The Welsh DOCTOR: OR, The VVelsh-man turned Physician, being a new way to
cure all diseases in these distracted times of ours, VIZ.

1. You shall see by this book that her have skill in all the 12. Signs, and
knowledge of all the Humors, and likewise of her senses in folks podies. 2. Her
will cure all the Agues that are in her States and her Kingdoms, arising from
factious and her turbulent humors. 3. Her undertakes to cure perfectly all the
Diseases in her she-cozens, as the glim'ring of her Giszard, the quavering of
her Kidney, with all pains and vento^ies in her pelllies. 4. Her will
undertake by her Receipts and her Potions to make all omens that are barrons be
as pig as her can tumble in two or three nights. 5. Her professes to restore to
all her distressed cozens that have got the wambling trot, or dislocation in
her pellies to her perfect health; that is, her will restore her Maiden-heads,
and her Virginities in a small space, and with much facilities. 6. Her will set
all the bones that were broken at our late battles among her cozens, though it
were in her necks. 7. Her will with her purge and her vomits clear the stomach
of her Church of all her Errors. 8. Her will do more admirable cures then her
cozens in the College of Physicians can do by her Galen and her Hypocrates;
and whereas it is caknown, that her English Doctors kill not above thee
quarters of her Patients that come under her hands, her will undertake to kill
them all by her excellent receipts, and make her alive again in an instant.
By Shinkin ap Morgan, Professor of te Medicall Arts and Sciences.

Printed by ^. A. 1649.

The Welsh Doctor.
FIrst then to begin in priefe, for her hates to be tedious or to use preambles
(...) long as our Welsh or your Tailors bills; her friend and cousen Jenkin,
(...) Taffie, Up Rice, Up Pew Gravock will in as short phrases and elocutions
as is po^^ble for a man of her calling come to the pusinesse, which as her
takes it, and (...) does all her famous ancient couzens and companions in the
Mathematics: Also (...) Ptolomy, Albumazar, and all learned Hebrew Rabbis,
that writ and made scriptions of this matter three thousand years before her
cousen Noah's Flood is (...) ^r^^^ish language: as concerning the dispositions
and constitutions of her podies in which Jenkin observes that their be five
humors, as Ploud, Phleagme, Choll^r, and Melancholy, with another humor far
worse then all these, marry her cannon well remember her names and
appellations, but it is called as her takes it, a scur^^ malignant humor,
which is predominant in too many, and that is sufficient testimonies to have
known it by, it contains all the rest of the humors, and is principally
predominant in her Couzens when her have well scoured her welsh-ma^^ with
Metheglin, it occasions prittle prattles and piple paples in her she cousen
whose tongues and tails love always to have her motions and figaries; N^^
Blood which is the first humor, is the life of man and it makes man have a
(...) color, and well complexioned.

Phleagm, that is a scurvy watrish humor, being a humor given much to (...)
mongers and Fish-wives, and those that dwell near Billins-gate.

Choler, that is a fiery hot humor which rules in many men's podies, and most
(...) her Welsh and British Nation, for when her Choler is moved, then her is
all (...) fire to vent it.

Melancholy, that is a dogged and a dusty, musty humor, compounded of M^^ ^^d
Coal which makes it be called Melancholy; of that base humor is her Cou^^^
Prince Ruperts dog, whose name is Puddle.

And so much is her conjectures and opinions concerning her five humors* his
own podies, and her Couzens; now to her senses.

There be six senses which her finds in Jeffery of Monmouth and other of (...)
Pretish writers to be just so many, that is to say number six, first the sense
of Seeing* secondly the sense of Hearing, thirdly the sense of Smelling,
fourthly the sense (...) Tasting, fifthly the sense of Feeling, the sixth sense
being more dangerous then (...) the rest, which is her wives tongue, which
makes up perfectly the sixth sense; for will call her a thousand base
denominations and titles; amongst which Rogue (...) Rascal are her courtesies
and her complements; The sense of Seeing is most pr^dominant in (...)
Mathematicians who had need have good sights to know (...) ^ouzens the stars by
their complexions, as her Usurers to look narrowly to (...) ^ags, and in her
old men who have young wives least her make look (...) ^ouzen Acteons. Her
sense of Hearing should be most pregnant in her Brownists* ^nabaptists, and
Roundheads, because her have none of that exerement of long ^^^ks to beat off
the sound, yet will they never hear wholesome doctrine, but long ^inded
exercises: her sense of Smelling her consignes to her Couzens of North^ales
where it is most employed in receiving the delicious odors and perfumes of
^^sted cheese, who has a mountain of Couse-bobby always at her door. Her
^ence of Tasting is most perspicuous in drinkers of Metheglin, which ever since
Prute and Corineus her kinsmen and progenitors has been her Country drink. Her
sense ^f Feeling her leaves to her couzens the Citizens wives who for the most
part are ^ftner left then others: And for her sixth sense, which is her wives
tongue, that her ^equeaths to the Tivell if he dare take her for his ears, and
so by prosecutions and ^rogressions Jenkin shall descend to delineate her
twelve signs, and to demonstrate that her is an absolute scholar, and well
learned in all the seven liberal sciences, which be nine by computation; as
follows: The definition or etymology of the ^welve signs, which has
predominance over her body every day, day by day;

First for the twelve Celestial signs her do caknow them very well, and can
call them by their names, as her shall find them hereafter; But for her
terrestrial signs ^here be so many in London, that her do not caknow half of
them; Therefore her will have nothing to do with them: the first celestial
sign is Aries; Now Aries in placed upon the head, especially if there be any
hair or bestiall sign there, if not, ^t is very plain, and also likely there
is a convenient place for grafting horns; for ^e that has horns on his
forehead need be at no charges to buy hooks to hang their hats on when they
are at their great feasts, and brains heated with wine.

Aries is her first celestial sign, and is commander over the head, which
seems to be the occasion that men's heads only have horns: the head is the
first house of man, and Aries which is a Ram, and her own Countryman, is Lord
over that house, this sign has most predominance over Butchers, her wives and
her daughters, and her would advise all her countrymen that have any motions
or affections to her Butchers wives or daughters be her maids, wives, or
widows. And so much for her etymology or definition of her first sign Aries.

Her next sign is Taurus seating her self in the nap of her neck, throat,
and under her chin. This sign Taurus is only for men that have a bul-head, and
those be they who do wear out their caps on their foreheads; and their bands
in their neck, yet they be all of one degree and similitude, though some wear
but their caps before, and the other their hands behind, there is but little
differences or distinction, for those men are still counted the honestest men
let their wives say what they can; but our hopes all will be well, if their
wives but mend and darne up her breeches again. And it is a very unlucky and
fatal sign her can assure you* for when this sign governs her couzens that
used to porrow her goats and her cattle on her mountains one from another have
their necks and their throats ^dorned with a ruff of hemp, which do you mark,
her is the worst of all other garments: men borne under this sign are subject
to bigger horns then those under Aries (for her knows that a bulls horns are
longer then a Ramms horns) and therefore had need to be buried with her faces
downward to avoid stumblings, and titubations in her Churchyards, market
places, this sign is only fortunate and propitious to Gregory and the hangmen
throughout the whole world, and fatal to highway men, who by the malignity of
this sign very often come to finish their days at Tiburne.

Her third sign is Gemini which in her welsh or heathen greek signifies a
gemmall ring, for look you as her gemmall ring infolds and intwines one link
within another, but in plain English, it is a close stool; for when her wife
Jones buttocks are upon the close stool, what can be more geminating or more
closer: so does your Gemini which has his residence in her arms, because with
her arms her do bestow usually her embraces, under your Gemini are borne most
of her handsome she couzens in Court, City and Country.

This sign is an enemy to all phlebotomy and bloodletting in any man, but in
the Spring time by her woman Surgeon, and so much for Gemini.

Cancer is her fourth sign which is our greek Ancer; which is in English a
younger brother; such a one was her when her went to Kenton battle; for when
her went away her desired her pay, answer was made, there was none: this sign
Cancer has her predominance in her breast, pointing to her very heart: this
sign was in her force at the battle of Kenton where her couzens like faliant
Welsh-men did not run away no faster then their legs could carry her, marry
'twas without shoot or boots, on her bare ten toes as her is a true Shentleman
of Wales and a Trojan: This sign is most appropriate to her Pishops and
Prelates where since the domination hereof have changed her miters into corner
caps, her couzens Saint Taffies the Arch pishop of Wales his breech making
buttons, this sign betokens that many Citizens shall teede upon spiders which
shall do them more harm then they do her other monkies, and make them break in
great abundance all to pieces.

Leo is her fifth sign which signifies in greek a Lion, now her must needs
confess her never saw a Lion in all her life but once, that was at Edgehill,
her had a white face and her two hands and her two legs was bound together and
carried before a man on horseback to the next market: now this furious beast
has his domination in the back, this sign has his operation over Porters and
men of burden, whereas these times stand are men of scurvy carriage, her
couzens of Wales that had out-ranne an errand, and carry water to her friends
houses being out of date, for in the City there is so small trading they need
but little water to dress their victuals.

Her next sign is Virgo which has her seat in her wast, hence it is that if
her Virgins be so slippery in the wastes as her Ecls in her tail, this sign
has all her wholesome whores and harlots under her, and betokens that if there
be four Virgins above fifteen in a Parish or twenty in a City, a miracle above
her nine wonders.

Libra is her sixth sign which signifies in Creek, first a lie, secondly a
mortar and ^ bray, which put together, makes Libra, and rules her belly and
her navel, this ^igne had her powers and her operations over her cousen
Winifred, and her Couzens Vrsulant, her eleven thousand Virgins that were so
chaste they feared not what man could do unto them: this sign has little to do
with maids, that love ^o lie with their faces upwards, and therefore her is
seldom conversant with ^^nne-keepers and Ale-wives. Her also betokens much
pain in the guts to those that can get no victuals, and dreadful trembling
in her bellies, and to her couzens that feed only on the fat of her leek and
the green onion, her being much troubled with ventosities and blowing her noses
backwards.

Her next sign is Scorpio which signifies a hedg-hog or an Urchin: which is
her ^igne of her privaties or copulation members, this sign is predominant in
most men from fifteen to fifty.

Sagitarus is her 8. sign, which signifies an Archer, or one that shoots at
pricks; and has his seat in her thigs, a terrible sign here is, and very
adverse to her Countrymen the Britains, for her is nothing fortunate in her
slights and exercise ^f her things in running away, and in races, as diverse of
her couzens at Kenton manifested by woeful experience.

Capricorn is her 10. sign, which signifies her welsh goat or Venison, and
rules in her hams or her knees: Hence her Dancers are called Caperers: for they
can caper without hurting their corns, which jumps and leaps, sine corns, and
so without hurt: but indeed her may be more properly applied to her heads, for
Capricornus is as much to say in her welsh greek horns, this sign is proper to
all Cuckolds and such persons in the City as love to have their horns exalted
above their neighbors, such as for the most part your Sectaries who detest
long hair and love her long horns.

Aquaries is her eleventh sign which does signify in Welsh a water-poet, one
who does rhyme and make ballets and other verses, for a pot of Ale and a pipe of
Tobacco: and so her does learn her Countrymen to sing.

Pisces being her last sign is most relative to the Fish-monger and her
fishwives who because these her two watery signs rule the feet and the legs,
can never keep her legs close whiles these signs are in force, this sign is
very proper to her Footmen that run much, and to her parpateticks and walking
Philosophers, and thus much for her twelve signs.

And now her having done with the definition of the 12. signs, also of the
five humors, and six senses, and also of the seven plannets, I now begin with
her Physical Observations.

HEr understanding that all her shee-cozens in general are subject to diverse
qualmes and diseases, her having been a long time conversant with her
shee-cozens podies, finds by her experiences and her skills, that the
generallest disease all her cozens are subject to, is the glimmering of her
gizzards, an infirmity which arising from her spleen into her mouth, infects
her tongue like a canker, making her call her husbands rogues and rascals and
many other scurvy ords: It makes her likewise oftentimes to strive for her
breeches and break her husbands pates with her ladles and her skimmers, and is
indeed an Epedemicall disease, and raining in most of her she Couzens: The
cure hereof though Gallen has not set down, not her Hippocrates, nor Averroes,
nor Avicen her Couzens, yet shall her Cousen Jenkin in priefe declare the
remedy for that disease.

First when her begins to be in her sits, her husbands shall perceive it by the
bending of her brows, then let him apply to her a plaster of good words, and
if that will not serve her turns, let him take her good has^e cudgel or her
ropes end, and bast her as her Welsh-men do her old goats to make them eat
tender, for so her Cousen King Tavid did; as you may find it some where
written; And Tavid went in and did so lace his wife; therefore her and aule her
Countrymen may therefore bast their wives by authority and privilege, and
liberty of the subject: for her do find it by experience and by her reading*
that the more her do beat her Walnut-trees, and her Spaniel and Camomel banck
be basted or trodden, the more fruit it will bear; and the women love their
husbands the better, and this will cure her presently, which twice or thrice
applied to her sides. There is another remedy which Jenkin her self has often
used with her Wives, which is to take her as her fit begins, and lay her upon
her back and tickle her Tuquoques, and it shall cure her in an instant;
Probatum est.

The quavering of the kidneys in her she cozens is, when her is full of her
lusts and concupiscences, and her much longings and desires to make her
husbands cuckolds. In Spain her couzens the Spaniards have excellent remedies
for these diseases in her wives; for as soon as her perceives and caknowes that
her wives are bent to be sick of the quavering of her kidneys, her lets her
blood in her breast or in the bellies with her sword or her taggers; marry
Jenkin would wish her couzens to use this easier remedies and medicines, which
is when her omans flesh rises, and would go to man's, let her husbands give her
two ounces of good instructions, with three drams of the oil of man distilled
through his own limbeck, a vomit and a potion made of opium and her turnips;
then let her have a diet for a month of her Welsh leeks without bread or salt,
and it shall recover her perfectly; probatum est.

For her barren cozens, her shall by her preservatives and her medicines make
her as pregnant as her heart can wish, and have every year a shild if there be
no defect in the capacities of her podies. First let her eat the brains of a
he goat mixed with the marrow of a Stoat, or Pole-cat (her may caknow him by her
smell and her savours) with the flesh of her monkies for a fortnights, and
trink every morning a pottle of her best and Welsh Metheglins; Then let her get
her into a good soft beds and have every night for the space of a month a
lusty young man to her bedfellowes to salute her bodies and recreate her
kidneys, and if her be not with shild Jenkin will forfeit her reputations in
physics. This medicine is most predominan^ over her Couzens in her Cities, and
may serve indeed for omens of all Nations under forty years of age, whereas
diverse of her Couzens have had the wambling trot in her pellies, or the
dislocation in the martix which is occasioned by much ploods and icches in her
podies, whereby oftentimes her comes to loose her Maiden-heads and her
Virginities, which her foolish Physicians in times past knew not how to cure.

Jenkin for the good of her dearest Cozens has found out the medicines that
will restore her to her Virginities, which is, her must take a peck of
Ferne-sut gathered on Midsummer night, with two ounces of Moonshine taken out
of the river of Dee at noon days, six eyes of the Phoenix, seven eyes of Argus
which her Cozen Mercury pulled out of her head, the brain of the bird of
Paradise which sung to her Gransieur Adam, the flesh of the buttock of one of
her Welsh Goats which her Cozen Noah's had in her Arks, the juice of the apple
which her Grandmother Eve eat at the inticement of the Serpent, the head of the
great huge fish of two hundred yards long, that was taken in Eighty eights with
a great ruff like a Spaniard, above London Bridge, a bottle full of the water
of the Inchanters wells, which was kept by the great Dragons that was overcome
by her Cozens Palmerius, and S. Tavid, two yards of freeze which was in her
Prophet Merlins old coats, five onions of Jenkins own planting, and six pound
of leeks, take all these, and stamp them upon the stone where Jacob slept, and
strain them through one of the clouds which hang over her Welsh mountain, and
then take all these her ingredients, and lap her up in a yard of butter-slies
skins, and lay her warm to her Cozens bottom of her bellies, and so let her
renew the plaster or cataplasme, do you see, every night afresh, and it shall
make her Cozens as found and firm in her Maiden-heads and her Virginities, as
ever her was in her life's, and her may be certain that Jenkin has made his
explorations and experiments upon this medicine, and find it to be very
availeable; Probatum est.

Her also does undertake to cure all her Agues and Fevers that are in her
States and her Kingdoms arising from her factious and malignant humors, which
indeed and in sooth none can cure without phlebotomy or blood-letting, but her
Cozen Jenkins, which must be done in this manner: First, her State or her
Kingdom must take fifty or threescore heads of her Malignants and poyle them
to a jelly in a hundred Cavaliers ploods, then take the fat of six Jesuits
that were hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn, (do you mark) and with the
brawn of a hundred Prelates buttocks stewed in Metheglins, and let all these
ingredients be laid on the stomach of her State of her Kingdom, and it shall
expel her Agues and her Fevers; or otherwise, take two ounces and six pound of
the long hair of your Roundheads, which in Welsh her calls Russetings, and
make therewith a (...) a-pulsive, with the plood of some Anabaptists, and
applied as aforesaid, an^ your sick State shall recover immediately without the
help of her Doctors an^ her Physicians, as Jenkin has made diverse times her
experiences and probations upon all the Kingdoms of Asia the less; Probatum
est.

Next, whereas her has been informed, that diverse of her Cozens have lost he^
legs and her arms, and many of her have broke her necks at Kenton Battles,
he^ has studied a medicine that shall recover her perfectly, let her come to
her Coze^ Jenkins lodgings at the sign of the Welsh Goat in Garlick-lane, with
her broken legs, arms, or necks, and her will make her as sound as ever her was
in her life's Probatum est.

Next her does profess to give her Church a vomit, and a purge that shall make
her free from all her pains in the stomach, her must first take a long stick
of Stibium which in Welsh is called the Gallows, and hang thereon three hundred
Brownists, five hundred Anabaptists, and as many of all sorts of her
Separatists, and then let her dry in the Sun fourteen weeks, and then beat her
to powder and mixed her with a great deal of oil extracted from her
Roundheads locks, and let this be given to her Church through the great Organ
pipe that is shut up in her Church of Paul's, and it shall make her Church vomit
and purge up all her errors and her heresies, and put her into as good states
and conditions of her health as her was in the days of her Apostles,
especially when her Cousen Jenkin gives her glyster to make her evacuate her
Pishops and Prelates backwards which must be compounded on this manner. First
her must take two handfulls of herb a grace of which there is enough in her
Welsh mountains, and mingle it with the surrups of two and twenty Miters,
boiled in the juice of as many Rochets and Surplices, and let it be put in at
the fundament or porch of the Church, and it shall give her thirty or forty of
her stools which shall clear her podies of all her Pishops and her Prelates,
and send her to the Tivell with a vengence.

Lastly with her diet and her purge, her cordial and her vomit, her will cure
all her couzens that are Cuckolds of her horns, and make her brows as smooth
at the backs of her hands, which, if any of all her London Physicians can
perform, Jenkin^ will never set up her pills nor her prescriptions, her will
also with contection of tosted cheese, metheglin, green leeks and onions,
undertake to kill her a hundred a day, and with her goats milk mixed with the
buds of her welsh gunshot which is English is called Elderne, restore her
again to her life's in a minutes space, and a^^ this be performed by Jenkin ap
Morgan Dr. of Physgig; and studier of all the art of medicine as her testifies
under her hands and hopes that all her Couzens that are sick of the said
diseases will buy her couzens book of medicines and repair to her for cures and
advice.

FINIS.

