THE UPRIGHT MAN'S CHARACTER AND Crown.

Preached in a SERMON at Paul's before the right Honorable the Lord Major, and
the Aldermen of the City of London, March 29. 1657.

By THOMAS WATSON Minister of Stephens Walbrook LONDON.

Quid sinceritate divitius? quae satis sibi abundat, and sua puritate contenta
est; non abrodit haec virtas, nec se invarias arts commutat; Quid fortius? nam
timere non novit. Hierom. He that walks uprightly, walks surely, Prove. 10.
9. Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, then he that is
perverse in his ways, though he be rich, Prove. 28. 6. London, Printed for
Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange 1657.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Robert Tichborn Lord Mayor; The Right Worshipful the
Sheriffs, with the rest of the Aldermen of the famous City of LONDON.
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful,
I Have been unwillingly drawn forth to this work, wherein I must expose some
of my unpolished thoughts to the public view, but your injunction, together
with the weightiness of the subject, did at last prevail with me; if there be
any thing of moment to be looked after, it is truth in the inward parts, by
this we resemble him who is Truth; and without it our title to heaven is but
forged. Aquinas tells us, error in principio gravissimus; it is dangerous to
err in principles. How many glorious frontispieces of profession have fallen,
because built upon unsound and cracked foundations; it is the design of this
ensuing discourse to Characterize, and decipher the upright man: He is
undiquaque insignis; his Motto may be semper idem, like Aristotle's (...) throw
him which way you will, he is still upright. We have many sights to be seen in
this City, but if there be any show worth seeing, it is to behold the upright
man, who has the Spirit of glory, and of God resting on him. Uprightness is
that current coin which has Gods impresse stamped upon it, and though it may
want something of angelical perfection, yet it shall always have grains of
allowance. Uprightness will not only secure our selves, but it will entaile a
blessing upon our Posterity, Proverbs 20. 7. The just man walks in his
integrity, his seed are blessed after him. I have made some little alteration
in this Sermon, and have inserted one or two Characters more, because else the
work had been incomplete, and the upright man would not have been perfect.

What I preached to your ears, I now present to your eyes, and that you may be
transformed into the similitude of it, shall be the prayer of him who is

Your Honors, and Worships in all Gospel-service, THOMAS WATSON.
From my Study at Steph. Walbrook, this 19. of June 1657.
THE UPRIGHT MAN'S CHARACTER.
PSALM. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace
SIncerity is of Universal importance to a Christian It Is the sauce which
seasons Religion and makes it savoury. Sincerity is the Jewel that God is most
delighted with, Psalm 51. 6. Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts;
and to speak plain, all our pompous show of holiness without this soul of
sincerity to enliven it, is but folly set forth in its embroydery, it is but
going to hell in a more devout manner then others. The consideration of which,
has put me upon this subject in this place of solemn worship and concourse;
and to quicken your attention, you have God himself calling to you to take
notice, in these words, observa integrum, Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace.

The Hebrew word for upright, (...) has two significations. 1. It 1.
signifies plainness of heart; the upright man is not pleated in folds In
animis hominu^ multae latebrae. Cicero.
; he is without collusion or doubledealing, In his Spirit there is no guile,
Psalm. 32. 2. That verse in Virgil suits too many, Spem vultu simulat, praemit
altum cord Virg. 1. aeneid.
dolorem.
The upright man has no Subterfuges, his tongue and his heart go together, as
a well-made Dial goes with the Sun; he is downright upright.

2. This word Upright signifies a 2.
man approved; the upright man is one whom God thinks highly of; and better
have Gods approbation then the worlds acclamation; the plainer the Diamond is,
the richer; and the more plain the heart is, the more it shines in Gods eyes.

In the words there are three parts, 1. The Prospect, the Upright man. 2. The
Aspect, Behold. 3. The Reason, for the end of that man is peace. Or thus, 1.
Here is the godly man's Character, He is upright. 2. His Crown, the end of that
man is peace. The words present us with this doctrinal conclusion.

The end of an upright man is Doct.
crowned with peace.

That I may illustrate this, I shall show you, 1. Who this upright man is, that
we may know him when we meet him. 2. The blessed end he makes, (...) the end of
that man is peace.

1. Who this upright man is. I 1. The upright man's Character.
shall show you the innocence of Christ's dove; we live in an age wherein most
pretend to Saint-ship, but it is to be feared they are not upright Saints; but,
like the woman in the Gospel, whom Satan bowed together, Luke 13. 11. I shall
give you several (...), or Characteristical signs of an upright Christian.

I. The upright man, his heart I. Charact.
is for God. Hence that phrase, (...), upright in heart, Psalm. 64. 10. It Is the
heart God calls for, Prove. 23. 26. My son give me thy heart; the heart is a
Virgin, has many suitors, and among the rest, God himself becomes a suitor.
The heart is like the primum mobile, which carries all the others Orbs along
with it. If the heart be for God, then our tears, our alms, all is for God.
The heart is the Fortroyal that commands all the rest. The High Priest when he
was to cut up the beast for sacrifice, the first thing he looked upon was the
heart, and if that had any blemish, it was rejected. It Is not the gift, but
the heart God respects Neque enim in sacrifici is munera, sed corda in spexit
Deus Cyprian.
. This people honor me with their lips, but their heart is removed far from
me, Esaias 29. 13. they did movere, not vivere; like the finger that moves upon
the Dial, but there is no life within; or like the tombs in the Church which
have their eyes and hands lifted up to heaven, but no heart to animate that
devotion A simulo fit simulachrum quod sit ficta imago alicujus. Nonintuetur
dominus quantum valeas sed quantum velis. Greg. Moral. l. 12.
. in Religion the heart is all, Ephesians. 5. 19. Making melody in your hearts to
the Lord. It Is the heart makes the music. The upright man gives God his heart.
It Is reported of Cranmer, that after his flesh and bones were consumed in the
flame, his heart was found whole: so an upright man in the midst of his
infirmities, his heart is kept whole for God, he has not (...), Psalm 12. 2.
an heart, and an heart; an heart for God, and for sin. God loves a broken
heart, not a divided heart Hos. 10. 2
.

II. The upright man works by an II. Charact.
upright rule. There are many false crooked rules which the upright man dares
not go by. As, 1. False Rule.


1. Opinion, It Is (say some) the opinion of such as are pious and learned. This
is a false rule, it is not the opinion of others can make a thing unlawful,
warrantable Nunquam magis periclitatur religio quam inter reverendissimos
Luther.
: If a Synod of Divines, if an Assembly of Angels, should say we might worship
God by an image, their opinion could not make this authentic and lawful; an
upright Christian will not make another opinion his Bible.

The best guides may sometimes go wrong. Peter preaches circumcision, the very
doctrine of the pseudo-Apostles, Gal. 2. 11. Peter himself was not infallible;
the upright man is no adorer of opinion; when the stream of Arrianisme swelled
so high that it did overflow a great part of the world; Athanasius did swim
against the stream; he was invincible in the truth Adamas Ecclesiae, Tertul.
.

2. Custom. It has been the 2. False Rule.
custom of the place, or (...), the Religion of our ancestors. This is a false
rule; The customs of the people are vain, Jer. 10. 3. and as for our
progenitors, and ancestors, a son may better take his land from his father,
then his Religion. How many of our forefathers lived in times of Popery, and
stumbled to hell in the dark, are we therefore bound to follow their blind
zeal? a wise man will not set his watch by the clock, but by the Sun.

3. Conscience; it is (says one) my 3. False Rule.
conscience. This is no rule for an upright man; the conscience of a sinner is
defiled, Tit. 1. 16. conscience being defiled may err; an erring conscience
cannot be a rule, Act. 26. 9. I verily thought with my self that I ought to do
many things contrary to the Name of Jesus; he who is interfector veritatis, (as
Tertullian speaks) even an heretic may plead conscience* admit conscience to
be a rule, and we open the door to all mutinies, and Massacres; if the devil
get into a man's conscience, whether will he not carry him?

4. Another false rule is providence, 4. False Rule.
providence sits at the helm and disposes of all events and contingencies;
but providence is not a rule for the upright man to walk by, we are indeed to
observe Gods providence, Psalm 107. 43. whosoever is wise will observe these
things; but we are not to be infallibly led by it. Providence is a Christians
Diurnal, not his Bible.

When the wicked prosper, it does not follow that their way is good, or that
God favors them, Gods candle (as Job says) may shine upon their head Job 29.
3.
, and yet his wrath hang over their head. It Is the greatest judgment to thrive
in a way of sin. Dyonisius, when he had robbed the Temple; and afterward had
a fair gale to bring home his stolen plunder; See (says he) how the gods
love Sacrilege. The Philosopher says, a calm is sometimes the forerunner of
an earthquake. Hamans banquet did but usher in execution. God may let men
succeed, that their judgments may exceed.

The upright man will not go by these rules, but leaving such false guides he
makes the Word of God his star to follow. This is the Judge and Umpire of all
his actions, To * Sint castae delitiaemeae Scripturae, Aug.
the Law, to the Testimony, Esaias 8. 20. The Old and New Testament are the two
lips by which God speaks to us, and are the pair of Compasses, by which the
upright man draws the whole circumference of his life.

The Montanists and Enthusiasts talk of revelations, and some now a days of a
light within them; the canon of Scripture is above any revelation. The Apostle
speaks of a voice from heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 18. 2 Pet. 1. 18
and this voice which came from heaven, we heard when we were with him in the
holy Mount; yet, says he, we have, (...), a more sure word. The Word of God
Verse 19
ought to be more sacred, and infallible to us, then a voice from heaven. III.
Charact. 1:


III. An upright man works from an upright principle: and that is, Faith
working by love, Galat. 5. 6.

1. He acts from a principle of Faith Ille apud Deum plus habet loci qui plus
attulit non argenti sed fidei. Aug. de ovib.
, Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his faith. The upright man, 1. Hears in
faith; it is called the hearing of faith, Gal. 3. 2. verbum fide degerendum
Tertul.
, faith concocts the word. 2. He prays in faith; it is called the prayer of
faith, James 5. 15. David sprinkles faith in his prayer, Ps. 51. 7. Purge me
with hysop and I shall be clean, wash me, etc. in the Hebrew it runs in the
future, (...); Thou shall purge Juxta mensuram fidei erit mensura impetrandi.
Cyprian*
me, thou shall wash me. It is vox credentis, the voice of one that believes as
well as prays; prayer is the arrow, and faith is the bow out of which we shoot
to the Throne of grace; a faithless prayer is a fruitless prayer. Prayer
without faith is like a Gun discharged without a bullet. The upright man prays
in faith. 3. He weeps in faith, Mark 9. 24. The father of the child cried out
with tears, Lord I believe. When his tears dropped to the earth, his faith
reached heaven.

2. An upright man acts from a principle of love Transfigit cor hominis and
excoquit desiderium aestibus amor Dei* Bid.
, Cant. 1. 4. The upright love thee. Love is as the spring in the Watch, it
moves the wheels of obedience; The upright Christian is carried to heaven in a
fiery Chariot of love; love does meliorate and ripen every duty, and make it
come off with a better relish. Divine love is like musk among linen which
perfumes it. This gives a fragrant redolency to all our services: A small token
sent in love is accepted. The upright love thee.

Hypocrites serve God formidine poenae, only for fear; as the slave works in
the gally, or as the Parthians worship the Devil that he should do them no
hurt. Hypocrites obedience is forced like water out of a Still by the fire. The
thoughts of hellfire make the water of tears drop from their eyes. The upright
Christian acts purely from love (...). Arist.
, 2 Cor. 5. 14. The love of Christ constraines me; an upright soul loves Christ
more then he fears hell Plus amat Christum quam timet gehennam, Bern.
.

IV. An upright Christian works to an upright end: He makes Gods glory his
ultimate end, his aims are right. Gods glory is the upright IV. Charact.
man's mark, and though he shoots short of the mark Romans 3. 23
, yet because he aims at it, it is accepted. This is the question the upright
man propounds to himself, Will this bring glory to God? he labors still to
bring in some revenues into the Exchequer of heaven; He prefers the glory of
God before whatsoever comes in competition with, or stands in opposition
against it. If life be laid in one balance, and Gods *Licet parvulus ex collo
pendeat nepos, licet matter mihi ubera ostendat, etc. Hier.
glory in the other, the glory of God out-weighs. They loved not their lives to
the death, Rev. 12. 11. If my wife and children (says Hierom) should hang
about me and dissuade me from doing my duty, if my mother should show me her
breasts that gave me suck, I would trample upon all, and ad vexillum crucis
avolarem, and I would fly to the cross.

The upright man prefers the glory of God before his own salvation, Romans 9. 1.
I could wish my self accursed from Christ for my kinsmen according to the
flesh. Paul knew it was impossible he could be accursed from Christ. The book
of life has no Errata in it; besides, Paul knew it unlawful to wish he were
accursed from Christ; but the meaning is, supposing, that by his breaking off,
and some of the Jews graffing into Christ, God might be more honored, such was
his zeal for Gods glory, that he could even wish himself accursed from Christ:
Gods glory was dearer to him then his own salvation.

An hypocrite is known by his squint eye; he does not look right forward to the
glory of God, but he looks a-squint to his own private interest; he spurs on
Religion through the stage of some politic design, and then turns it off
again.

The hypocrite serves God, 1. For gain. He looks at the emoluments 1.
and profits which come in by Religion; it is not the power of godliness the
hypocrite loves, but the gain of godliness; it is not the fire of the Altar, but
the gold of the Altar which he adores. This is a religious wickedness. Salvian.
Ephraim is an heifer that loves to tread out the corn, Hosea 10. 11. God made
a Law* Deuteronomy. 25. 4. that the ox, while he was treading out the corn, should
not be mazled, he might eat as much as he would. Ephraim liked this; hypocrites
love Religion for the provender it brings; it is the loaves not the miracles
draw them to Christ* Demetrius cries up the goddess Diana, Act. 19. 27. but it
was not her Temple but her silver shrines he cared for; many fall in love with
Religion, not for her beauty, but her jewels. Camero of Bordeaux a French
Divine speaks of a Lawyer in his time, who turned Protestant, only for worldly
respects, that he might get preferment. There Is a story of a Monk, who went
like a mortified man with his eyes down upon the ground, who afterward was
made Abbot; and being asked why he went in that submisse lowly posture with his
eyes down? says he, I was looking for the keys of the Abbey, and now I have
found them. The Moral of it is good: The Hypocrite does sacrifice Deo, and
lari: while he serves God, he seeks himself; like the wasp that comes to the
gally-pot for the honey; or the Fox which follows the Lion for the prey he lets
fall. The hypocrite makes use of Religion only as the fisherman does of his net
to catch preferment.

2. He serves God for applause; 2
hypocrites look not at Gods glory, but vainglory Animalia gloriae and vilia,
popularis aurae mancipia. Hierom.
. They serve God rather to save their credit, then to save their souls:
hypocrites pray to be seen of men, Matthew. 6. 5. The Greek word is (...), that
they may be set upon a Theater, and have Spectators; when they give alms they
blow a trumpet, Mat. 6. 2. and their hearts were as hollow as their trumpet;
they did it that they might have glory of men, verse 2. It was not giving
alms, but selling them; they sold them for praise and applause: Verily I say
unto you (says Christ) they have their reward. The hypocrite may make his
acquittance, and write, received in full payment, he has all he must look for;
an upright heart makes the glory of God his center.

V. An upright man is uniforme V. Charact.
in Religion; he looks with an equal eye at all Gods Commands. The Tables were
written on both sides, Exo. 32. 15. an upright Christian turns both sides of
the Tables; he looks at duties of the second Table as well as duties of the
first; he knows all have the same stamp of Divine authority upon them. It Is
said in the honor of Zachary and Elizabeth, they walked (...) in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord; an upright Christian though he fails
in every duty, yet he makes conscience of every duty; he will as well worship
God in the closet, as the Temple; he often casts up the accounts between God
and conscience. Utitur speculis magis quam perspicillis, he wears his eyes at
home, as well as abroad; and had rather use the looking-glass of the Word to
look into his own heart, then the broad spectacles of censure to look into the
faults of others; he walks (...), soberly in acts of temperance, (...),
righteously, in acts of justice, (...), godly, in acts of piety Tit. 2. 12
.

An hypocrite will pick and choose Sublata quacunque part integrante tollitur
totum.
in Religion, in some duties he is zealous, in others remiss; ye pay tithe of
mint, and annise, and cummin, and have omited the weightier matters of the Law,
judgment, mercy and faith, Matthew. 23. 23. Jehu was zealous Mat. 23 23.
against the idolatry of Abab, but gives a toleration to the golden calves, 2
Kings 10. 29. Jehu's obedience was lame on one foot. Some will go over the
smoth way of Religion, they are for easy duties, but they like not the rugged
way of self-denial and mortification: the plough when it comes to a stiff piece
of earth, makes a bawlk; an upright Christian, with Caleb, follows God fully
Number. 14. 24.
; and where we are so ingenious as to do our best, God will be so indulgent as
to pass by our worst.

VI. An upright Christian does VI. Charact.
not go stooping. The Hebrew word for upright (...) in Pyhel signifies to go
strait. The upright man will not stoop to any thing against his conscience. The
Greek word for upright used in the Septuagint, (...) signifies homo non
tortuesus, a man that does not bend. The upright Christian does not whirle
about, or sinfully prostitute himself to the lusts and humors of men; the
Apostles could not flatter or cringe, Act. 4. 19. Whether it be right in the
sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye?

The upright Christian dares not palliate or justify the sins of men, this
were with holy water to wash the devils face, Isa. 5. 20, 23. Woe to them that
call evil good, which justify the wicked for reward. Propertius speaks of a
Spring in Italy which makes the black oxen that drink of it look white. Afit
emblem of those Parasites, that can make the worst men look white.

An upright man dares not keep back any part of Gods truth, Acts 20. 27. I have
declared unto you, (...), all the counsel of God. It Is cowardice and treason to
conceal any part of our Commission.

An upright man will not neglect a known duty for fear of losing a party.
Some, upon this very ground have forborne to declare against error for fear
of a party falling off from them. If men will fall off from us for doing our
duty; my opinion is, they are better lost then kept. Others have neglected to
have the hands of the Presbytery laid upon them, only because this would
displease a party, how many Apocryphal preachers are now among us? in the
Bishops times we had many Ministers who were no Preachers, and now we have many
Preachers who are no Ministers: The upright man had rather be without his head
piece then his breast plate, and had rather men should account him for
imprudent, then God should accuse him for unfaithful. An upright man will not
let any interest byasse him from the truth, Amicus Socrates, sed magis amica
veritas. The Saints are compared to pillars, Rev. 3. 12. the pillar stands
upright. Unsound Christians are ex salice, like willows which will bend every
way, a good Christian is like the palm tree which grows upright, Jerem. 10. 5.
when we let men (...), Lord it over our consciences; if they bid us break our
vows, sell our Religion, we are ductile, and malleable to any thing, like hot
iron which will be beat into any form; like wool, that will receive any die,
this argues much unsoundnesse of heart. An upright Christian will not be bent
awry, he goes without stooping.

VII. An upright Christian is zealous VII. Charact.
for God, Rev. 2. 2. Thou can not bear them which are evil, uprightness is
the white, and zeal is the sanguine, which makes the right complexion of a
Christian. Zeal is a mixed affection; it is a compound of love and anger, it
boyles up the spirits to the height, and makes them run over; zeal is a fire
kindled from heaven; blessed be its ang^^, for it is without sin; and its
wrath for it is against sin. When Paul saw their idolatry at Athens, his spirit
was stirred in him, Acts 17. 16. The Greek word (...), signifies, to be in a
paroxysme. Paul was in a burning fit of zeal. Moses a meek man, though cool in
his own cause, yet hot in Gods; when Israel had committed idolatry. Moses anger
waxed hot, Exodus 32. 19. He breaks the Tables, grindes the calf to powder,
strows it on the water, and made the children of Israel to drink of it.

An upright Christian takes a dishonor done to God more heinous, then a
disgrace done to himself; can the true child endure to hear the Father
reproached? When Craesus son (though born dumb) saw them go about to kill his
father, his tongue-strings unloosed, and he cried out, Kill not King Craesus.
He that can hear Christ's Divinity spoken against by the Socinian, his
Ordinances cried down by the Libertine; and his blood not rise, and his zeal
not sparkle forth, is a traitor to the Crown of heaven. Did Christ open his
sides for us when the blood run out, and shall not we open our mouths in his
vindication? how were the Saints in former times fired with zeal for God? They
were as Cyprian affirms tanquam leones ignem spirantes, like Lions breathing
forth the heavenly flame of zeal.

VIII. An upright Christian will VIII. Charact.
not allow himself in any known sin; he dares not touch the forbidden fruit,
Genesis 39. 9. How then can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?
though it be a complexion-sinne, he dis-inherits it. There Is no man but does
propend and incline more to one sin then another Nemo est tantae sanctitatis
quin ad us number pcccatum quam ad caetera propensior Carrwr.
; as in the body there is one humor predominant, or as in the hive there is one
master-Bee; so in the heart there is one master-sinne: there is one sin which
is not only near to a man as the garment, but dear to him as the right eye.
This sin is Satan's Fort royal, all his strength lies here; and though we beat
down his outworks, gross sin, yet if we let him hold this fort of
complexion-sin, it is as much as he desires. The Devil can hold a man as fast by
this one link, as by a whole chain of vices. The fowler has the bird fast
enough by one wing. Now an upright Christian will not indulge himself in this
complexion-sinne, Psalm 18. 24. I was also upright before him, and kept my
self from mine iniquity. An upright Christian takes the sacrificing knife of
mortification, and runs it through his beloved-sinne. Herod did many things,
but there was one sin so dear to him, that he would sooner behead the Prophet,
then behead that sin. Herod would have a gap for his incest. An upright heart
is not only angry with sin, (which may admit of reconciliation) but hates
sin (...) Arist Rhet. l. 2. c. 5.
, and if he sees this Serpent creeping into his bosom, the nearer it is, the
more he hates it.

IX. An upright Christian is right IX. Charact.
in his judgment; he does not lean to error; his head does not turn round.
Though there will be differences in lesser matters, things indifferent, and
disputable, (and indeed where there are not such clear vestigia, and footings
in Scripture, here there must be some grains of allowance) yet in the
Fundamentals of Religion, the upright Christian keeps his standing.

Error when it is not only circa, but contra fundamentum, is dangerous (...)
Ignat. ep 7. ad Smyrn.
; a man may as well go to hell by error, as by moral vice; gross sin stabs
to the heart, error poisons; there is less hope of an erroneous person then a
profane; the profane person sins, and does not repent; the erroneous person
sins, and holds it a sin to repent; the one is without tears, the other
cries down tears. The upright Christian is not tainted with this leprosy in
the head; he has rectitude in his mind.

X. An upright man is of a sympathizing X. Charact.
spirit 2 Cor. 12. 26.
, he lays to heart the miseries of Sihon Tanto quisque perfectior est, quanto
perfectius sentit dolores alienos Greg. in Moral.
. This argues much sincerity, Pliny speaks of the aurea vitis, the golden Vine,
which feels no injury of wind, or storms. The Church triumphant may be
compared to this golden Vine, which is above all storms of injury and
flourishes in perpetual glory: but the Church-militant is not a golden Vine,
but a bleeding Vine; now where there is sincerity, there is sympathy.

An hypocrite may be affected with his own miseries, but an upright heart is
affected with the Churches miseries. I confess an hypocrite may be sensible of
the miseries of the public, so far as he himself is concerned, as a man may
be troubled to hear of such a ship cast away, wherein were much Merchants
goods, because he himself had a share in it, and his Cabin is lost; But an
upright Christian, though he be not touched in his own particular, he is out of
the bill of mortality, yet because it goes ill with the Church, and Religion
seems to lose ground. He counts the Churches loss his loss; he weeps in
Sihons tears, and bleeds in her wounds.

Jeremy, that (weeping Prophet) makes the Churches miseries his own, Lam. 3. 1.
I am the man that have seen affliction. He suffered least in his own person,
for he had a protection granted; the King gave order that he should be well
looked to, Jer. 39. 11, 12. but he felt most in regard of sympathy. Though they
were Sihons miseries, they were Jeremies lamentations; he felt Isreal's hard
cords through his soft bed. Nehemiah lays to heart the miseries of the Church,
his complexion begins to alter, and he looks sad, Nehem. 2. 3. Why should not
my countenance be sad, when the City, the place of my fathers Sepulchers lies
waste? What, sad when the Kings Cup Bearer, and wine so near? Oh but it fared
ill with the Church of God, therefore he grows weary of the Court, he leaves
his wine, and mingles his drink with weeping. Here was an upright man.

True grace enobles the heart, dilates the affections, and carries out a man
beyond the Sphere of his private concernments, making him mind the Churches
condition as his own. Oh, how few upright Saints! may not that charge be drawn
up against sundry persons? Amos 6. 4. That lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch
themselves upon their Couches, and eat the Lambs out of the flock, that chaunt
to the sound of the vial, and invent to themselves Instruments of music like
David; That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief
ointments, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

It is with most people as with a drunken man fast asleep, he is non sensible
of any thing that is done; let others be killed by him, and lie a bleeding, he
is not sensible. Somno vinoque sepultus, -- He sleeps securely in his wine.
Thus it is with too many who are drunk with the wine of prosperity, and fallen
fast asleep, though the Church of God lie bleeding of her wounds by them, and
ready to bleed to death; they are not sensible; they have quite forgotten
Jerusalem. Like Themistocles, who when one offered to teach him the Art of
Memory* he desired that he would teach him the Art of Forgetfulness. The Devil
has taught many men this Art. They have forgotten the miseries of the Church;
such may suspect themselves to be unsound. The Saints are called, (...), lively
stones, 1 Pet. 2. 5. therefore if there be any breach in the spiritual house,
they must be sensible. Is not the Church Christ's Spouse, and to see it smitten
and Christ through her sides, will not this affect our hearts? The Church is
the apple of Gods eye, Zach 2. 8. and to see the apple of his eye weep, will
not this draw tears from us? An upright heart cannot but grieve to sit by the
Churches bed side, and hear her dying groans.

XI. The upright Christian is sui XI. Charact.
diffusivus, he is liberal and communicative. 1. He has a liberal 1:
heart toward the maintenance of Gods worship. He will not let the fire of
Gods Altar go out for want of pouring on a little oil; what vast sums of
gold and silver did David prepare for the House of God 1 Chronicles* 29. 3.
, 1 Chronicles. 29 3. Moreover, because I have set my affection to the House of my
God, I have of my own proper good of gold and silver, which I have given to the
house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,
even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand
talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses withal, etc.
Hypocrites, if they may have golden purses are content to have wooden Priests.
They love (...), a cheap Gospel, they are loath to be put to too much charges.
How many have lost their souls to save charges. The upright Christian will not
offer that to God which costs him nothing.

2. The upright man has a liberal 2.
heart to Christ's poor Summa disciplinae Christianae consistit in
miscricordia. Ambr.
, Psalm 112. 9. He has dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor, his
righteousness endures for ever. The Hebrew word for godly, (...), signifies
merciful; The upright man poures the golden oil of mercy into the wounds of
other. The poors man's hand is Christ's treasury Manus pauperis Christi
gazophylaciu^.
; the upright Saint is ever casting into Christ's treasury; mercy and liberality
is the ensign that integrity displayes.

The more excellent any thing is, the more diffusive. The clouds Eccl. 11. 3
pour down their silver showers *, the Sun does send abroad its golden
beams. The end of life is usefulness. What benefit is there of a Diamond in
the rock? and what is it the better to have a great estate if this Diamond be
shut up in a rocky heart?

What shall we say to self-interested men? are these upright? All (...).
seek their own, Phil. 2. 21. you may as well extract oil out of a flint, as a
drop of charity from them. Some observe the ground is most barren near golden
mines; and indeed it is too often so in a spiritual sense; those whom God has
most enriched with estates, are most barren in good works. How can he say he
has an upright heart, that has a withered hand? how dares he say he loves God
in sincerity? 1 John 3. 17. Who so has this worlds good, and sees his brother
in need, and shuts up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the love
of God in him?

What shall we think of such as instead of scattering abroad the seeds of mercy
and compassion to others care not how they they wrong others 1 Cor. 6. 8
; are these to be accounted upright? Christ made himself poor to make us rich
2 Cor. 8. 9
; and these make others poor, to make themselves rich; instead of giving the
poor a covering Job 31.19
; they take away their covering from them; like the Hedghog that rolls and laps
it self in its own soft down, and turns out the bristles to others; an
emblem of these, who if they may gratify themselves, they turn out the
bristles, they care not what mischief or prejudice they do to others. These are
these who raise the honor of their own families out of the ruin of others.
They are not birds of Paradise, but birds of prey; and which is worse, to do
this under the mask of profession, this is just as if a thief should commit a
robbery in the Judges own robes; or as if a woman should play the harlot,
having the Bible lying before her. These are none of the race of the upright.
The upright man is a (...), a public good in the place where he lives; he is
given to works of mercy, he is like God who makes his springs to run among
the Valleys, Psalm. 104. 10. so does the upright man make his springs of charity
to run among the valleys of poverty.

XII. The upright man is progressive XII. Charact.
in holiness; he pursues after further degrees of sanctity; Job 17. 9. He that
has clean hands shall wax stronger and stronger. Uprightness is in the heart,
as seed in the earth, which will increase, Col. 2. 9. unsound Christians rest
in some faint desires and formalities; it is with hypocrites as with the body
in an Atrophy, which though it receives food, yet thrives not. The upright
Christian follows on to know the Lord, Hosea 6. 3. It was Charles the fifths
Motto, plus ultra, on further. They say of the Crocodile, it has never done
growing Quam diu vivit crescit.
Hierom writes of Paulinus, that in the first part of his life he excelled
others, in the latter part he excelled himself In primis partibus alios, in
poenultimis seipsum superavit. Hier
. The upright man is not like Hezekiahs Sun, which went backward, nor like
Joshuahs Sun, which stood still; but like David's Sun, which goes forward,
and as a champion does run his race Psalm. 19. 5 Object.
.

Obj. But may a child of God say, I fear I am not upright, for I do not
perceive that I wax stronger?

Answ. Thou may thrive in Answ.
grace, though thou do not perceive it. The plant grows, but not always in
one place. Sometimes it grows in the branches, sometimes secretly in the root:
so an upright soul still grows, but not always in the same grace; sometimes
higher in the branches, in knowledge; sometimes he thrives in the root, in
humility; which is as needful as any other growth. If thou art not more tall,
yet if thou art more lowly. Here is a progress, and this progress evidenceth
the vitals of sincerity.

XIII. The upright man orders XIII. Charact.
his conversation aright, Psalm. 50. 23. To him that orders his conversation
aright will I show the salvation of God. The upright man is (...), a pattern of
holiness; he treads evenly; be walks as Christ did, 1 John 2. 8. Though the
maine work of Religion lies within, yet our light must so shine, that others
may behold it; The foundation of sincerity is in the heart, yet its beautiful
frontispiece appears in the conversation. The Saints are called jewels, because
they cast a sparkling luster in the eyes of others. An upright Christian is
like Solomon's Temple, gold within and without: sincerity is a holy leaven,
which if it be in the heart, will work it self into the life, and make it swell
and rise as high as heaven, Phil. 3. 20.

Some brag they have good hearts, but their lives are crooked. They hope to go
to heaven, but their steps take hold of hell, Prove. 5. 5. an upright Christian
is (...), he sets a Crown of honor upon the head of Religion, he does not only
profess the Gospel, but adorn it, he labors to walk so regularly and holily,
that if we could suppose the Bible to be lost* it might be found again in his
life.

XIV. The upright man will be XIV. Charact.
good in bad times. The Laurel keeps its freshness and greenness in the
Winter-season, Job 27. 6. My righteousness I hold fast and will not let it go,
my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. Uprightness is a complexion
which will not alter. The upright man's zeal is like the fire which the vestal
Virgins kept in Rome always burning.

In Christian is non initia sed fines lau dantur.
The hypocrite seems upright, till times of trial come. The crystal looks
like pearl till it comes to the hammering. The hypocrite is good only in
Sunshine; he cannot sail in a storm, but retreats to the shore. Naturalists
report of the Chelydonian stone that it will retain its virtue no longer then
it is enclosed in gold. An emblem of hypocrites who are good only while they
are enclosed in golden prosperity, take them out of the gold, and they lose
that virtue they did seem to have; descinit in piscem mulier formosa superne.
-- Unsound professors, like green timber, shrink in the hot Sun of
persecution. The heat of the fiery trial cooles their zeal.

An upright man whatever he loses, he holds fast his integrity; he is like
wine full of spirits, which is good to the last drawing. The three children, or
rather the three champions were invincisible in their courage, Dan. 3. 18.
neither Nebuchadnezzars music could flatter them, nor his furnace scare them
out of their Religion Justum and tenacem propositi virum, non civium ardor
prava jubentium, non vultus tyranni mente quatit solida. Horace. (...), Ignat.
Ep. 11. ad Ephesians.
. Paul glories in his sufferings, Romans 5. 3. he shakes his chain, and displays
it as an ensign of honor. Ignatius calls his fetters his spiritual pearls;
they were as precious to him as a necklace of pearl; Thus the upright man,
though death be in the way, spurs on to the end of the race; he is most swift
toward the center. Of him it may be said, Thou have kept the best wine till
now.

XV. An upright man endeavors XV. Charact.
to make others upright; it is his work to make crooked things straight Isa. 40.
4.
. Where there is life, there is a power of propagation, 1 Cor. 4. 14. In Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel; a good man labors to make others
good; as fire does assimilate, and turn every thing into its own nature. Luke
22. 32. When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. The upright man is in
the place of God to his brother, he increases his knowledge, confirms his
faith, enflames his love; if he sees his brother declining, he labors to
reduce him; when the house begins to lean, you put under a strait piece of
timber to support it. Another beginning to lean to error; the upright
Christian, as strait timber does underprop and support him.

And thus I have set before you the upright man, he is worth a marking and
beholding. I have drawn the upright man's picture; and the use I would make of
all is this, that Use. Exhort.
you would fall in love with this picture, and that you would endeavor to
resemble it.

And there is a great Motive in Motive.
the text to make you fall in love with uprightness* See what a badge of
honor is put upon the upright man. God calls him perfect, (...), Mark the
perfect man.

Quest. But can any man be perfect Quest.
in this life? Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
Prove. 20. 9.

Answ. Far be it from me to hold Answ.
with the Katharists and Familists, that a Christian is pure from sin in this
life. If there were no Bible to confute that opinion, a Christians own
experience might do it. We find the continual ebullitions, and motions of
sin working in our members. Paul cries out of a body of death, Romans 7. 24.
The Saints, though they are comely, yet black *; Cant. 1. 5
-- Grace in this life is like gold in the oar, full of mixture; but yet in an
evangelical sense, the upright man is said to be perfect, and that five manner
of ways.

1. An upright man is perfect with 1.
a perfection of parts, though not of degrees. There is no part of him but is
embroidered, and bespangled with grace; though he be sanctified but in part,
yet in every part; therefore grace in a believer is called the new man, Col. 3.
10. The work of the Spirit in the heart is a through work, Psalm 51. 2. wash me
thoroughly from my iniquity. Grace in the heart is like air in the twilight,
there is no part of the air but has some light in it, and in this sense the
upright man is perfect.

2. The upright man is perfect 2.
comparatively in regard of others. Thus Noah was perfect in his generation,
Genesis 6. 9. Noah compared with the profane world, was a perfect man; gold in
the oar compared with lead or brass is perfect; a field of wheat, though it
may have some thistles growing in it, yet compared with a field of tares, is
perfect.

3. The upright man is perfect in 3.
regard of his aims; he does collimare, level at the mark of perfection: The
upright man breaths after perfection; and therefore he is said not to sin, 1
John 3. 9. because though he be not without sin, yet his will is against
sin Non facit peccatum quiapatitur potius, Ber.
; he has voted sin down, though this bosom traitor rebels. When he fails,
he weeps; and this is a Gospelperfection.

4. The upright man is perfect 4.
through the righteousness of Christ; he is perfectly justified, Col. 2. 10. ye
are complete in him; through the redglasse every thing appears red; so through
the glass of Christ's blood, the soul is looked upon as beautiful and glorious:
He that has on Christ's seamlesse coat is perfect: He that has the
righteousness of God is perfect, 2 Cor. 5. 21.

5. God calls the upright man 5.
perfect, because he intends to make him so. Christ calls his Spouse his
undesiled, Cant. 5. 2. Open to me my dove, my undefiled, or as the original
word is (...), my perfect; not that the Spouse is so, she has her (...), her
spots and blemishes, but yet undefiled, because Christ intends to make her so.
God has chosen us to perfection Elegit nos ad perfectionem.
, Ephesians. 1. 4. a limner that has begun the rude draught of a picture, he looks
upon it what he intends to make it; he intends to lay it in its own orient
colors; in this life there is but the first draught, the imperfect lineaments
of grace drawn in our souls, yet God calls us perfect, because he intends by
the pensil of the holy Ghost to draw us out in our orient beauty, and lay the
Virmillion color of glory upon us. Thus the upright man is perfect, it is as
sure to be done as if it were done already.

And so much for the first part of my text. The upright man's Character.

I proceed now briefly to the second, 2. The upright man's Crown.
which is the upright man's Crown in these words, (...). The end of that man is
peace; as the upright is honorable while he lives, he is perfect; so he is
happy when he dies. His end is peace. The word (...), peace, incircles all
blessedness in it. The end of that man is peace; a wise man looks to the end
of a thing, Eccles. 7. 8. better is the end of a thing then the beginning. So
peaceable is the end of an upright man, that Balaam desired it, Numb. 23. 10.
Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.

Now the upright man goes off the stage of this world wearing a tripple Crown
of peace. 1. He has peace 1.
with God; Tranquillus Deus tranquillat omnia.
God says to him, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee. I have nothing
against thee; thou have laid thy sins to heart, and I will not lay them to they
charge. The Jewish Rabbis say, that Moses died with a kiss from Gods mouth;
the upright man dies embracing Christ and kissing the promises.

2. He has peace with conscience; 2.
1 John 5. 10. He that believes has the witness in himself; his end must
needs be peace that has a smiling God, and a smiling conscience. Austin
Laetitia bonae conscientiae Paradisus. Aug.
calls it the Paradise of a good conscience; a godly man is in this Paradise
before he dies. What sweet music does the bird of conscience make in the
breast of a believer! be of good comfort says conscience, thou have walked
uprightly in a crooked generation, fear not death. This is (...), the
fore-taste of heaven; here is Manna in the golden pot; he that dies with peace
of conscience, flies to heaven as Noah's Dove to the Ark with an Olive Branch in
his mouth.

3. The upright man has peace 3*
with the Saints; he has their good word; they embalme his memory, and erect
for him monuments of honor in their hearts. Thus the upright man's end is
peace, he is renoun'd among the people of God; he inherits not their censure,
but their praise; he is carried to his grave with a shoure of tears.

Use 1. See a great difference between Use 1. Inform.
the godly and the wicked in their end* The end of the upright man is peace,
but the end of the wicked is to be cut off, Psalm. 37. 38. a wicked man's end is
shame and horror, he dies with convulsion-fits of conscience; he lives in a
calm, but dies in a storm, Job 27. 20. a tempest steals him away in the
night; like those fish Pliny speaks of, which swim along pleasantly till they
fall into the mare mortuum, or dead sea; to every sinner I say as Abner to
Joab, 2 Samuel 2. 26. know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter
end?

What is the end of hypocrites? Job 8. 13. Their hope shall be cut off: What is
the end of Apostates? 2 Pet. 2. 20 For if after they have escaped the
pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, their latter end is
worse with them. Peter Castellon, Bishop of Marsten having gotten a great
estate, began to inveigh in his Sermons at Orleands against the profession of
Religion, sitting at a time in his chair, he fell into a strange disease which
no Physician had ever seen; one part of his body was extreme hot, and burned
like fire, the other part cold and frozen like ice, and thus with cries and
groans finished his life. The end of the wicked is to be cut off, when they
are at their lives end, they are at their wits end, Psalm. 107. 27.

Obj. But do we not see the worst Object.
men go out of the world as quietly and smoothly as any? do not they die in
peace?

Answ. 1. If a wicked man seems Answ. 1.
to have peace at death, it is not from the knowledge of his happiness, but
from the ignorance of his danger; Haman went merrily to the banquet, but little
did he think what a second course was to be served in, and that his life must
pay the shot.

Answ. 2. A wicked man may die Answ. 2.
in a lethargy, but not in peace; Nabal died quietly Sam. 25 37
, but he were a fool that would wish his soul with Nabals. Conscience may be
like a Lion asleep, but when this Lion awakes it will roar upon the sinner.

Answ. 3. A wicked man may Answ. 3.
die in presumption, but not in peace; he hopes all is well with him, but
there is a great deal of difference between presumption and peace. It will be so
much the worse to go to hell with hope of heaven: a wicked man phancies to
himself a good condition; he dies in a fancy, but not in peace; and observe,
for the most part God drives a sinner out of his fools Paradise before he dies.
God lets loose conscience upon him, guilt spoils his music; and before his
life is cut off, his hope is cut off Job 8. 14
. I will conclude this with that saying of Christ, Luke 11. 21. While the
strong man keeps possession, all his goods are in peace. The peace a sinner
seems to have, is but the Devils peace: His serenity is but security; and
whatever he may promise himself, Satan does but still him with rattles. He that
lives graceless, dies peacelesse.

Use 2. Here is infinite comfort to Use 2. Consolat.
the upright man, his end is peace: If you look to the beginning of his life it
is not eligible Noli praecipitare judicium nec sententiam proferre ex proximo
intuitu mollerus.
, his life is interwoven with troubles, (...), we are troubled on every side, 2
Cor. 4. 8. like a ship that has the waves beating on both sides; but, the end
is peace; and the smoothness of the end may make amends for the ruggedness of
the way. The upright man, though he lives in a storm, he dies in a calm, Ier.
31. 17. There is hope in thine end. The end crowns al; The upright man though
he drinks wormwood while he lives, yet he swims in honey when he dies; the
upright man, with Simeon, departs in peace, Luke 2. 29. and his ending in peace
is but his entrance into peace, Isa. 57. 2. He shall enter into peace; his
dying-day is his marriageday. Grace gives both the flowers and the crop: the
sweet flowers of peace here, and the full crop of glory hereafter. Paula, that
religious Lady when one had read to her that Scripture, Cant. 2. 11. The
singing of birds is come: yes, says she, the singing of birds is now come, and
so being full of peace mounted off from her deathbed, and went triumphing, and
as it were singing to heaven: Then, shout for joy all ye that are upright in
heart, Ps. 32. 11. peace is that neverfading garland which shall be set upon
the head of the upright, so says my Text, Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace.

FINIS.

