The VVelsh-Mans Postures, OR, The true manner how her do exercise her company
of Soldiers in her own Country in a warlike manners with some other newfound
experiments, and pretty extravagants fitting for all Christian podies to caknow.

Up Morgan. up Shinkin. Maurice. T^^sie


^nted in the year. When her did her enemy jeere, 1642.

THE WELCH-MANS Postures: OR, The true manner how her do exercise her
Soldiers in her own Country.
Together with some other newfound experiments, and pretty extravagants
fitting for all Christian podies to caknow.
THough her love not to remember Kenton Battle, not how the bullets slew
about her cares like Bees, nor how her lost her left arm* and did afterward
with her right arm and hand write her Welsh Almanac, yet that her may give
good instructions to all her loving Countrymen how to defend her self in
Warlike Disciplines, and learn to keep her crowns uncrackt, and come off with
awle her lives and limbs, her will now show her the way how to order and
handle her Muskets, Guns and Pikes, according to her Welsh manners and her
own experiences.

First her desire all her Contrymen to ca-know her must not be drunk not
reele, but stand bolt upright as her stakes do in he hedges or fields, no her
do not mean fields, but her mean files. And moreover her must stand right in
her ranks and pedigrees, that is Pouldron to Pouldron, or Noddle to Noddle, or
Iobber-nole to Iobber-nole, and keep her ranks close, if her smell not too
strong^ that is, her must stand by her Countrey-mans shoulder, and must stand
by her side, be it right or wrong close to her. And then her must remember to
teach her wife and all her children not to talk or break her pates to keep
silence, and her must remember that silence is best when her is taught, as for
publishing and speaking her mind in bid English, and therefore let her be sure
always to keep silly-sence in her mouth waking or s^eeping, and let her tell
all her stories and long tales and write Almanacks and this her present work
in silly-sence.

And moreover if her pick her Country-mans pocket at a fair, ^et her do it to
her right hand, or dive in her Country-womans placket, let her do it to her
right hand, and if her toast her sheese by the fire side let her do it to her
right hand, or if draw he^ ^^eat sword five yards long, and her Tagger, let her
hold both in her right hand valiantly, and that will make her in her next
posture as if her were Saint George: but if her enemy come too fast upon her in
a furious manner, let her ^unne away as her were* not half so valiant as her
were thought to be; but if her do fall to discourse of her pedigree, let her
brag as her were in Wales, and as her were King Arthurs own cousen, and as her
were ancient Gentleman of Pig-house, or as her were descended from a
hog-house, and let her always commend her self as her were better then ever
her was. Now her meaning in these words (as her were) is this, that her must
ever turn the cat in the part, and speak and do contrary to all trueths and
verities, for if her have never a penny in her purse her must talk and
do^nmince^s as her were a great She^tleman, and kaine and bastinado her young
^ouldiers, if her have never look her enemy in the face, her must talk as if
her were as valiant as her Countryman Pendragon, her must speak as her were
true, honest, valiant, faithful and loving to all her Contrymen, though her
meant no such matter.

First her will show Her Postures for her Gun.
FIrst silence or silly-sence.
Stand e^^ in her ranks.
Streighten h^^ ^iles.
F^ces to her let^ag;
A^^e you were before;
Faces to her right crag;
Ass y^^ were;
Faces about, that is where her ^an^e ^a^;
Faces to her valiant Captain.
SHoulder her Gun, or lay her
gun upon her lest Crag.
Take down her Gun.
Hold her Gun fast behind.
Keep up her nose.
Look in her arse or Gun-hole.
Put dust in her Arse.
Then put one bullet in her arse.
Put another ^ullet in her arse.
Knock her down on the ground.
Draw out her stopping stick; or muckle prick.
Handle her stopping stick.
Put it into her Arse-hole.
R^m down her bullet into the bottom of her Arse-hole.
Draw out her stopping stick.
Put it in her right place again.
^ift up her Guns nose.
Further into her nog-ing stick.
L^^ke to her fire-pan.
^^ep her arse clear;
Blow the loose dust out of her arse.
Then wipe her arse.
Let not her nose drop in her arse, as her wife does, when she makes puddings.
Guard her arse with her two first fingers.
Open her arse with her finger.
Powder her arse.
Shut her arse again.
C^ck her ropes end.
Blow her ropes end.
Try her ropes end.
Open her arse with her finger,
Stand stiftly to her guns arse.
Put out her truest leg;
Pull down her Cock;
Give fire to her arse-hole.
Make her shitt bullets,
And let her go off with a ponder in the Tivells name.
Take her gunne out of the nogging stick.
Draw out her muckle prick.
Se^ure her guns arse.
Put more dust in her arse.
Prime her arse again and again.
Shoulder her gun again on her left crag.
Keep her legs close.
And march in good fashion* with her nose in the leaders arse, if her smell not
too strong of toasted sheese.
Her Postures for her Pike.
TAke her pike in her Thee^v^sh hand.
Hold up her long pike-staffe.
Take order with her pikes.
Charge her pikes.
Str^ke with her pike-staffe.
Push her pikes in her bellies.
Put her p^kes to her breast.
Shake her pikes:
Shoulder her pike always on the right side of her crag.
Take order with her pikes.
Carry her pikes over her heads.
Draw her pikes after her.
Let her pike stand stiff.
Cheek her pikes.
Nose her pikes,
Charge to her right leg,
Put shoulder to her pike again.
Stand to her pike.
Make her pike stand again.
Then charge to her left crag.
Charge between her legs.
Carry her pikes on her should sea or right crag always when her marches;
Stand to her pike-staffe.
Charge under her hands.
Charge under her legs;
Charge her pikes between her legs, and draw forth her long sword.
Then take order with her pike.
Come up to push of pikes.
Then break her pike, and run away with her other piece and swear her did
break in her enemies bellies: If her pike be hole then retreat with her pikes.

And never be beaten back with her pikes, but when ^er see her own blood.

Fling away her pikes and take her he^^s; for her can tell, that at such times,
one pair of heels is worth two pair of h^: And Qui non dissimulare n^^ est
vivere, that is, he that cannot ^^l how to d^ssemble, and double his files,
must not live in this round age.

ANd further for her Gun, let her as soon as her has presence and given fire
let her fall off, and never come up again to her first Ranks, but leave all
the wings and fly away with her own wings tied to her heels, as her have heard
that her cozen Mercury has, for after her Gun has once (...) bullets, let her
give over least her fall into ^owring, and make her own self b^ shit her
owneselfe for fear, without command or authoritie^ In her marches, let her
always keep a good distance from the enemy, at least a mile, or a mile and a
half, for her love not her enemy, so well to come near her; but if her must
come in h^ sight let her make her Gun shit bullets in her face, or else keep
her ^st with her long pole, or staff with a pike at the end; a^ now her will
show her how to perform her exercises and (...) of pikes another way.

Advance and hold her p^kes or hop-poles, as her do h^ Welsh ^ookes, or as her
hold her pikes in pushing against (...) country men's packes, and coun^^y
wo^^a^s pellies, and let h^ boldly, holding her in her true hand, if her have
any. Order (...) pikes though her do not order her self, and let her keep
he^ self and her pikes always within her own borders of Wal^^ and never stir
a soote to these Battayles, and then her shall o^der her pikes in good fashion.

Shoulder her pikes, and let her lie on her shoulder as he^ Welsh hook ^oe^,
half before and half behind; but her had (...) there car^y any thing on her
shoulders to her Country Mark then shoulder the pikes, her had rather eat her
Welsh sho^^ders of Mutton or sheep arms at home, rather than ^^avail^ the
wars to shoulder her pikes and be beaten back and shoulders; as her was at
Coven^^y, and at other places let her cha^ her pikes that they would prove more
valiant than her self, (...) when her meets with her country-women her pikes
put her charge when her come to pu^h a pike with her, yet her had (...) there
^un her pikes in her country podies bellies, and so co^^ off valiantly*

Trayle and draw her pikes after her, as a Tortase or a gr^^ Snake does her
long tails, but her shall hang and draw he, (...) fore her shall get her to
draw or traile any more pikes after h^^ and so draw her into danger of the
Redcoats, and have (...) Coxcombe cut, and her own plud drawn which her
cannot abide to see.

Keep her pike next to her cheek, and let her check keep her colors, or if
her check do not keep it, let her nose keep and ^eare her ^^lours in the
midst of her face and march for most. And these are some of her ways and
fashions how to use her Arms, her Gun, her roapes end or matches, and her
pikes, against back or pelly, but as for using her legs, all true Bri^taines,
and all her country men can do that out of her own magnani^ities and
valor, and can run away without any directions, for at such times one pare
of legs is better than two pare of hands, to bring her into her own country,
and bid farewell a^mes and bullet-shiting Guns.

The Welch-mans newfound experiences.
HAng a dog in a Crab^tree and her will never love Varges afterward.

If the head of a Fox or of a Wolf be hanged in a Dove-house, neither
Pole-cats, Weezels nor any thing that will either hurt the pigeons or suck
their eggs will enter therein; Probatum est*

A comb made of the right horn of a Ram, does take away the headache being
applied on the right side of the head, if tho pained head be combed therewith:
If the pain be on the left side of the head, then a comb made of the left
horn of a Ram does take it away, if it be rightly combed therewith.

If any soldier be in fear of his life, in so much that her is afraid ^o
beshit her breeches; eat but one knot of the Root called Mullen; or else the
rine of a Pome-granard; and it will bind her fast behind.

The juice of Broom mixed with the oil of Radish or of mustard seed, is a very
safe remedy for the killing and destroying of a soldiers enemies, his
back-biter; called an English Moabite, with a list down her back like a
Roane-horse.

New cheese wrapped or folded in the dry leaves of the herb called Dragon,
preserves the same from being moldy, or from ^ennesse; Probatum est, as her
did at Edgehill.

Whosoever will preserve her podies from violent danger, le^ her keep her safe
from going to Wars at Edgehill; and whosoever would live long, let her keep
her self from wine and Women; Probatum est.

IT is truly reported that many men who travail toward the Holy Land, and
into Arabia the Desert have been transformed into beasts, and such like
creatures; only a Countryman of hers, who would needs go see fashions, as
other pilgrims did* did only carry some good Welsh cheese which did preserve him
from being transformed, such virtue has good cheese over those foul fiends in
that Country.

Hang a roasted dog in a dove-house (as her do in Wales) and al^ the Pigeons in
the whole County will resort thither; and the^ take them, and kill them, roast
some, bake some, and stew some* and boil the rest: Probatum est.

An excelent approved thing to make a sat body slender and light; First her go
and enter her self a voluntary soldier, where her shall be^ same to lie hard
and fare hard; if that will not perform the work; then Secondly let her
strive and be file leader, or be placed in the front of the Army or Battle;
Especially if there be an enemy in opposition to her and if her be not shot
with a bullet after two or three fireings, or else loose an arm or a leg, he
has Cuckolds luck; but if her be hit and lose her arm or her left leg, as her
did at Kenton battle, her will warrant her, her shall grow slender and have a
thin body, and be far lighter then ever her was before.

And to advance this work forwards, let her eat but two cloves of garlic in
a morning, and then nothing till noone but an ounce of Welsh cheese toasted,
and an ounce of Rye bread, and a little fair water; If this do not perform
the thing; I will for ever suffer in good men's opinions; but her do know it to
be true; Probatum est.

And so her have done with these her known and tried experiences and will cease
till her set out her skills in physic, and in all the other seven liberal
sciences; vale du humah.

FINIS.

