A necessary Advertisement to a needful Fortification.
BY WILL: WEBSTER.
My former Tables much good liking won,
The fate of this, may in the like line, run:
With Trading times, they suited; and (J guess)
This with our sad condition suits no less.

AS now we busily our selves apply,
(Sparing for neither care, nor cost, nor pains)
Our Cities and our Towns to fortify,
Because a threatening danger so constraines:
Even so (^^sasters threatening) it is our parts
Against their Assaults, to fortify our hearts.
The settlement of outward peace among us
Has been endeavored for, but all in vain:
Disturbers of our peace, so much do wrong us,
That hopes of peace we scarce can entertain:
Those our endeavors having fruitless bin,
Now let us seek to settle peace within.
This inward peace should first be sought, indeed;
That, without this, is but an empty thing:
This will support the heart in time of need,
When that cannot a dram of comfort bring:
This will supply our want, when that we miss;
But that cannot supply our want of this.
He that upon his Maker rowles his mind,
And with sure confidence casts Anchor there:
He Is in safe harbor, neither waves nor vvind,
Nor plundring Pirates needs he to fear.
For these cannot of inward peace bereave him,
Though destitute of outvvard helps they leave him.
To settle outward peace, the task is hard,
For many must concur, that now do jar;
This other easier is, in this regard,
To deal but with our selves, in this we are.
He that seeks inward peace, shall find the same,
If he can but bring his own heart in frame.
And over our own hearts, we may (no doubt)
Prevail, if we divine assistance crave:
And when this business shall be brought about,
So, that this peace we in our bosoms have:
Then are we fortifide, and may defy
The worst Malignants worst malignity.
If we our hearts to such a pitch can raise,
Patience, and confidence in God will arm us
Against the calamities of these sad days,
They may assault, but cannot greatly harm us:
With loss of outward things we may dispense,
Not making them, but God our confidence.
Our plenty, peace, and long tranquillity
Had almost brought us to be of the mind
That patience, faith, hope and humility
Were not so needful, as we now do find.
How mainly necessary, now do seem
These graces, which were held in slight esteem?
Gold in the chest, perhaps, was prized as much
As these in heart, and more desired and sought:
But gold it self will not abide the touch
As these will do, when thus to trial brought:
We shall do well, if we have these about us,
Though all our helps do fail, that are without us.
How soon may we in outward things be crossed?
How suddenly (of all) be dispossessed?
And comfort took in them, with them is lost,
To make our God our portion then its best:
From whence may peace and comfort be derived,
Whereof we know, we cannot be deprived.
Our Land long time has been like Goshen Land,
Free from such plagues our neighbour-nations felt;
Enjoying blessings from Gods liberal hand,
But we with him ingratefully have dealt:
And by our sins have so provoakt his ire,
That now, it vvasting is, with sword and fire.
And in this case, now what is to be done,
Since God is pleased, to show himself displeasd?
From him (as from a foe) we cannot run,
Then we must seek to have his wrath appeasd:
And that is by offering up in sacrifice
A broken heart, which he will not despise.
And we must pray; but if we look to speed,
Zeal, faith, and charity our prayers must vving:
It is not long -- lip labor does the deed,
So as a blessing down on us to bring:
For like Baals Priests, we long may cry and call,
If these be vvanting, yet not speed at all.
He that (in Prayer) has but a stammering tongue,
And shallow memory, and wants the art
To word it smoothly, as he goes along,
Yet he may have a powerful praying heart.
A current method, takes the hearers ears;
But as for God, the heart he chiefly hears.
This I have here inserted, that I may
Take off discouragement from such as have
Fervent desires, and zealous hearts to pray,
But want a verbal nimblenesse, to crave.
Such hearts, acquit such tongues, but certainly
The tongue cannot, the hearts defect, supply.
The grace of zealous heart is chief; and yet
The gift of ready tongue I value much:
And those in whom this gift and grace are met,
I hold, a double honor, due to such:
But if they severed be, in such a case,
Better to want the gift, then want the grace.
Let us all labor for sincerity,
That seasons all, and that God most respects;
And let us seek to shun hypocrisy,
That poisons all, and that God most rejects:
With bare appearances men pleased are,
But from men's ways, Gods vvayes do differ far.
We should be blessed, if we pure hearts could get,
We should see God, and see him work a vvonder:
Our Church and State he would in order set,
That like a broken clock are clasht asunder.
Whose joints and wheels are scattered and dispersed
Not by the wit of man to be reverst.
For most unhappy differences are grown
Between our King and his high Parliament,
To such a height, that none but God alone
Can reconcile, what is so in sunder rent.
Oh that his ancient love to this our Land
Would move him now to take this work in hand!
It was not our deserts, that him did move,
Truth, Peace, and Plenty, here, so long to send;
But it was his free mercy and his love,
And whom he loves, he loves unto the end.
If (of his love) those blessings tokens were,
That (he will forsake us quite) we need not fear.
Then let our faith sure footing take from hence,
He has been good to us, we all do know;
Whereon we well may ground this confidence,
That he will again, in his good time, be so:
No doubt, if we, on him, with patience wait,
He Will bring us out, that brought us in this strait.
He that did frame the world, most easily he
Can bring our Land again in its due frame;
He can, and he will do it (no doubt) if we
Do beg this blessing in his dear Sons name.
What so we ask, we shall obtain, he says,
If we (not wavering) do ask in faith.
We must believe he will do it, but when he will do it,
That to his will and vvisdome we must leave:
But we, mean while, by Prayer may urge him to it,
He bids us ask, and says we shall receive.
But for this mercy, first he us must fit,
Which being done, we then may look for it.
We did not thankfulness enough express,
For that long happy peace our land enjoyed:
We almost weary were of happiness,
And seemed to be with peace and plenty cloyed.
Therefore, by want of peace, we now are taught
To know its vvorth, and prize it as we ought.
And like as our unthankfulness before
Appeared, by our unworthy vvalking then;
So now (if God will peace to us restore)
We must resolve to be far better men:
So that our lives, more lively may express
(Then can our tongues) our hearts true thankfulness.
Would every one take up this resolution,
And send up zealous prayers to Mercies throne;
God would forbear his Angers execution,
And graciously, would be with us, at one.
And of one mind would make us, curing so
This our distemper, which thus works our vvoe.
O that our 'God' would cause his truth to shine
In all our hearts, that all may it embrace;
And then to peace would all our hearts incline,
And from amongst us, all dissension chase:
And that he would (lest ruin should betide us)
Into the way of peace be pleased to guide us.
But if Almighty God shall not be pleased
To turn to us, and cause us turn to him,
So that we shall not of this war be eased,
But still be frighted with its visage grim:
We must, if still, we thus must be annoyd,
Prepare to bear what we cannot avoid.
And it behooves, that then we seek to store
Our hearts, with more then humane fortitude;
That being thrust out from the quiet shore
Into the Maine, amongst waves and billows rude:
We may above them keep, and as they rise,
So raise our minds, and more the world despise.
If God on us do lay adversity,
We thereunto must patiently submit,
Because our happiness does rather lie
In patient bearing, then not feeling it.
Let patience have its perfect work, and we
The quiet fruits of righteousness shall see.
If our estates we lose, we lose but that
Which we enjoyd but at the Donors will:
And therefore why should we repine thereat?
If we were good, we may be good men still.
Crosses, that are not mingled with a curse,
Do use to make men better, and not worse.
Perhaps, some fear, if losses on them fall,
Their children then may want, and suffer need:
Yet they that give their children most of all,
Can surely settle nothing on their seed.
If God (what we bequeath) to them shall bless,
It is enough for them, be it more or less.
On earthly things we must not set our love,
On pleasure, profit, or on high estate,
For all is vanity, as all do prove
One time or other, either soon or late:
For what in all this world does pleasing seem,
But first or last, it grows out of esteem?
Children delight in every childish toy,
Which when they once grow men, they do reject;
And many men in many things do joy,
Which yet before they die, they disaffect:
But howsoere, when death once calls away,
That all is vanity, then all will say.
Then comfort needs most, when death does call,
But vvorldly comforts then prove most unsound,
In profit there is no profit then at all,
In pleasure then, no pleasure can be found:
But when all comforts fail the world holds dear,
A heart endued with grace it self will cheer.
Which grace, he grant us, that has dearly bought us,
And daily in our hearts the same increase,
Till by his blessed guidance he has brought us
To everlasting happiness and peace:
To him be praise, whose mercy fails never,
By Angels and by men, ascribed for ever.
FINIS.
Printed at London in the year, 1643.


