^ars Puer Alecto, Virgo, VULPES, Leo, Nullu*



A CAT May look upon a KING.

depiction of a cat

London, Printed for William Roybould, at the Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard.
1652.

TO THE READER.
IF I were Master either of good Language, or good Method; I would then presume
to present this ensuing Discourse, and according to the fashion, entreat thy
courteous acceptance: But being so rude and naked (yet true) I send it forth
into the World to take its fortune with the rest of the Paperbrats of this Age:
some may fret, some may laugh; both please me alike: my end only is, that we
may all of us, after so much blood and treasure spent, with hearts and hands,
pray for and endeavor the welfare, security, and prosperity of the whole.

Adieu.
The Introduction.
THE unparalled Transactions of these our late times have raised in me such
a confusion of thoughts, that I resolved to look back; as a man that is stunned
with a stone, looks not after the stone, but after the hand that flung it.

And surely I find (by the help of my spectacles) King JAMES was the Fountain
of all our late Afflictions and miseries.

It has been a custom among our flattering Priests (for I know none else used
it) upon mention of deceased Princes, to use the expression, Of blessed memory;
and so I believe have used it, ever since William the Bastard of Normandy
overran this Kingdom. Which begat another itch in me, to search the lives of
all our Kings since him, to see if any of them had deserved that reverend
remembrance. And first for

King William The Conqueror.
I Know no better testimony of him, then out of his own mouth, lying upon his
deathbed: his words take as follows.

The English I hated; the Nobles I dishonored, the Commons I cruelly vexed,
and many I unjustly disinherited: In the County of York, and sundry other
places, an innumerable sort with hunger and sword I slew; And thus that
beautiful Land and Noble Nation, I made desolate with the deaths of many
thousands.

William Rufus.
THis King did not only oppress and fleece this Nation, but rather with
importunate exactions did as it were flay off their skins. His chiefest
consorts were effeminated persons, Ruffians, and the like; and himself
delighted in continual adulteries, and company of Concubines (even before the
sun.) None thrived about him, but Treasurers, Collectors, and Promoters: He
sold all Church -- preferments for money, and took Fines of the Priests for
fornication.

Hunting in that most remarkable New-Forrest, Walter Tyrrel shot him to the
heart with an arrow out of a Crosse-bow, whether of purpose or not, is no great
matter.

Henry 1.
IS branded with Covetousness, and intolerable taxations; and cruelty upon his
elder brother, whom he kept in perpetual prison, and put out both his eyes: and
for his most excellent leachery, leaving behind him fourteen Bastards.

King Stephen.
IN famous for perjurie; a hater of this Nation, whom he durst never trust, but
oppressed this Land with strangers, notwithstanding that he had received the
Crown upon courtesy; dies, and leaves behind him two bastards.

Henry 2.
NEver such a horrid extractor of moneys from the Subjects, as this King; and
is infamous for perjury, jealousy, and lechery; curses all his children upon
his deathbed, and so dies leaving three bastards.

Richard 1.
RAked more money by unparalleled Taxes upon this Nation, then any King before
him: his voyage to the Holy Land pared them to the bones by many unjust ways;
but his unlucky return quite ruined it: He dies by a poisoned arrow, and leaves
two Bastards.

King John.
OF this King we cannot reckon so many impieties as he had: Unnatural to his
own blood, to the wife in his bosom; bloody to Nobility and Clergy; Perjury,
often swearing, but never kept his word; betrays the Crown and Kingdom to
the Pope; And rather then want his will to ruin both Church, Nobles, and the
whole Nation, sends Ambassadors to a Moor, a mighty King in Africa, to render
unto him this kingdom of England, to hold it from him as his Sovereign Lord,
to renounce Christ, and receive Mahomet. In the heat of his wars with the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commons of this Land, repaires to the Abbey of
Swines-head, where he is poisoned, and leaves behind him three Bastards.

Henry 3.
A Chip of the old block, for no Oath could bind him; Jealous of the Nobility,
brings in strangers, despises all counsel in Parliament, wastes all the
Treasure of the kingdom in Civil wars, sells his Plate and Jewels, and pawnes
his Crown.

Edward 1.
Governed his will by his power, and shed more blood in this Kingdom, then any
of his forerunners; counted his Judges as dogs, and died as full of malice as
he lived full of mischief.

Edward 2.
A Man given to all sorts of unworthy vanities, and sinful delights: The
scourge and disgrace of this Nation in Scotland, against a handful of men,
with the greatest strength of England. After so many perjuries about his
Favorite Gaveston, and slaughter of the Nobility, he is deposed and murdered.

Edward 3.
TO his everlasting stain of honor, surrenders by his Charter, his Title of
Sovereignty to the kingdom of Scotland; restores the Deeds and Instruments of
their former homages and fealties (though after the Scots paid dear for it) to
supply his want. Whatsoever he yielded to in Parliament, was for the most part
presently revoked: And in that Parliament which was called The Good, they
desire the King (having abundantly supplied his wants) to remove from Court
four persons of special prejudice to his Honor, and the Kingdoms, with one
Dame Alice Piers, the Kings Concubine, an impudent troublesome woman: But no
sooner ended this Parliament, having gotten their moneys, but those four
forbidden return to Court, and their wonted insolences: The Speaker, who had
presented the Kingdoms grievances, at the suit of Alice Piers, is committed to
perpetual imprisonment.

Richard 2.
It Is said of this King, he spared neither the dignity, nor the life of any that
crossed his pleasure; spared neither lewd example, nor vild action, to follow
cruel council; A man plunged in pleasure, and sloth; in his private councels
would alter whatsoever the Parliament had settled; neglects his debts; prodigal
to strangers, destroys the Nobility; and for his hypocrisy, cruelty, perjury,
and tyranny, is deposed and murdered at Pomfret-Castle.

Henry 4.
SO true is that Distych translated out of Suetonius:

Who first exiled,
and after crowned,
His reign with blood
will much abound.
For after he had murdered his Predecessor, nothing took up this Kings reign
but ruin and blood upon the Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom, with such
unsufferable taxes as never were before, nor since.

Henry 5.
THis King reigned about nine years and a half, all which time our stories
mention nothing but his wars, raising of moneys, and spending the blood of this
poor Nation.

Henry 6. AND Edward 4.
WEre two men, born as it were, for ruin, blood and misery to this kingdom;
whose lives and actions no man can read with patience: That so much treasure
and so many men's lives should be spent and lost, to maintain the ambition,
luxury, pride and tyranny of but two men, in so many set-battels fought in the
bowels of this kingdom. Henry was stabbed with a dagger by the Duke of Gloucester
in the Tower. Edward died at Westminster and left behind him two bastards, and
a miserable Whore Jane Shore.

Richard 3.
A Monster of lust and cruelty; whose murders, too many to be here repeated,
are at large set down in our Chronicles, with his attempts of Rape and Incest.
So perfect he was in villainy and hypocrisy, that he would always use most
fair language, and show greatest signs of love and courtesy to that man in
the morning, whose throat he had taken order for to be cut that night; and was
the first I read of in our stories, that ever used that oath, God -- damn --
me. He was slain at Bosworth-field; his body stark naked and mangled, besmeared
with blood and dust, was brought upon a horse to Leicester, where for a
spectacle of hate and scorn, he lay two days unburied.

Henry 7.
THis King, my Lord of Virulam has washed his face so clean with good
language, that without a near approach he is hardly discovered: But surely I
find no right he had to the Crown, more then the consent of the people, (which
was not then in fashion) whom he never durst trust neither, his heart
continually burning to destroy all sparks of the right blood, and their
Abettors. How was the Lord Chamberlaines life jugled away for his thoughts, and
his estate which was so considerable, with many more of our Nobility. And for
that story of Richard Duke of York, son to Edward the 4. under the name of
Perkin Warbeck, I do as verily believe he was the said Duke of York, as I
believe Henry the 8. was the son of this Henry the 7. the circumstances being
so pregnant from so many persons of honor, but nothing more confirms me in
it, then this kings indefatigable pains and most infinite cost to get him, and
ruin him, and with him the harmless Earl of Warwick, the one beheaded, the
other hanged at Tyburn; and surely though this king did far excel all his
predecessors in craft, yet was he as guilty of cruelty and blood as the worst
of them; Nor can all the water in the Sea wash from him those two monstrous
sins of Avarice and Ingratitude.

Henry 8.
TO say much of him, were to make you surfeit; Sir Walter Raleigh's testimony
of him is sufficient. If all the pictures and patterns of a merciless Prince
were lost in the world, they might all be painted again to the life out of the
story of this King: His vast expense of treasure, and profuse bloodshed, made
this Kingdom look with a ghastly face; and to express him fully, this remains
of him to everlasting, That he never spared man in his anger, nor woman in his
lust. I do none of them wrong, for thus I find them branded to my hand by
public Records: and surely this puts me in mind of a story I have heard in
Spain; A Friar preached before Don Pedro the king, surnamed the Cruel, took his
Text which invited him to extol Regal Dignity to its highest pitch, often
saying, Few kings went to hell; but in the close of his Sermon, said, You may,
peradventure, wonder that I so often tell you that few kings go to hell, marry
the reason is, there are but few kings, for if there were more, they would go
all to the Devil.

Of all these our kings, I would know which was of blessed memory, who ruled by
blood, oppression, and injustice upon this nation, in contempt of God and man:
Let no man now wonder if this Nation endeavor (after so long and grievous
bondage under tyranny) to reduce themselves into a free State.

And as the face of things do now appear in their glory (for such surely they
are) I see no great hinderance to an honorable, and secure settling of this
Nation in a free State to the worlds end, if we can agree amongst our selves
(which I pray God we may.) If an honest League be made, and as honestly kept
betwixt us and the Hollander, (not that I care much for Hans, but because he is
a man of business, and surely it is Trade must make this Nation rich and secure)
I know no power in Christendom can hurt us: Shipping and Mariners must be
cherished, the value of our money so settled, that the Mint may go plentifully;
our Gold must not be sold for profit as Merchandise, by the fraudulent
Goldsmith to Merchants to transport, nor our Silver by them picked and culled,
to sell to Refiners for silver thread to make superfluous Lace. (These
digressions, though true, crave pardon.) As the wheels of our State are many
whereon it goes, so there are (God be thanked) sufficient to attend them, and
make them go right: Let them go on and prosper, and I doubt not but that
shortly we shall see a clear light shine upon this Nation, of honor, respect,
and security.

Now in the close of this Preface, if any man ask why I have curtailed the
lives and persons of these thus; I answer, the Common people of this kingdom
cannot attend to read Chronicles, and they are the major part whom it concerns;
and now by the providence of God, that we are reduced to a Free State, in this
little Book I would have them hereafter know for whom and for what they fight,
and pay. Next, if any man ask why I make such mention of their Bastards; I
answer, only to let the world see what foundation these six and twenty
Bastards have laid for honorable, Noble, and right Worshipful Familes of a
long continuance, which have been maintained by the blood and treasure of this
oppressed Nation. If why I mention not Edward the 5. and Edward the 6. I say
they were children, and so died, affording no matter for this present. If why I
omit Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth; I answer, I have nothing to do with women,
and I wish I never had. But I must not make the door bigger then the house, I
have only one Vote to pass, That Ireland may once be settled in obedience to
this Commonwealth, and Scotland reduced to an English Province, that there may
never more be heard the name of a Kirk, or Covenant; and so I address my self
to King James.

King James.
TO write the life and reign of this King, requires a better book-man, and a
better penman: that which I have to observe, is only to render him as great a
Tyrant as any of the rest; for though his fearfulness kept him from wars and
blood, yet as much as was in his power he laid as many springs to enslave this
Nation as ever any; His will was the sole rule of his Government; nor had the
people any thing to act but submissive obedience. His first work was to sound
the Prelates and Nobility, whose ambition and corruption he found suitable and
serviceable to his intentions; and 'twas their infusion, so agreeable to his
disposition, that made him carry himself so majestically to the Parliament of
England, (a power he might justly fear to offend) but their Councels (though
they then served his and their ends) are now come upon them like a storm, the
one voted down root and branch, the other voted useless and dangerous.

The King brings with him a general Peace with all Christendom, not
considering the particular interest of this Nation, whether it were honorable,
or safe, as the affairs of England then stood, his Predecessor having taken
upon her to be Head, and Protectrix of the Protestant party wheresoever: But he
had his ends to himself. First he had heard how many and how often attempts had
been used to take away the life of Queen Elizabeth, whom God notwithstanding
preserved and protected, by the diligence of her servants: but he would rather
trust to his King-craft, then to Gods providence.

Then having taken away all thought of wars, his design was to luxuriate the
people, that so he might more insensibly lay that foundation of tyrany he
intended.

And now comes tumbling in monstrous excess of Riot, which consumed many good
Families, and more good Hospitality, formerly the glory both of our Nobility
and Gentry; with an incredible increase of Tavernes and Bawdy-houses, for which
two we are to this day beholding to the Scots.

And with this King, and this Peace, came the greatest Plague that ever this
Kingdom felt before his time; as if God had told us from heaven we had
deserved it, by betraying our selves; and which was but a light fore-running
punishment, in respect of what in time should follow; and yet peradventure that
Plague was but a shadow of himself, the greater.

The Kingdom could not afford more pomp and glory, then was shown when King
James came first through London; and 'twas so much the more considerable as to
him, that from a nasty barren Country, (rather a Dunghill then a Kingdom) came
to be at that instant as great a Prince as any in Christendom: And indeed it
was the wonder of those Statesmen who had had experience of the gallantry of
this Nation, that a Scot should enjoy this Crown without resistance. If the
temper of these our days had then (as now) taken head, we had saved much
blood: much money, and in all likelihood been long since settled to such a free
State, as we yet struggle for; Rich, and secure.

Long had he waited for the death of Queen Elizabeth; but longer had they
waited, that waited upon him: for had not their hopes as well as his expected
their shares of spoils of this Kingdom, we may with out doing any wrong to
that Nation, conclude him in the fate of his many Predecessors, whom they
murdered. His Stock was odious to the more ancient Nobility of that Nation; and
the cloak of the Kirk would have served without scruple for such a covering, as
the Grand-Signior uses to send men doomed to death.

His original Extract I find was this:

Banchoo a Nobleman of Scotland, had a fair Lady to his daughter, whom Mackbeth
the King desires to have the use of; Banchoo refuses, and Mackbeth murders him,
and takes the Lady by force.

Fleance, the son of Banchoo, fearing the Tyrants cruelty, flies into Wales to
Griffin ap Lhewellin the Prince of Wales. Lhewellin entertaines him with all
hospitable civility. Fleance to requite his courtesy, gets Lhewellins daughter
with child: Lhewellin murders Fleance, and Lhewellins daughter is afterward
delivered of a son, named Walter; this son proves a gallant man, and falling
out with a Noble person in Wales, that called him Bastard, Walter slew him, and
for his safeguard fled into Scotland, where in continuance of time he gained so
much reputation and favor, that he became Steward of the whole Revenue of that
Kingdom, of which Office, he and his posterity retained the surname, and from
whence all the Kings and Nobles in that Nation of that name had their
original; here is a goodly foundation.

For his Person, a man might sufficiently and truly make a Volume, only to
tell of his laziness, and his uncleanness; but I cannot do it without fouling
too much paper.

He was a great pretender to Learning and Religion, and for the speculative
part, had as much as any of our Kings upon record; but for the practical, and
best part of it (if we may judge of the Tree by the Fruit) we may without
breach of charity conclude him not guilty: He was the greatest Blasphemer in
the world; swear faster then speak, and curse the people by the clock: And it
appears by the whole course of his life, that he was a most malicious hater of
this Nation.

That insolent act of Ramsey's switching my Lord of Montgomery, at
Bansted-Downs at a Horse-race, was questionless a laid quarrel to have
destroyed much of our English Nobility; and had it been practiced upon any but
that thin-soul'd Lord, who was importuned but to draw his sword, that had been
a bloody day: what reserve the Scots had was never known; but such an affront
is not to be construed without reservation.

The King was naturally fearful, even as low as could be; And what he would do,
and durst not own, that he would do by his Favorites, whom (for the fitness of
his designs) he would raise from low degree, to oblige them the more, and to
desert them with more ease, and shift them often til he had them sitted to his
purpose.

Dunbar was too solid, Hayes too light; Northampton too crafty, Montgomery too
silly, (here is two English, two Scots, all deserted) And now he has found a
young Scot, that had been one of his Pages in Scotland, and turned off with
fifty pounds in money and clothes, to seek his fortune; having spent his time,
and his means in France, comes over hither, and for his fashion and language,
is entertained by his country man, then Lord Hayes, (another Scot of the like
extract) for a Page, where the King takes notice of him, calls for him, and at
the first dash makes him one of the Bedchamber, and suddenly his Favorite,
and Knight Sir Robert, then Viscount Rochester, and after Earl of Somerset.
This man the King had wound up to his just pitch, of whom we may justly say
Trim tram, Like master, like man. When this man had long wallowed in his
Masters bounty, and the treasures of this Kingdom, he fell the foullest that
ever man did, upon the rocks of dishonor, adultery, and murder: Of dishonor,
to a Noble Peer of this Land, and in him to the whole, Nobility; Adultery, not
only to bewhore her, but to get her divorced, and marry her; And murder, upon
the body of that unfortunate Gentleman, Sir Thomas Overbury, only for
dissuading him.

And here it is much to our purpose, to insert how this Favorites carriage had
highly offended Pr. Henry, who understanding the loose kind of life this man
lived, especially relating to her, distastes him, disrespects him, and forbears
his company, and flatly falls out with him. Somerset complains to the King:
shortly the Prince falls sick and dies.

That he was poisoned, has been a common fame ever since: But to snuff the
candle, and make it burn clear, take the testimony of these famous Physicians,
that dissected his body, and have left it upon record under their hands.

The Dissection of the Body of Prince HENRY.
FIrst, we found his Liver paler then ordinary, in certain places somewhat wan;
his Gall without any Choler in it, and distended with wind.

Secondly, his Spleen was in diverse places more then ordinarily black.

Thirdly, his Stomach was in no part offended.

Fourthly, his Midriffe was in diverse places black.

Fifthly, his Lungs were very black, and in diverse places spotted, and full of
a thin watery blood.

Lastly, the Veins in the hinder part of his head, were fuller then ordinary;
but the Ventricles and hollownesse of the brain, were full of clear water.

In witness whereof, with our own hands we have subscribed this present
Relation, November. 7. 1612. MAYERN ATKINS HAMMOND PALMER. GIFFORD. BUTLER.


This Prince was an active man, and full of high thoughts; A Lover of this
Nation, and looked upon by them with much affection and expectation. What fears
and jealousies Somerset might maliciously infuse into the Kings too fearful and
timorous soul, we cannot tell: but that language from Somerset to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, when he told him he must provide himself to go the
next morning to Westminster to his Trial, said, He would not; That the King had
assured him, he should not come to any trial; neither durst the King bring him
to any trial. This language, I say, stinks abominably: And when he did come to
his Trial, fearing (being enraged) that he might fly out into some strange
discovery, there were two men placed on each side of him with cloaks on their
arms, with peremptory command, that if Sommerset did any way fly out against
the King, they should instantly hoodwink him with their cloaks, take him
violently from the Bar, and carry him away: and this could be no man's act but
the Kings. He would often boast of his King-craft; but if his fears, and
Somersets malice took this Princes life away, 'twas a sweet piece of King-craft
indeed, but the fruit of it has been bitter.

I cannot enough admire that language he used, when he gave in charge to his
Judges the Examination of Sir Thomas Overburi^^ murder:

My Lords, I charge you, as you will answer it at that great and terrible day
of Judgment, that you examine it strictly, without favor, affection, or
partiality: And if you shall spare any guilty of this crime; Gods curse light
upon you and your posterity; and if I shall spare any that are found guilty,
Gods curse light on me and my posterity for ever.

This expression has a most honest outside: but if the King had a design of
fear, rather to be so rid of Somerset, then an inward desire of Justice, 'twas
monstrous foul; which we shall better judge of by the sequel.

Seven persons were by the Judges condemned to die for this foul murder; four
of them of the least account, and accessaries, are executed; the three great
ones, and principals, the King pardons; and to Somerset himself, to his dying
day, was most profusely liberal, and suffered to live with that firebrand of
hell his wife, under the Kings nose, all the days of their lives.

Here Is fine juggling! these must be saved, for fear of telling Scotch tales of
the King. Would the spirits of those noble souls of these our days, put up
such a piece of injustice in the master, and such an affront and contempt of
this Nation, both from the Master and the man (two Scots) without vengeance? I
believe not.

And this Favorite of his, when his estate was seized upon for this foul
murder, was found to have two hundred thousand pounds in money, plate and
jewels, in his house; and nineteen thousand pounds a year in Lands coming in:
a fine advance from a Scots Page; fifty pounds, and a Suit of Clothes: (and can
any man tell for what?) I never heard that all Scotland was worth so much. But
enough of him.

This King had no Wars; but spent more money prodigally, profusely, and
riotously then any of his Predecessors.

What swarms of Scots came with him, and after him, into this kingdom? who
perpetually sucked him of most vast sums of moneys, which stand yet upon record;
which put him upon all dishonorable ways of raising moneys, to the most
cruel oppression of this Nation, to serve their riot and luxury: but there are
many yet living can justify this truth: Though they lived a while at such a
height; yet they died like themselves, contemptible, miserable Beggars; and at
this day scarce one of them can show the fruits of those vast donatives, either
in themselves, or their posterity, that is worth looking upon: And so let them
all perish, whomsoever, Scots or English, whose foundation is such. Though, I
see no reason but any estate may be now questioned, which is known to have been
raised upon the oppression of this Nation; nor that any title of Honor so
bought should descend to posterity.

A Lord is to be a Lord by merit of employment in some noble Office, for the
public good; not by projecting tricks, and cozening devices to fill a
Tyrant's Coffers, to the enslaving of a gallant free Nation. But, etc. to
return to King James.

In those days it is true, the Bishops, Nobility, and the Lawyers, had a great
influence upon the people for their abilities, and supposed honesties; yet
amongst these, such are found, and others are made such, that whatsoever the
King would have, they are fit, and willing instruments to bring it about, and
make it pass for current Divinity, and Law. Witness,

The burning of a whole Cart-load of Parliament Presidents, that spoke the
Subjects Liberty; that were burnt at the Kings first coming.

Witness the Nullity.

Witness the life of Sir Walter Rawleigh, that was taken away in point of
State, whose least part was of more worth then the whole race of the best of
the Scots Nation.

Witness, the inhancing of Customs.

Witness, Privy Seals, Monopolies, and Loans, Benevolences, Sales of Lands,
Woods, Fines, New-buildings.

Witness, the lamentable loss of the Palatinate.

Witness, the Treaty of the Spanish-Match.

In which two last, this Nation received more dishonor, then in any action any
former age can parallel, and all under the color of an honorable Treaty. His
Daughter was undone, and his Son bob'd of a Wife, after the hazard of his
Person, and vast expense of infinite treasure to this day undischarged.

I could never understand what piece of Kingcraft it was, to let the Prince his
only Son, with Buckingham his favorite, make that Voyage into Spain, unless
it were to be rid of them both: and had he not had to do with a noble Enemy,
surely they had never returned.

He would sometimes call a Parliament, for money, not for business: But if the
Kingdom presented any grievances, he would quarrel by his prerogative, and
dissolve it.

One Letter of his to the Parliament, I cannot read but with amazement: which
being but brief, take here from his own hand.

A Copy of His Majesty's Letter To the Lower House of Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
WE have heard by diverse reports to our great grief That the far distance of
our person at this time from our High Count of Parliament, caused by our want
of health, has imboldened some fiery and popular Spirits in our House of
Commons, to debate and argue publicly in matters far beyond your reach and
capacity, and so tending to our high dishonor, and trenching upon our
Prerogative royal: You shall therefore acquaint that House with our pleasure,
That none therein shall from henceforth presume to meddle with any thing
concerning our Government, or Mysteries of State; namely, not to speak of our
dearest Sons match with the Daughter of Spain, nor to touch the honor of
that King, nor any our friends or confederates; and also not to meddle with any
man's particulars, which have their due motions in our ordinary Courts of
Justice: And whereas we hear they have sent a Messenger to Sr. Edwyn Sands, to
know the reason of his late restraint* you shall in our name resolve them, that
it was not for any misdemeanour of his in Parliament: but to put them out of
doubt of any question of that nature, that may arise among them hereafter, you
shall resolve them in our name, That we think our selves very free, and able
to punish any man's misdemeanors in Parliament, as well during their sitting,
as afterward; which we mean not to spare hereafter, upon any occasion of any
man's insolent behavior there, that shall be ministered unto us. And if they
have already touched any of these points which we have forbidden, in any
Petition of theirs, which is to be sent to us: It is our pleasure, that you
shall tell them, that except they reform it before it come to our hands, we
will not dain the hearing or answering of it.


I leave every Reader to comment upon it, according to his own patience and
passion: But, that a Scot, from so beggarly a condition, to be so peaceably and
honorably received to so royal a government over so brave a Nation, should use
such ungrateful, presumptuous, and proud language to the Parliament of
England, is to my understanding monstrous, horrible, and not good. But 'twas
his humor all his reign; with impatience overruling, with jealousies
threatening, and at pleasure to dissolve all Parliaments, thereby to lay that
foundation of tyrannical and arbitrary government, which he intended to bring
upon us.

His Favorite Somerset being condemned, and quietly laid aside, he was ready
provided of another, George Villiers by name, a handsome young man, lately
returned out of France, from an allowance of Threescore pounds a year: who
comes to Court, is admitted to a bearers place, presently Knighted, and made
Gentleman of the Bedchamber, and the same day a Thousand pounds a year out of
the Court of Wards given him; and in a breath made Master of the Horse, then
Knight of the Garter, then Baron of Whadon, Viscount Villiers, Earl of
Somerset, and a Privy-Councellor, Marquess of Buckingham, Lord Admiral of
England, Chief Justice in Air of all the Parks and Forests on the South Side
of Trent, Master of the King's Bench Office, Head -- Steward of Westminster, and
Constable of Windsor-Castle, and lastly Duke; and then he could go no higher in
title; but by his Masters pleasure and courtesy, all the affairs of the
Kingdom are steered by his compass, as is at large made known in many men's
writings published. Yet when he knew his Master (notwithstanding his slabbering
expressions of affection, and extravagant Honors and riches) to be weary of
him, he found a Plaster and a Powder, that made him amends for all his
favors; And here the King-craft met with his match. How far King Charles might
be privy to this business, I determine not; but the private familiarity between
them, continued so long after, and protecting him from being questioned for
this very particular in Parliament, is no small presumption.

But what the King denied (Justice) God sent by the hand of John Felton, who
stabbed this Duke at Portsmouth, with a ten penny knife, that he instantly gave
up the ghost with these words, Gods wounds, I am slain!

To write all those actions this Duke did by these two Kings favors, in
prejudice of this oppressed Nation, would make a choleric man mad, and a
phlegmatic stupid: but let him go; the King is the thing I intend, who made use
of him, the flattering Prelates, the poor-spirited Nobility, and corrupt
Lawyers, to frame such a Government, as all the wealth in this kingdom should
be at the Kings disposing.

Which course, with such instructions, he left to his Son; and how his Son
managed them, has been so clearly published by Supreme Authority, fairly
written by sowhite a hand, that I intend not here to say much of that Prince:
Only this I can say; He was a man so wilful, obstinate, and uxorious, that he
quite forsook his own interest as a King, and the honor and interest of this
Nation, thorough malice, and her counsel; and did so far incline to the
interest of France against Spain, (and no thanks for his labor) that by his
means alone Rochel and Dunkirk were both lost: But that, and his Fathers
instructions, lost him, with the loss of more blood and treasure to this
Nation, then all our wars had spent since the William the Norman.

It has been to me the greatest wonder of the world, how this King could be so
blind, as not to prevent that storm that came upon him, till it was too late.
Were all his Counselors false? O unhappy King! Or would he be ruled by none
but himself and his wife? O more unhappy man! (Surely in this was the hand of
God most visible.) Mischief was in his heart against this Nation; but it came
upon himself and all his, as the world has seen.

There was about the time of his death, a Book published, which was presented
to the world, as He the Author: which was so gross an imposture, that I have
much marvail'd (the fraud being so plain, and easily detected) that no course
has been taken to find him out, and punished, that made it: For that it was
not his, is as plainly to be discerned, as the Sun at noon. But that false
perfume lasted but a while, and the scent was only pleasing to them that could
not smell.

So that I may say, that in our days we have seen two the most remarkable and
most eminent passages of humane affairs, that this Nation has afforded since
the Creation:

The Entrance of King James into this Kingdom, with as much pomp and glory as
the World could afford:

And the Exit of his Son, with as much shame and misery as could befall a King.

And although God Almighty be the Judge of all men; yet Gods judgments that are
so remarkable, are for our instructions, and God is to be glorified by us for
these judgments of his upon this Kings family.

I cannot in the best stories I have read, find who was clearly King James his
Father.

Mary Queen of Scotland (a lusty young Widow) marries the Lord Darly son to the
D. of Lenox, in the year 1565. or thereabouts: and at the same time, had for a
reserve in great favor with her an Italian Fiddler, and Bothwel a Scotch Lord.
After marriage, the Queen proves with child. The King her husband, that was
Lord Darly, (enraged by some informations) comes into the room where the Queen
his wife was at supper, and very big; drags the Italian Fiddler into another
room, and murders him. The Queen was shortly delivered of a Son, which was our
King James. The solemnity of the Christening ended, she and Bothwel murdered the
King her husband. Then the Queen marries Bothwel, (and all this in a moment of
time) but they are both fain to fly; The Queen came into England, and was here
beheaded; Bothwel fled into Denmark, and there lay in prison all the days of
his life.

And now (Reader) observe the fortune of this prodigious Family.

His supposed Father was strangled in his bed, by the consent of his mother,
and flung out into a garden.

His Mother is beheaded.

His eldest Son Pr. Henry, by the jealousy, and consent of his Father, in the
flower of his youth and strength of his age, is poisoned.

His Daughter, married to the Palsgrave; where shortly her Husband (in ambition
to become a king) is slain, and she with her many children are driven out of
their estates, and fly for shelter into Holland, where she has lived ever
since upon the courtesy of this State.

Her eldest Son, having lived long upon a particular charity of this Nation, is
now at length restored to a feather of his goose.

Two other of her sons, after six years following arms and plunder for King
Charles, turned Pirates at sea, and so are at present.

King James himself (after two and twenty years reign, by the act of his
Favorite Buckingham, and the consent of his son Charles that succeeded him) is
poisoned.

King Charles, after eight years was with the Parliament, is taken, arraigned
and condemned, and is beheaded at his own doors; his Wife fled home to her
friends, and his Children scattered abroad in the world, to live upon the
charity of others.

Are all these circumstances to be slighted, or unconsidered? And shall we take
the Priests word; King James was of blessed memory? I challenge the proudest of
them; let them publish one clear act of Honesty from him all the time of his
reign, or any honestman that ever he loved, and I Will yield. His hypocrisy,
perjury, cowardice, blasphemy, malice, are known to all; and base ingratitude,
which comprehends more then all the rest: whereof one example of him is well
worth our remembering, to Sir Henry Wo^^on, which briefly was thus:

Sir Henry (a man for person and parts highly esteemed, and honored of all
that knew him) being in Florence, when Queen Elizabeth's death drew nigh, (which
King James gaped for) the Duke of Florence had intercepted some Letters, which
discovered a design to take away the life of King James: The Duke abhorring
the fact, resolves to endeavor the prevention, calls for his Secretary to
advise by what means a caution might be best given to the King; and it was
resolved to be done by Sir Henry Wotton, who (being well instructed) is
presently dispatched into Scotland with Letters to the King, and most rare
Antidotes against all manner of poisons, whereby that mischief was prevented;
and Sir Henry Wotton returns into Italy, where shortly after came the news of
the death of Queen Elizabeth, and James King of Scots proclaimed King of
England; and away comes Sir Henry Wotton, to joy the King.

This had been a fit Subject for to have shown his Noble mind upon for a
Favorite: but what does the King? takes him into two and twenty years
travail, like a pack horse, to make him an Agent in foreign parts, and leaves
him in his old age in Eaton-Colledge, unable to pay his debts, as many appear
by his lamentable complaint upon his deathbed; his words are these in his
Last-Will and Testament.

I humbly beseech my Lords Grace of Canterbury, and the Lord Bishop of London,
to intercede with our most gracious Sovereign, (in the bowels of Jesus Christ)
that out of compassionate memory of my long services, some order may be taken
for my Arrears, for satisfaction of my Debts. This president alone is so
transcendently foul, as all his other actions and passions are virtues to it.
Fellows of no merit, at home, must wallow in his bounty and their own luxury,
to do his foul pleasure, and to execute his tyranical actions; whilst such a
Noble Soul as this, must suffer want, and die in it.

And now lay all these things together, the lives of all our former Kings, and
the lamentable condition of this Nation under these two last; and tell me if it
were not high time to consider of the honor, welfare and security of this
Nation, by reducing it to a Free State.

But before I take my leave of these Kings, I would willingly (as a Preparative
to the cordial agreement of our Free State) present some few Considerations;
and herein I shall only show my hand, and my heart, wishing that some abler
Penman may more substantially publish something to this purpose, in better
language, and more at large.

First, How often we have been made slaves to Foreign powers, by not agreeing
among our selves.

Our Kings having other Dominions beyond seas, have consumed our blood and
treasure, to defend, maintain, or increase them at their pleasures: And their
frequent matching into strangers blood, has increased new titles, and
pretenses of quarrels, that have afforded matter for bitter wars, both abroad
and at home. All which are now laid asleep.

Next is worth our serious consideration, How God Almighty in his providence
has divided us from all the World by a wall of Water, and has brought us into
a condition this day, by Shipping, Trade, and able Seamen and Merchants, that
no Prince in Christendom can show the like for number and ability: So that
now we have no Complements for Matches, nor business with Foraign Princes but
for Trade. And here let me use the words of Sir Walter Raleigh, in his
Discourse of Shipping:

Whosoever commands the Sea, commands the Trade: Whosoever commands the Trade
of the World, commands the Riches of the World, and consequently the World it
self. A fair invitation to cherish Shipping, Seamen, and Merchants.

And if hereafter we fall into difference with any Foreign Prince, we fight
for our selves, not for illgrounded Titles, nor to satisfy the ambition of
particular, nor to maintain the luxury of any spurious Issue.

There are but two things (which I mentioned in the Introduction) can obstruct
us (as I hope) IRELAND, and Envious Presbytery: The Royalist, I presume, will
hear reason; And SCOTLAND, I suppose, will shortly be reduced to an English
Province, and kept so by force; for Jocky is not to be trusted; He is naturally
so false, and has been so high-fed since their Scotch king came to this
Crown, that his own Country -- fare will not down, till they be humbled,
(which, God be thanked, is in a fair way.)

Yet if there be any of that Nation sensible of their own security and welfare
under our wing, (which I much fear) that shall comply in this union, I shall
pray to God to make them good Christians.

And if any Foreign Prince whatsoever, shall hereafter (through ambition, or
envy to our State, or pretense of donation from the Pope) assist or maintain, a
Faction either in Scotland or Ireland, (as heretofore) to hinder, prejudice, or
molest our right or interest in these, or either of these places; I see no
reason why we should treat with them as friends.

But I am now beside my Cushion: my end is only to prepare and persuade a
hearty Agreement amongst our selves, to the secure settling of our Free State.
So farewell Scot, and farewell King; And GOD bless the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

FINIS.
Published by Authority.

Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed and sold by William
Roybould, at his Shop at the Unicorn in S. Paul's Churchyard, near the Little
North-door.
THe (Holy-Arbor, containing a Body of Divinity, or the Sum and Substance of
Christian Religion: First, methodically and plainly treated, of then Analyzed
and applied: wherein also are fully resolved the Questions of whatsoever points
of moment, have been, or are now controverted in Divinity: together with a
large Alphabetical Table of such matters as are therein contained, or
occasionally handled either by way of Exposition, Controversy, or
Reconciliation. In folio, by John Godolphin, J. C. D. 1651.

CHRIST alone exalted. In seventeen Sermons, preached by Dr. Tobias Crisp. In
8o. 1650.

The History of the Bohemian Persecution, from the beginning of their
Conversion to Christianity, to these Times. In which the unheard of secrets of
Councels, Policy, Arts, and dreadful Judgments are exhibited. In 8o. 1650.

The Assertion of Grace, or a Treatise of Justification, by R. Town.

The Ladies Vindication, or The praise of worthy Women. In 12o. 1651.

A further Discovery of the Mystery of the Last times: Set forth for the Good
of such, as in these dissenting times know not to what Society of Christians to
join themselves. In 4o. 1651.

A Sermon preached by Dr. Homes, October. 8. 1650. at Christ-church, before the
Lord Major and Aldermen.

The Mischief of Mixt-Communions, by Dr. Homes. 4o

The Life and Reign of King Charles, or the Pseudo-Martyr discovered: together
with some Animadversions on the strange contrariety between his public
Declarations, protestations, Imprecations, and his Pourtraicture, compared with
his private Letters and other of his Expresses, not hitherto taken into common
observation. In 8o. 1651.

The Antiquity of Commonwealths, instanced by that of Holland, wherein is
declared the rise and continuance of that Government, as also their Laws and
Customs both in their Civil and Military power. In 8o. 1652.

A Sermon preached at Mary-Aldermanbury, November. 5. 1651. by M. William
Jenkins, being the first he preached after his Releasement.

Church-Cases cleared: wherein are held forth some things to reclaim Professors
is that are slack-principled, Antichurchians, Nonchurch-Seekers,
Church-Levellers: with a Pacificatory preface, etc. By D. N. Homes.


