The Weavers Request. OR, Their Just COMPLAINT against the Rude Rabble, that
revile against the Gentile Mode now in Fashion.
To the Tune of, Ladies of London.
This may be Printed.

R. P.



depiction of several men. depiction of man's head.

WE the brave Weavers of ancient renown,
whom Fame has for ever recorded,
Would know the reason we thus are run down
instead of our being rewarded:
Top-Knots of late the Rabble contemn,
to ruin us is their endeavors;
Let some strict Order be taken with them,
for why should they run down the Weavers?
It is well known we have been dismayed,
although we did patiently take it;
Seven long years we have served for the Grade
and yet have been forced to forsake it,
Put to our shifts, and daily contrived
by labor we did our endeavors;
But now since Top-Knots are wearing, we thrive,
and therefore they run down the Weavers.
Formerly Weavers their work was in haste,
when Gallants did wear on their Breeches
Ribbons at knees, nay, and all round the waste,
O then the brave Weavers got Riches:
But since, alas! Dame Fortune does frown,
affording us none of her Favors,
Top-Knots are made the scoff of the Town,
and all for to run down the Weavers.
depiction of a man. depiction of a woman.

Women and Damsels they daily offend,
and makes a most horrid Narration;
Nay, and the Rabble does likewise pretend
that this is the Pride of the Nation:
Fain would they keep their Betters in awe
by flouting, which is their endeavors;
Let them be punished according to Law;
for why should they run down the Weavers?
Yet the Mechanic will hector and brag,
enough to make any admire;
Yet we may see them as proud in a Rag
as Ladies in sumptuous attire:
Wearing of Knots they counted a Pride,
to end it they do their endeavors,
And would have Women now lay them aside,
in order to run down the Weavers.
But let them all be as mad as they will,
that seem to be highly offended;
Women their Top-Knots I Would have them wear still
then shall they be highly commended.
Never regard what any shall say,
for they are but sorry deceivers;
I would have Women go gallant and gay;
for why should they run down the Weavers?
Had it not been for the Women indeed,
our Trade had been utterly fallen;
But by the making them Ribbon and Breed,
it was a great help in our Calling.
Therefore we ought to speak in their praise
from whom we received such favors;
Long may they flourish with happy good days,
for being so kind to the Weavers.
Those that does offer abuse are to blame,
to Weavers, who never offended;
Let Gallants go still like Persons of Fame,
since they are most Nobly descended:
And as for those that will be so rude
for Ruin they make their endeavors,
By some strict Order let them be subdued*
This is the Desire of the Weavers.
FINIS.
Printed for I. Blare at the Looking-glass on London Bridge.


