FUNERAL OBSEQVIES, TO THE Right Honorable THE LADY ELIZABETH HOPTON.

By EDWARD VVHATMAN.

printer's decorative illustration

Imprinted at London, 1647.

FUNERAL OBSEQVIES.
Stolen to the grave? Then let me sigh, and dye,
And sepulchr'd in mine own Carcass lie;
But that were Bliss: Calamity keeps state,
And comes attended by another Fate:
So the first fatal fall from Paradise,
Opened the casements of our Grandsirs eyes,
And turned their blessing to their scourge. To know
Us wretched, is far worse then to be so.
A grief unknown is healed. Thus our loss draws
That pleasing curtain interposed was,
And makes the world transparent. Now, we spy
Our joys are languish't to deformity;
All Creatures (the earth's sucklings) seem to be
But Hieroglyphics of Mortality:
Houses are graves, where moving Corpses dwell;
For who can say he lives, that knows she fell?
But stay, rash pen, this blasphemy recall,
The vanquished, not the Conquerors do fall.
Death, which (with falser Optics) does appear
Mighty and dreadful, brought no terrors here.
It kills the bad, but to the good, it is
The Gate, the Key, and Porter too, to bliss.
You Nobler Sons of honor, who pretend
To live linked revolutions without end,
Your hopes are empty, for I dare aver
The Path to glory is to study her.
Pardon great Saint, if thy low Vassalls praise,
Eclips the splendour of thy burnish't raise:
We know dull solid Bodies have the fate,
The bright ones luster to reverberate:
So the dim superficies of the Moon
Darts light and virtue by reflection.
But as a glass when the foil's peecemeale rent,
And fretted into Marble does present
Defective forms, yet all those parts agree
In (the worlds beauty) exact Symetrie:
So I deformed with sin; yet know my breast,
(Cause her I honored) with some goodness blessed,
Render a lame Effigies. For to do it well,
I should in Virtue be her parallel.
Red Modesty now checks my Zeal, and says
The leaner Tribute of imperfect praise,
Injur's her holy Dust, and bids retract
Our forward hand from this prophaner act.
To raise a house shall I deny a stone,
Because I bring no Rock? do all? or none?
All have not Hecatombs to sacrifice:
It Is worse to be ungrateful, then unwise.
And though I have not Muse enough to swell,
My Verse into a great bulk'd Chronicle,
I will so paint, that, by the foot we'll guess
At the proportion of Hercules.
Her mind was even, knew no Civil Jar,
But still maintained a brave defensive War,
Against sly Vice, and by a noble will,
All quarrelling extremes did reconcile.
Nor was she peg'd to Fortunes Wheel: when chance
Her streams into an Ocean did advance,
Majestique Pride could never usurp a Throne
Upon her brow. 'Twas sweetness Garrison.
Grim sorrow raised no rough frown there. For he
That saw her manage infelicity,
Would court its loveliness, and swear that Fate
Might give a prouder, but no happier state.
Nor were these paleated shows: No she
In real deeds outvied Hypocrisy.
She courted greatness with no studied grace,
Nor looked over wretches with a quarter-face;
Nor did she ere extenuate a crime,
Cause 'twas exalted on the Front of Time.
But Oh! I feel an earthquake, through my heart,
Some struggling spirit would a highway part,
As when the purest water does aspire
To Air, by rarefaction it is made fire:
So would my grief twist into rage, and I
Should write a Satire, and no Elegy;
Did I not know, Duty binds us to mourn
Those whom we honored, not scourge those we scorn.
But I am yet too narrow, glory runs
(Like feathered Time) in nimble motions.
He Is but half good, who only does arive
(Worths lazy vacuum) the negative.
But here all active Virtues meet in one,
And made a Heavenly Constellation.
Filled with more lasting and refulgent Stars,
Then in the Concave of the eight Orb appears.
But a weak ray as easily might spy
The twinkling sparks convened in the Galary
Observe their names and natures, and hope here
T'Epitomise them on our paper Sphere:
As I contemplate them. For Virtues were
Fluid, and Momentany things in her.
A Midwife to some one each hour became,
And made inscriptions in the leaves of Fame;
For they be letters in Gods great book set,
And are to every one an Alphabet,
Span'd to a number: Yet cause they admit
Of transpositions, become infinite.
Thus goodness writes her Annals. Thus each man
Is his own Volume and Historian.
And here were so composed that we might vote
Gods holy finger a third Table wrote,
And instituted her Example, Law,
Whence future Ages should a pattern draw,
To pace their lives by. For she, she alone
Was Quintessenc'd to a perfection.
Virtues (those rags of worth) which sometimes flame,
Then sleep a pause, Agues of Zeal we name;
But here enchain'd, in an entirenesse flowed,
And were united to the total, good:
So when the creeping streams join forces, than
They lose themselves, and are an Ocean.
So Silver, Gold, and sprightfull Mercury,
(Deified to Omnipotence) deny
Their ancient cognizance, and only own,
The mighty title of Elixer stone.
Nor was (this world of worth) this great soul sent
Close Prisoner to a mud-wall'd Tenement:
No, no, it had a Temple so divine,
Doomsday (perhaps) may change, but scarce refine.
Her smiles (more cheerful then the Suns) on earth,
Did Antidate almost essential mirth.
But Heaven is denied us here; the blessed we see
Are most obnoxious to destiny.
Long since that Mountainous Prophetique stone,
Has the four boundless Monarchys or'throwne;
Another (no less terrible) Alluding to her disease.
has slain
The fist, the last, and greatest too again:
For she was world, and Paramount alone;
All Passions bowed to her Dominion.
This Empire was too mean, she is flown more high,
And sits enthroned in Gods own Hierarchy,
And only leaves her holy Dust in paune,
That when the world's like her, she will come again.
Sleep honored Ashes in your peaceful bed
Sleep, sleep, and never be disquieted.
We'll feast on your Memorial; and Fame
Shall be the Page, and Usher to your name.
Where ere it goes winged sighs shall hovering stay,
And liquid pearls shall pave the corrall way.
And since I raise no Tomb, nor crown thy Hearse
With fasting Pyramids of weeping Verse.
Like to some Votary I will confine
Humble Devotions to thy sacred Shrine;
And if (as Heaven-indited Rolls declare)
As Victims, grateful thoughts accepted are,
Pious perfumes each minute shall arise,
My Heart the Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice.
FINIS.

