The Welsh Physician, HER New way to cure all kind of Diseases in her Churches
and Commonwealths.



1. Her undertakes to cure perfectly all Diseases in her she-Cousens. 2. Her
will undertake to make all omens that are barrons be as pig as her can tumble
in two or three nights. 3. Her professes to restore her Cosens Maiden-heads,
and Virginities in a small space, and with much facilities. 4. Her will cure
all the Agues that are in her States and her Kingdoms, arising from her
factious and turbulent humors. 5. Her will set all the bones that were broken
at Keinton among her Cousens though it were in her necks. 6. Her will purge the
stomach of her Church of all her Errors.
Whereas it is caknown that her English Doctors kill not above three quarters
of her Patients that come under her hands, her will undertake to kill them all,
and make her all live again in an instants.

By Shinkin ap Morgan, Professor of her Medicall Arts and Sciences.

Printed for the good of her Contrymen, this present year, 1647.

The Welsh-Physitian. Her new way to cure all Diseases in Church and
Commonwealth.
HEr understanding that all her shee-cozens in general are subject to diverse
qualmes and diseases, her having been a long time conversant with her
shee-cozens podies, finds by her experiences and her skills, that the
generallest disease all her cozens are subject to, is the glimmering of her
gizzards, an infirmity which arising from her spleen into her mouth, infects
her tongue like a canker, making her call her husbands rogues and rascals, and
many other scurvy ords: It makes her likewise oftentimes to strive for her
breeches and break her husbands pates with her ladles and skimmers, and is
indeed an Epedemical disease, and reigning in most of her shee-Couzens: The
cure hereof, though Gallen has not set down, nor her Hypocrates, nor Averroes,
nor Avicen her Couzens, yet shall her Cousen Jenkin in priefe declare the
remedy for that disease.

First when her begins to be in her fits, her husbands shall perceive it by the
bending of her brows, then let him apply to her a plaster of good ords, and
if that will not serve her turns, let him take her good hasle cudgel or her
ropes end, and bast her as her Welsh-men do her old goats to make them eat
tender, for so her Cousen King Tavid did, as you may find it some where
written; And Tavid went in and did so lace his wife; therefore her and aule her
Countrymen may therefore bast their wives by authority and privilege, and
liberty of the subject: for her do find it by experience and by her reading,
that the more her do beat her Walnut-trees, and Spaniel and Camomil bank be
basted or trodden, the more fruit they will bear, and the women love their
husbands the better, and this will cure her presently, with twice or thrice
applied to her sides. There is another remedy which Jenkin her self has often
used with her Wives, which is to take her as her fit begins, and lay her upon
her back and tickle her Tuquoques, and it shall cure her in an instant;
Probatum est.

The quavering of the kidneys in her she-cozens, is when her is full of her
lusts and concupiscences, and her much longings and desires to make her
husbands Cuckolds. In Spain her Couzens the Spaniards have excellent remedies
for these diseases in her Wives, for as soon as her perceives and caknowes that
her Wives are bent to be sick of the quavering of her kidneys, her lets her
blood in her breast or in the bellies with her sword or her taggers, marry
Jenkin would wish her Couzens to use this easier remedies and medicines, which
is when her omens flesh rises and would go to man's, let her husbands give her
two ounces of cood instructions, with three ounces of the oil of man distilled
through his own lembeck, a vomit and potion made of opium and her turnips, than
let her have a diet for a month of her welsh leeks without bread or salt, and
it shall recover her perfectly; Probatum est.

For her barren Couzens, her shall by her preservatives and her Medicines make
her as pregnant as her heart can wish, and have every year a shild if there be
no defect in her capacities of her podies: First let her eat the brains of a He
goat mixed with the marrow of a Stoate, or Pole-cat (her may caknow him by her
sinell and her savours) with the flesh of her monkies for a Fortnights, and
drink every morning a pottle of her best welsh Metheglins. Then let her get her
into a cood soft peds, and have every night for the space of a month, a lusty
young man to her ped-fellow to salute her podies and recreate her kidneyes, and
if her pe not with shild Jenkin will forfeit her reputations in Physgigs. This
medicine is most predominant over her Couzens in her Cities, and may serve
indeed for omens of all Nations under forty years of age, whereas diverse of her
Couzens have had the wambling trot in her pellies, or the dislocation in the
matrix, which is occasioned by much ploods and itches in her podies, whereby
oftentimes her comes to loose her Maiden-heads and her Virginities, which her
foolish Physicians in times past knew not how to cure. Jenkin for the good of
her dearest Couhens has found out the medicines that will restore her to her
Virginities, which is, her must take a peck of Fern-sut gathered on Mid-summer
night, with two ounces of moonshine tasen out of her river of Dee at
noon-dayes, six eyes of the Phaenix, seven eyes of Argus, with her Cousen
Mercury pulled out of her head, the brains of the bird of Paradise which sung
to her Gransieur Adam, the flesh of the buttock of one of her Welsh goats which
her Cousen Noah's had in her Arks, the juice of the apple which her Grandmother
Eve eat at the inticement of the Serpent, the head of the great huge fish of
two hundred yard long that was taken in eighty eights with a great ruff like a
Spaniard, above London bridge, a bottle full of the water of the Inchanters
wells which was kept by the great Dragons that was overcome by her Couzens
Palmerius, and Saint Tavids, two yards of freeze which was in her Prophet
Merlins old coats, five onions of Jenkins own planting and six pound of leeks,
take all these and stamp them upon the stone where Jacob slept, and strain them
through one of the clouds which hang over her welsh Mountains, and then take
all these her ingredients and lap her up in a yard of Butter-flies-skins, and
lay her warm to her cousens bottom of her bellies, and so let her renew the
plaster or cataplasme, do you see every night a fresh, and it shall make her
couzens as sound and firm in her Maiden-heads and her Virginities as ever her
was in her life's, and her may be certain that Jenkin has made his explorations
and experiments upon this medicine, and find it to be very available; Probatum
est.

Her also does undertake to cure all her Agues and Fevers that are in her
states and her Kingdoms arising from her factious and Malignant humors which
indeed and insooth none can cure without phlebotomy or bloodletting; but her
cosen Ienkins, which must be done in this manner. First her State or her
Kingdom must take fifty or threescore heads of her Malignants and poyle them
to a jell^y in a hundred Cavaliers ploods, then take the fat of six Jesuits
that were hanged drawn and quartered at Tiburn, do you mark, and with the brawn
of a hundred of Prelates buttocks stewed in Metheglins, and let all these
ingredients be laid on the stomach of her state or her Kingdom, and it shall
expel her Agues and her Fevers, or otherwise. take two ounces and six pound
of the long hair of your Cavaliers which in welsh her calls Russetings, and
make therewith a Cat-a-pulsive with the blood of some Anabaptists, and applied
as aforesaid, and your sick state shall recover immediately without the help of
her Doctors and her Physicians, as Jenkin has made diverse rimes her experiences
and probations upon all the Kingdoms of Asia the less; Probatum est.

Next whereas her has been informed that diverse of her Couzens have lost her
legs and her arms, and many of her have book her necks at Kenton battles,
her has studied a medicine that shall recover her perfectly, let her come to
her Cousen Jenkins lodgings at the sign of the Welsh goat in Garlick-lane with
her broken legs, arms, or necks, and her will make her as sound as ever her
was in her life's; Probatum est.

Next her does profess to give her Church a vomit and a purge that shall make
her free from all her pains in the stomach, her must first take a long stick of
Stibium, which in Welsh is called the Gallows, and hang thereon three hundred
Brownists, five hundred Anabaptists, and as many of all sorts of her
Separatists, and then let her dry in the sun fourteen weeks, and then beat her
to powder, and mix her with a great deal of oil extracted from her Cavaliers
slocks, and let this be given to her Church through the great Organ pipe that
was in her Church of Paul's, and it shall make her Church vomit and purge up all
her errors and her heresies, and put her into as good states and conditions of
her health, as her was in the days of her Apostles; especially when her Cousen
Jenkin gives her glyster to make her evacuate her Pishops and Prelates backward,
which must be compounded on this manners. First, her must take two handfuls of
herb a grace, of which there is enough in her Welsh Mountains, and mingle it
with the surrups of two and twenty Miters, boiled in the jayce of as many
Rochets and Surplices, and let it be put in at the fundament or porch of the
Church, and is shall give her thirty or forty of her stool which shall clear
her podies of all her Pishops and her Prelates, and send herto the Tivell with
a vengeance.

Lastly with her diet and her purge, her cordial and her vomit, her will cure
all her Couzens that are Cuckolds of horns, and make her brows as smooth as
the backs of her hands, which if any of all her London Physician can perform,
Jenkin will never set up her pills nor her prescriptions, her will also with
confection of tosted sheese, metheglin, green leeks and onions, undertake to
kill her a hundred a dity, and with her Goats milk mixed with the buds of her
welsh gunshot, which in English is called Elderne, restore her again to her
life's in a minutes space, and all this to be performed by Jenkin ap Morgan
Doctor of Physgig, and studier of all the arts of medicine as her testifies
under her hands, and hopes that all her Couzens that are sick of the said
diseases will buy her Couzens book of medicines and repair to her for cure,
and advice.

The last Will and Testament of Thomas up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell, up
Ralph, up Shon, up Taffie, Shentileman of Wales, which her was write and
publish fifteen tayes after her teath.
IN te name of te great got, Amen, to morrow after te feast of Saint Taffie in
te fouerteen, fifteen, twenty year of te create Cadwallin te pig, son and
heir te creat Prate te creat Prittain, I Thomas up Shinken, up Shon, up Taffie
peing sick of pody, put in mind and memory, was here make her last Will and
Testament, first her was make her loving wife Madge her sole executioner. Item,
her was kive her eldest son Shon up Thomas up Shinkin, up Morgan, up Howell,
up William, up ^^ph, up Shon, up Taffie, her creat stone house which was stand
in te portom of te creat Mountain in te full face of te sun.

Item, her was kive her loving wife Madges her sole extentioner, her other
house called her moist shennet with te privy house and awle te appurtenances
teteunto. Item, her was kive her eldest servant Shames, up G^^t^^, Morgan, up
Lewis, up Shones, up Shon, pecaus her was porne a Shentileman, and was stay her
servant a treat while, four yard of Frise to make her mourning shaket. Item,
Her was kive her Taughter Shennie four yard of Pullrush to make her cold ring.
Item, Her was kive ten shillings for shunkets; Imprimis, four creat sheezes
cut out in Causebobby, four pushels of creen Leeks roasted, and four pushels
of Onions, to make awle her couzens and kinsfolks cry. Item, Her was kive ten
shillings to te creat Clark of creat Saint Mary's, tat her cood ring te creat
Pell, to kive warning tat her was coming, tat Saint Peter might open her cate,
and let her in. Item, Her toe entreat her loving wife Madge, her sole
execetioner to pe honest, and pay awle her tepts, her cannot choose put pay.
Item, Her tesire her cretitors to take a pound of criefe for a pound of moneys,
for faith if her was long lived, her was peen honest to every pody. Item, tus
her tesire cot to receive her soul, who was her Maker and Redeemer, and her
was tesire her pody shod pe puried in te shurch of Saint Mary, and also I
tesire to see shentilemen tat are my Neighbors present to set their hands here
as witless tat I tie in te true Protestantie Faith.
Giles up Morgan, up Harry up Rafe, Simon up Thomas up Mordant, up Taffie, Rafe
up Shinkin, up Morgan up Taffie, her Couzens.

FINIS.

