THE DECLARATION AND UNANIMOUS RESOLUTION OF Colonel Whaley, And all the
Officers and Soldiers of his Regiment, now present with their Colors.

With a particular List of all their names that signed it, on Monday the 14. of
this instant May, 1649.

Published to prevent mistakes, and presented to every honest heart, especially
to our dear Fellow Soldiers of the Army under the Command of our ever honored
General Thomas Lord Fairfax, his Excellency.

London, Printed by John Clowes, and are to be sold near the Royal Exchange,
and in Popes-head-Alley. 1648.

The Declaration and unanimous Resolution of Col. Whalley, and all his Officers
and and Soldiers present with their Colors.
WHereas many scandalous and dangerous Papers have been lately published in
print, tending to seduce, and divide the Army, and dissolve the present
Government and power thereof; as also to subvert the Parliament and Council of
State, in this juncture of time, wherein they are endeavoring so necessary a
work, as settling the peace of the Nations, securing of trade, by a Fleet at
Sea, already by them set out; settling and supplying Garrisons, especially
Maritine, for preventing Invasions and Insurrections, taking of Free quarter,
establishing (by an equal Leavie) constant pay for the Army, providing
effectually for their Arrears, and the speedy transporting of a considerable
Army into Ireland, for the relief of many thousand of our distressed Brethren
and fellow Soldiers, who are engaged with us in the same quarrel, and (its
more then probable) must all perish, if not speedily relieved from hence. Which
considered: we cannot conceive that those who contrived and dispersed the
aforesaid papers, and endeavor otherwise to make obstructions, and hinder
those good transactions before mentioned, (which are so really intended, and
near effected by those now in power) to be either friends to us, or the
commonwealth; but rather enemies: And we humbly conceive it necessary, that
such persons may be discovered and suppressed.

And having lately observed, to our great grief, the disaffections of those to
whose lot it fell, to relive poor Ireland, and the secret and malacious
insinuations of diverse who (under the specious pretenses of procuring Liberty
here; and of the unwarrantablenesse of the War there) have by their
suggestions, deceived many (even honest men) into a belief thereof, and
divided them from that Engagement; thereby retarding the service: And (this we
believe) as it is on purpose to promote and advance the distructive designs of
the Common Enemy in the intentions of the Master Projectors: So it is in the
intentions of the rest of that Faction, against all, or at least against all
just and good Government, which we desire from our very souls, may be settled
and maintained by this P^rl. for the countenancing of those that do well, and
the terror of those that do evil; and this we despair not of, since they
have already done so many Acts of Justice, and accomplished so many excellent
things in order thereunto, notwithstanding the violent threats and intrusions
of a detestable Anarchy; and the serious thoughts of the present miseries of
Ireland, and how ill that Engagement resents with some of those whom the finger
of God has shared thereto, have wrought very much sorrow upon our spirits, and
we must needs say, if Providence in the Decision had cast the lot upon us, we
should all, or most of us, have embraced the service, hoping the protection and
blessing of the most high God, will be upon the upright endeavors of those
that undertake it: And if they should not have help now at last, considering
their constant patience and faithfulness in that difficult and hazardous
service, and immediate dependence upon this Nation, especially the Army) it
would be the sadning of all honest hearts, and the greatest dishonor and
danger that can befall the English State. Wherefore we earnestly beseech our
fellow Soldiers, and others who have any love to peace, not to entertain such
pernici-Notions, as may set up, or begit any disorder and confusion, which
doubtless is not of God, and will inevitably involve this too much wasted
Re-publique, into greater Wars and Famine, which we already taste of, being
miseries we are not long able to endure: and so instead of Freedoms and
Liberties, (in our poverty and weakness) to be all inthralled, and subverted to
the furious cruelties of the worst enemies viz. Strangers and Forraigness,

And taking notice how Deceivers by their false informations, and substill
instigations do endeavor to persuade us, our Fellow Soldiers, and others to
join with them in their wicked designs, to desolve the Parliament and Council
of State disorderly; and to cast off the Lord Genesis Lievt. Genesis and the rest of
the most faithful now in Authority, (no necessity leading thereunto.) We
declare that such traitorous plots and actions, we abhor and utterly
disclaim, and that we shall continue our due obedience to the Parliament, our
General, and Lievt. Genesis and all others now in Authority over us, and do
bless God for the good we, and this Nation have, and do enjoy by their pious
acts of Justice, and wise mannaging the public affairs, for the
establishment of peace upon good and sure grounds. In the prosecution whereof
we are engaged, and do engage with them to stand or fall against all attempts
contrary hereunto whatsoever, and by whomsoever.

The Colonels Troop.
Edward Whaley Colonel. Daniel Dale, Capt. Lieut. John Wright Cornet Philip
Ru^^sey Quartermaster Matthew Wealey Corporal. Rich ^^ilder Corporal. Will
Shephard Corporal. Richard Johnson Trumpet. Tho: Medhouse Trumpet. Philip
Bitts Trumpet. John Lanckstone Farrier. John Perriemount Sadler Hancserd
Knowles Chaplin Walter Stevenson Surgeons Edw: Wentworth Mate. William Fitts
Mate. James Horn Provist-Marshall John Foul Marshall man John Piggot Marshall
man John Kingsley John Cope James Brett Simon Ru^land Tho: Howard Joseph Prior
Edmond Pooley John Thompson John Stanton Dan: Walltafeskie Jo: Shepherd Jo:
Godbold Robert Thorpe Jerem: Garrard James Harlwin Christo: Pell Rich: Cowlea
Rich: Brawdbent Adam Thurder James Johnson John Lord Will: Cook Senior Richard
Chittocke Nich: Kirton Rich: Watts Daniel Wealey John Car Junior Jo: Duncom
William Cook Junior Robert Feilding Richard Neale Francis Jessop William
Parker William Robinson Rich: Robinson John Car Senior John Haruey Sam: Haruey
Nath: Cole John Case Dan: Harlwin Abraham London Jo: Shearman Rob: Caroile Tho:
Bidley Rich: Floyd Luke Crow James Mottes Rich: Stanford Rob: Gooch Jo: Lucey
William Sliverey Tho: Matchet Fran: Jones George Farmer Abraham Baley Rich:
Bradford Rob: Smith Edw: Watlin James Ballard Peter Belvoire William Alldred
Francis Robinson Tho: Whealtand Fran: Ball Hen: Jolley Tho: Kent Rich Comes
Hen: Rayles Jo: Hagger Edw: Spencer Jo: Humphreys Jo: Brothers Lionell Brothers
William Field Rich: Edwards Thomas Farthing Philip Watling Jo: Woodraft Tho:
Beverstocke Jo: Curde Walter Davis William Cooker Jam: Burven William Overton
Jo: Sheeming William Hubbard John Ire Simon Gayle John Simons Tho: Veale Jo:
Bradley. John Sanders
Captain Evansons Troop.
Will. Evanson Capt. Edmond Chillenden Lieut. Anthony Lacon Cornet Will. Linley
Quartermaster Cuthburt Reynoldson Corporal. George Turner Corporal. John
Calloway Corporal. Jacob Kempe Trumpet. Anthony Blithe. Trumpet. Matthew Cooney
Farrier. Thomas Quarry Sadler. William Russell Nath: Evanson John Williams
Edward Calloway Nath: Rignell Thomas Huckell John King John Evans Richard
Hanies John Gledwell Robert Payton Christopher Reynoldson John Slater Henry
Barker Thomas Knight Stephen Skinner Christopher Smith Thomas Coals Edward
Binney Robert Wilson Laurence Proctor Luke Martin George Susham Thomas Hayes.
William Drewrey Edward Wright Pearson Russel Io: Bray Richard Mattinley Richard
Reynolds Thomas Perrey Richard Ingram Thomas Gearey Hen: Gearey John Lovedell
John Stevens Thomas Missenden Hen: Wouley William Goodwin Walter Stone Hen:
Tharpe Abraham Have Io: Austin George Wetherley Woolston Everard Hen: Calloway
Rob: Cabel Peter Woodward William Butler Rob: Saywell Peter Moore Thomas Cooper
William Marriot John Rickets Nick: Rice John Osburne Thomas Cleaveley William
Rawbones Io: Ostler Io: Abra^es John Baker Rich: Perrey Henry Sleech John
Enowes Thomas Goldring Sam: Chanler Io: Colson Io: Davis William Paybody John
Knowles Christopher Greenhill Rich: Mason Rob: Flower Thomas Punt John Hills
Thomas Rogers Nick: Allin William Hall John Harris Fran: Ickley William Clarks
Simon Brown Ben: Godfrey Samp. Bourn Roger Weight Nath: Harris Rich Simons John
Gear John Pearce Rich York Thomas Turner Thomas Sprigg William Rice John White
Hen: Catcut
Captain Groves Troop.
John Grove Captain. Thomas Chamberlain Lieut. Abell Warren Cornet Geoage
Sanders Quartermaster Richard Ireland Corporal. Thomas Throwley Corporal.
Thomas Campion Corporal. Ionath Loader Farrier Io: Iacus Sadler Hen: Grove
Brian: Thomas George Perdue Thomas Jones Evan Morgan Edw: Thomas William Thomas
Edw: Williams Io: Tailor Rob: ^eakins Io: Ley Io: Colley Hen: Fleming Rog:
Leonard Thomas Bell Thomas Fitz Junior Thomas Harris Giles Harris Iam: Broadrib
Hen: Watkins Hen: Leonard Io: Smith Steph: Foreign Rich: Coincent Fran: Norton
Rob: Wedgebar Rich: Buines Mat: Mason John Soundey Francis Wagman Francis Allin
Io: Perrey Reynold Hoxon Stephen Walker David Smith Rich: Winter John Auldridge
John Collins Thomas Thomlinson Io: Chidocke Isaac Perke Jacob Perke John
Spinkes Mat: Jones Thomas Reeve Ben: Leaver Nich Estoe Io: Douty Thomas Hall
Rob: Car Thomas Worsley Lewis Ames Hen: Eliot James Medicen Edward Clewes John
Brandison Richard Rich Thomas Loxden Jo: Kengton Jo: Saraker Der: Hoare William
Fellow John Eartsman Nath: Bawin William Bolton John Webster Edward Street
William Shepre Thomas Shepre Io: Parsons Io: Thomas Thomas Pilborough George
King Richard Inwood Io: Sanders
Major Swallows Troop.
Rob. Swallow Major Iosse Sabbartan Leivt. Thomas Stewart cornet. Tho. Kendaall
Quarter Mr, David Canbey Corp. John Allen Corp. Tho. Willsen Corp. Tho.
Ainsworth Trump. Michael Prior Trump. Tho. Sicklemoore Farrier. Tho. Raynier
Sadler. John Revet Hugh Darley Samuel Carriage Roger Aldridge Robert Keys
Edward Potter John Simons Robert Winn Will. Wellborrough Richard House James
Rishtown John Pitts Thomas Ablet John Thorey John Gile Andrew Fernon Jos.
Pcarce John Hartlie Richard Downs John Fox Michael Odye John Papworth John
Ratcliffe John Pits John Wellborough John Crane John Emson James Dickes John
Sadler Ios. Whitlock Thomas Fanner Robert Blackborn Ralph Young Richard
Ratcliffe Edward Story John Parsons Thomas Church John Wilcocks Senior Henry
Lister James Stewart William Sprint Robert Wiildman Edward Littleberry John
Wilcocks Junior Nicholas Spilman John Sage James Hayden Robert Stoney John King
Thomas Radmell Ruben Simons Ios. Bucknam John Bieksbee Robert Evitts Jeremiah
Clerk William Teargoose Philip Mardocke Edward Round William Linsey James
Sprint Thomas Styles John Lovet Iohd Gadesby John Harvey George Cooper Gregory
Ellis Edward Speachly James Denison Nicholas Southerwood William Strange
Francis Thrower Samuel Spooner Samuel Stephens Chrispopher Tolson Thomas Ives
John Warren Thomas Gerrard George Goodman John Whiston John Wai^ford Clement
Brotherwick William Short Griffiu Lewis Jos, Bridger Matthew Godheard Thomas
Tomson Samuel Smith John Whaley Francis Flaxman Thomas Flaxman Samuel Teargoose
Edward Gee Caleb. Latten Fardinando Hill Joseph Gifford John Sadler
Captain Savage Troop.
John Savage Captain. Benjamin Bracey Lieutenant Nathanael Holt Cornet Time.
Thoruborough Quar. Mc. Robert Jackson Corporal. John Hawkins Corporal. James
Sharp Corporal. Solomon Sharp Trumpeter. Benjamin Barnes Trumpeter. George
Butler Farrie. John Lovet Sadler. John Richardson John Grayes Nicholas Mew John
Crowson Humpdrey Tailor Samuel Driver James Townsend Richard Whaley John Leech
Humphrey Roberbs John Godfrey Joseph Lepton David Caperoon Nicholas Gourder
Matthew Hepworth Henry Ball Randall Johnson John Kirhey Jeremiah Ives Henry
Sudbury John Ely Thomas Dunsmore Benjamin Thornborough Henry Brillock John
Grant Thomas Leichfield Henry Powell Roger Bradbrooks Thomas Laud Edward Head
Richard Boswell William Round Richard Hodges John Hill John Whittington Richard
Lewn William Scarbat William Mills Nicholas Williamson Edward Capps Richard
Green Mihill Le Mot John Emet Francis Norton Lazerus Smith William* Brown John
Gentle Edward Bayley Edward Simons Thomas Terrill Francis Wharton Henry Demeroy
Thomas Scot William Nest Thomas Perkeson Henry Lawrelson Richard Loret George
Reeve Henry Garrat William Bigs William Wickes. Francis Byot John Willcocks
Thomas Gearey Mihill Lewis Edward Butler Samuel Tailor John Grayer John Roberts
Capt. Cannons Troop.
Henry Cannon Capt. John Frank Tievtenant John Due Cornet Thomas Thomson Quar.
Mr. John Harison Corporal John Row Corporal Luke Cook Corporal Rob, Fadrey
Trumpeter John Reynold Trumpeter Nathaniel Hazelwood Sadler Thomas Kempe
Farrier William Muschion George Dyos Daniel Hafford John Washinton Humbl.
Bro^om James Row George Day Robert Balston Richard Yielding John Ebbs Thomas
Prior Nicholas Glover Thomas Brasebrey Henry Hoshkines Erasm^s Mushchion John
Powell John Smith. John Reynolds Laurence Andrews John Digger Charler
Bringhurst John Butter John Coachead Daniel Drywood Richard Adams Robert Kaytes
Robert Winter. Robert Saywell Robert Porter John Day Peter Sprigg John Grove
John Harrison John Stidwell Thomas Gouge Allexander Fletcher Robert Brandon
John Tailor John Fosskit John Horton James Miller John Reynolds Samuel Hancock
Robert Fawdras Ios. Hall John Tailor John Frost William Parkison George Oliver
William Bayley Robert Colan William Redhurn Eastaie Fielding William Lash Roger
Chapman Robert Moore Andrew Beren Richard Templeman George Martin George Howart
Samuel Fyler. James Glover John Minter John Dyos John Parker Ios. Withrow
Thomas Fawsdieke Robert Jacob Thomas Plumbe John Row Thomas Beale Hugh Veasey
Richard Smith
FINIS.

