QUESTIONS Propounded by the Natural Man BY WAY OF REASONING. And answered by
the Spiritual Man:

But the Natural Man receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they
are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them: It is written for the use
of them that halteth, that they may be gathered: In which reason Babylon is
fanned, and her Land emptied, for so it is written.

Whereunto is added a few lines for the Rulers of the Land, in love to their
souls.

Jer. 51.1, 2. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I will raise up against Babylon,
and against them that dwell in the midst of them, that rise up against me, a
destroying VVinde; and will send unto Babylon Fanners that shall fan her, and
shall empty her Lands; for in the day of trouble they shall be against her
round about.

Natural Man. Adam the first man that was created of the earth? and had not he
Dominion over all things that was created of the earth? and was not he the son
of God? and did not he beget sons? and is there any son born which was not by
him, or his sons begotten.

Genesis 1.30. Luke 4.38.
and was the son of God, and did beget sons; but the first born of every
creature was not by him, nor his sons begotten; for he was not born of the will
of man, but of God, and was before all things that are made; for by him was all
things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, Joh. 1.13. Col. 1 16.

Adam the Father of all the sons of men? and was not he the Son of God, as it
is written; had God any other son before him? if so, who was his Mother? for
the sons of Adam had Eve to their Mother, Genesis 3.20.

Adam was formed of the dust, and Eve of him; and as from them came sons of the
same nature, Psalm. 22.30. 1 Cor. 15.47. their descent not counted from them.
Heb. 7.6.
even so the second man and his generation is from Heaven, Heavenly, and their
Mother is New Jerusalem, which is above, and ber children are partakers of the
Divine Nature, Gal. 4.26. 2 Pet. 1.4.



Acts 17.28. as thou art the offspring of Adam the first man. Isa. 11.10. Rev.
22.16. Job. 21.8.




Cor. 6 17.

Ioh. 6.57.
thou was one in nature with us.

Ephesians. 2.3.





Ioh. 14.17.
because we see it not.



Romans 4.5.

Joh. 6 63. Romans 5.10. Prove. 17.15.
is true; but that he justifies them in ungodliness, is false; for that is an
abomination to the Lord.



Phil. 2.8. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 10.20. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 2.14. 1 Ioh. 3.^8.
and consecrated a new and living way through the vail, that is to say, his
flesh, in which he suffered death, and being put to death in the flesh, but
quickened by the spirit, that he might destroy him that had the power ^o death,
that is, the Devil; and for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil, and deliver them who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15.







Heb. 10.20. 1 Pet. 4.1. 1 Cor. 1.18. Gal. 6.14. 1 Ioh. 3.8. 1 Timothy 5.9. 1 John
5.4. Heb. 12.2. Romans 4.3.5.1.
humbling our selves to the cross, which is the Power by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world; through which the Son of God
destroys the works of the Devil; and so the mystery of Faith comes to be held
in a pure conscience, which gives us the victory over the world; and so Christ
is the author and finisher of our Faith, which is counted unto us for
righteousness; and thus we are justified, not in sin, but in righteousness.



Joh. 4.17. Heb. 12.23. Joh. 1.1.8.











and if any be in Christ, he is a new Creature; but thy Faith is, Romans 8.1. 2
Cor. 5.17.
that thou art righteous in Christ, and that thou say, Thou art under
condemnation; so thy faith is against Scripture and knowledge both.



When a strong man armed keeps his Palace, his goods are in peace.



Jude 19.



Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God; and he that believes on the Son of God has the witness in himself, 1 John 4.3, 5, 10.



Cor. 12.5.







He dwells with you, and shall be in you; at that day ye shall know that I am
in my Father, and you in me, and I in you; and except Jesus Christ be in you
you are reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5.



Joh. 19.29.


The sp. man's quest.





England.















The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of od, Mark 1.1. and they
are able to make thee wise unto salvation, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproofs, for Correction, for Instruction, and in them we think to have eternal
life.


Sp. Man. That is thy ignorance to think so; the holy Scriptures are true, but
thou have belyed them.






Not. Man's quest.









The Kingdom of God is within you; and the Kingdom of God is not in word, but
in power; Luke 17.21. 1 Cor. 4.20. Romans 1.16.
and the Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes.







Acts 10 36. 1 Pet. 3.19.




Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Cor. 12.7.
who is through all; and that which may be known of him, is manifest in them;
for to every man is the manifestation of the Spirit given to profit withal;
the other turns the mind from light to darkness, from God into the air; where
the Prince of darkness rules in the children of disobedience, whose minds are
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians 4.14.

To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is ne light in them. And Abraham says, Isa. 8.10. Luke 16.31.
If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though
one arose from the dead.

Romans 1.18. and the unrighteousness in which they are to be holden is
manifested without the Law, and witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the
righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
them that believe, Romans 3. verse 22.



Job 28.14. Romans 10.6.
Who shall ascend into heaven? that is to bring Christ down from above: Or who
shall descend into the depth? that is to bring up Christ again from the dead;
but what says it, The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart;
that is the Word of Faith we preach.



Ephesians. 4 10. 2 Cor. 13.5.
far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things; and if he be not in you,
you are reprobates.



Joh. 1. 4.
in the Light, and is the Light of men.


Spiritual Man. Prova. ^.^3. Joh. 16.8.










2 Co^. 3.17.
is that the Lord of Life and Glory?

2 Cor. 3.18.
are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of
the Lord.



Acts 3.21.
when he has restored all things spoken of by the Prophets.



1 Cor. 12.5.
there are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.


Natural man; Well, I will consider of it when I have a convenient season, but
at present I cannot receive it.


Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul; be not cut
off in her iniquities, for this is the time of the Lords Vengeance, he will
render unto her a Recompense, Jer. 51.6. Rev. 18.4.
Hear O Heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me; the Ox
knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my
People does not consider.
THis is thy state, O Land, thou know not the Lord thy Maker, neither will thou understand; but walk on in darkness; all thy foundations are out of
course; woe is me for thee; Will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be?
Be instructed O Land, least the Lord depart from thee, and make thee desolate,
a land not inhabited; for what art thou unto God more then other Nations which
was before thee, which was made desolate, that thou should not be made
desolate? Seeing he is no respector of persons, a God that changes not, who
will by no means clear the guilty, as it appears by the Scriptures of Truth;
for the Angels that kept not their first estate are reserved in chains, under
darkness, unto the Judgment of the great day. Likewise the old world for their
wickedness was drowned. Except eight persons Sodom and Gomorrah, with the
Cities about them, for sin suffered the vengeance of eternal fire. Israel in
the Wilderness for rebelling against the Light, often times was plagued; and for
forsaking the Commandments of the Lord in the Land of Canaan, was carried away
captive by Shalmanezer, except the Tribe of Judah only; and that Tribe also
for sin was carried into Babylon; and after their return and rebuilding of
their City and Temple, for sin both City and Temple became heaps, and Zion to
be plowed as a Field, and themselves scattered amongst the Nations unto this
day, being a prey to the Heathen.

Now all these things happened to them for insamples, and they are written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Now consider this all you that are enemies to the Light in you, and that
builds Temples without, where God dwells not, and prepares a Table for that
Troop, and that ^urnish the Drink Offering unto that number; for the Lord shall
slay thee, and ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my choen, says the
Lord, and I will call my servants by another name, because when I called, ye
did not answer; when I speak, ye did not hear, but did evil before mine eyes,
and did choose that wherein I delighted not, therefore it will be more
tolerable for Tire and Zidon, and Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgemeet
then for thee, O Land, except thou repent, who have bad so many examples of
Gods severity, for in thee the Prophets prophecy faisly, and the Priests bears
rule by their means, and the people will have it so, and as Troops of Robbers
wait for a man, so the company of Priests murders in the way by consent, for
they commit lewdness, as appeared unto, and by the late Jewries who was
employed by the Authority to enquire concerning their lives and Doctrines, who
upon their Oaths testified, That they was ignorant, scandalous, ungodly, many
of them whose God is their belly, who mind earthly things, whose glory is
their shame, and who yet are thy Teachers in many places; deliver thy self from
them, and break of thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing
mercy to the poor which thou have oppressed and imprisoned, that the Lord thou
may come to know, and rest with us; or else when the Lord shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, vengeance on thee shall be
taken that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his Power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.

Thus have I cleared my conscience, whether thou will hear, or whether thou will not hear, I am free from thy blood, who am a lover of that Light which
reproves thee, and if it loves thee not, it will condemn thee. Thus thou have
warning by

R. VV.

These Lines are written that men might learn not to blaspheme the living God,
whose ways are upright.
BLasphemy is a belying the truth, and saying that men are Saints when they are
not, Isa. 37.3. Rev. 2.9. and 13.5, 6. Ezekiel. 35.12.

The Principle of it is that in every one which opposes the Light, whether in
themselves, or in others, as will appear by these following lines, as it is
noted in the Scriptures of truth, Matthew. 15.19. 2 These. 2.4. Rev. 2.9.

First, Blasphemy is a belying the truth; and this is truth, That God decreed
no man to destruction, but man's destruction is of himelf, Luke 22.65. Prove.
6.32. Hos. 13.9.

Secondly, When Adam transgressed, and we in him, God does devise means that
his banished be not expelled from him, and that without respect of persons, 1
Cor. 15.22. 2 Samuel 14.14. Act. 10.34. Deuteronomy. 10.17. Romans 2.11. 1 Pet. i. 17. For
the Lord has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, nor is he willing that
any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. Ezekiel. 33.11. 2 Pet.
3.9.

Thirdly, That all men might, he that gave himself a ransom for all, has
tasted death for every man, 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9.

Fourthly, He that dyed for all (for all was dead) has lighted every man;
which light is life, and came upon all men, unto the justification of life, 2
Cor. 5.14. Joh. 1.9. Romans 5.18.

Fifthly, He that receives this gift denies himself, and finds life; Mark
8.34. Romans 9.16. Ephesians. 1.11. Psalm. 144.10. Hos. 13.9. 2 Pet. 3.9. Isa. 55.7.
Ephesians. 5.13. 1 John 3.8.
and so its not of man that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God who
works all things after the Counsel of his own will; and so our salvation is
of God, but our destruction is of our selves; for God is not willing that any
should perish, but man is not willing to forsake his sins, which is the cause
of perishing; but man would be saved from wrath, but not from sin, which is the
state of wrath, Romans 2.8, 9. which the Light does manifest, and would destroy
in us if he was not resisted by us, Act. 7.51. and 13.46.

He that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy, Prove. 29.1.
R. W.

A Copy of two Letters as follows, which was sent unto two called Ministers,
with nine Queries.
JEffrey Sunkens, I being informed that thou on the tenth or eleventh day of
December. 1656. at Justice Pierces House dids declare as foleth:

That the Scriptures are a Christians Rule of life, and ground of Faith, and
that only upon the hearing of this thy affirming it, I was moved to write unto
thee these my following Queries.

First, Whether Abraham's rule of life and ground of faith was Scriptures, and
that only, seeing there was none, as I know; if so, what Scriptures, the whole
or part, yea or nay.

Secondly, Whether Abraham's rule of life and ground of Faith was not one with
Abel, and Noah, and all the holy men of old; if so, Whether that one ground was
not invisible, yea or nay.

Thirdly, Whether there be any other rule of life, or ground of faith for
Christians now; if not, whether their rule of life and ground of faith was not
before the Scriptures was, yea or nay.

Fourthly, Whether the Apostles rule of life and ground of faith when they was
sent forth to preach, was visible or invisible; things made ready to their
hands, or other men's lines, yea or nay.

Fifthly, Whether there be any other rule of life or ground of faith for the
Ministers of Christ now to walk by, but the same they walked by, yea or nay.

Sixthly, Whether they made Scriptures their rule of life or ground of ground
of faith, or commanded others to make the Letters they did write to the Saints
their rule of life, or ground of faith; and that only, yea or nay.

Seventhly, Whether the Church of Romes rule of life and ground of faith be not
the Letters of others; and whether Romes Church be not Antichristian, yea or
nay.

Eighthly, Whether thy making the Letters of others the rule of life and ground
of faith, be not another foundation then that the Apostles laid, seeing thou
says that only; and whether thou art not one with the Church of Romes rule of
life and ground of faith; if not, show the difference, yea or nay.

Ninthly, Whether making the Letters of others to be the Rule of life and
ground of faith, and that only, be not transforming as the Ministers of
Righteousness; and whether Satan and his Ministers does not so, yea or nay.

Thus in love to that in thee that never changes, which does reprove thee; and
except it changes thee, it will condemn thee; otherwise thy Friend Robert
West expects thy answer.

I having received no answer unto this day, being the twelfth day of the second
Month, 1657. therefore I desire it to be printed for the use of all; For the
foundations of the earth shall be discovered, and the gods thereof famished,
and their Ladder-work uncovered, Mic. 1.6. Zeph. 2.11, 14.

This Letter following was delivered, with six of these queries, to one Henry
Johnsons, called Minister of the Borough of the Devises in Wilts, by R. W.
about twelve Months since, but no answer returned returned, although desired
and expected.
HEnry Johnsons in love to thy soul, and the souls of whom thou must give an
account of unto the living God, I am moved to write unto thee that thou may
take warning, and not destroy thy self, and the souls of them for whom Christ
dyed, for filthy lucres sake, as the false Prophets did of old; for there were
false Prophets among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers amongst
you, who privately shall bring in damnable Heresy, even denying the Lord that
bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, by reason of whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. read that chapter, and take
warning. Consider also what John says, He that transgresses and abides not
in the Doctrine of Christ, has not God, 2 Epist. ver. 9. Now the Doctrine of
Christ to the Pharisees thou may read, Matthew. 23. where are eight woes to
them, and thou walking in their steps, must partake of their woes; for they
were called of men Masters, and stood praying in the Synagogues, and talked of
Scriptures, and thought in them to have eternal life, Joh. 5.39. Now deal
honestly with thy self; art not thou one in thought with them, as well as in
practice with them and Corah, who said all the Congregation are holy, Numb.
16.3. or else why do thou baptize all that are brought to thee? O Henry! I
see by the Light I have from the Lord Christ, that thou art a line without the
Law, as once Paul was when he persecuted Christ in his Members (as thy hearers
do me) and so thou art in the flesh, and he that is in the flesh cannot please
God, Romans 8.8. Be silent, O all flesh! before the Lord, for he is raised up out
of his holy habitation, Zach. 2.13. for thy strength is to stand still, and to
wait for the revelation of Jesus Christ which made Paul a Minister; and say not
that revelation is ceased now, as once thou did to me; For no man knows the
Father but the Son, and he to whom he will reveal him; And his spirit
witnesses to our spirit, that we are the sons of God; for as many as are lead
by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, Romans 8.14. And that is my Rule;
and this denies not Scriptures, but opens them, when to all thy learned they
are as a Book sealed; so they were to the chief Priests and Pharisees when
Christ came in the flesh; for with all their Hebrew, Greek and Latin, they
could not know him, as thou may see Matthew. 16.14, 15. for they had their
saying who he should be; and when he asked his Disciples, they were silent,
save he who had a revelation, who had a revelation, who said he was the son of
the living God: And there is no other knowing of him now savingly, nor never
was, though false Apostles or Ministers may transform themselves as the
Ministers of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works, 2 Cor.
11.15. as thine is, for under thy Ministry grows briars, and thorns, and
stubble; and no marvel, for they that God sent not, shall not profit the people
at all, Jer. 23.32. For by their fruits ye shall know them, says Christ,
Matthew. 7.15, 16. where he bids us beware of them, Blessed be his Name that
their marks they cannot blot out. Now read and confider these lines I pray
thee, before the Lord, and look into thy conscience for the Lords sake, that
thou may not destroy thy self and the souls of them that hear thee; and
remember thou have been warned by a friend to thy soul.

A few Lines for the Rulers of the Land, in love to their souls.
Be wise O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the earth; serve the Lord with
fear and rejoice with trembling; for God will bring every work into judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil,

Psalm. 2.10. Eccles. 12.14.
Having read in some Papers of your zeal in promoting the Gospel of Christ; it
is good to be zealously affected always in a good matter: But O ye Rulers, see
you to your matter, 2 Samuel 15.3.
for there is a way that seems right to a man, but the end thereof is death;
and there may be a zeal, but not according to knowledge. And there is a name to
things, Romans 10.2. Rev. 2.9. Gal. 1.9.
but the things are not so as they are named. And there may be that called
Gospel, and preached for it, and it not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now let them be accursed that preaches it; but be you free, and be not
partakers of other men's sins, that both you and the Nations may be freed from
the plagues of Babylon; for if you support her not, she cannot stand; Rev. 18.4.
but if you support her, you must persecute* and that will be grievous for you
one day, who have been such great Professors, and by whom the Lord has removed
persecutors that was before you.

Now in love to you and the truth, for whose sake I am moved to write unto you,
that all may read and search the Scriptures of truth, Dan. 10.21.
whether according to it (yea or nay) this be the Gospel that is preached by
them that are called Ministers, who have separated themselves, having not the
spirit, Jude. 19. Mic. 3.11. Genesis 12.3. Deuteronomy. 30.14. Romans 1.16. Genesis 22.18.
Luke 7.21. Col. 1.27. Joh. 1.10.
and preaches for hire; I say, Whether it be the same Gospel which was
preached by God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and that Moses and the Prophets,
and Christ, and his Apostles did preach, for that was one, not divided; and it
was the power of God unto salvation unto every one that did believe; and it was
in them, as it is written, In thee, and in thy seed shall all the families of
the earth be blessed, says God to Abraham. Says Moses, The word is very nigh
unto thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. Says Christ, The Kingdom of
God is within you. Says Paul, Christ in you the hope of Glory, whom we preach.
Thus was the Gospel preached by the holy men of old which was in the world, and
the world knew him not; and truly if there had not been a seed in us in which
the blessing is, which was and is the Gospel, we had been as Sodom, and made
like unto Gomorah; for if Jesus Christ be not in you, says Paul, ye are
reprobates: Acts 9.1 Gal. 1.1
Now before Paul knew Christ to be in him, he persecuted him; but when it
pleased God to reveal his Son in him, he preached him in the world whom the
world knew not, but was to them a mystery, as he is this day where he is not
believed on in them; for the Antichristian Ministry has preached him up in
Heaven of a distance from man, 1 John 5.1^.
so long, that by it they have preached him out of the hearts of the people to
be looked for. Therefore take heed my dear Friends, and now Rulers, what Gospel
you do promote, and what Ministry you do set up, for the Spirit of Life, which
is the Lord, is risen in our hearts, and he is entered into his Witnesses, 2
Pet. 1.19. Rev. 11.11. 2 These. 2.8.
which is the Light of Christ, and spirit of men; and the time is at hand that
the dead should be judged, and the man of sin revealed and consumed, and the
glory of all flesh to be stained, and the Star of Jacob to be exalted, who is
risen in our hearts, and arising in many thousands; that the kingdom of this
world may become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, whose day is at
hand. Therefore fall away from the man of sin, which is in the Temple your
body, that the day of Christ you may see, for that day shall not come except
there come a falling away first, and the man of sin be revealed, which is that
in you that opposes the Light of Christ and his Ministry, and exalts it
self, which must be consumed before the glory of the Lord be revealed in you,
Kom. 8.18. Jer. 31.34.
and his teachings you come to know, which is in spirit to be received, which
makes perfect now, as ever did, the spirits of just men, who believes the
teachings of God in spirit, as Abraham did, for when God said to Abraham, Walk
before me, and be thou perfect, he believed God, and did not say, It cannot be
in this world; and whose says, It cannot be in this world, denies Abraham's
Faith, Ephesians. 4.12.
Christ's Exhortation, Prayer and Ministry, which was all for the perfecting of
the Saints in this world, whereof the Apostles were Witnesses, with the holy
men of old, as says the Scriptures, Job 1.1, 8. Heb. 12.23. 1 John 4.17. and
they that denies perfection attainable in this world, denies Christ's
Exhortation, Prayer and Ministry; and indeed, shuts the Kingdom of Heaven
against men, Rev. 21.27.
for into it can enter no unclean thing.

Consider of these things I pray you, that you support no longer that Ministry
which denies perfection to be attainable in this world, and take the means into
your hands which is the cause thereof, that the Lords people may be freed by
you without, as they are by him in spirit, to serve him in righteousness and
holiness, without fear all the days of their lives, which is the desire of
yours in the Truth.

This was delivered unto some of the Members of Parliament, and desired to be
by R. W. read amongst them.

The End.

