TWO SERMONS: One against ADULTERY; The Other, of the NATURE, ART, and ISSUE Of
the Christian Warfare. WITH A DISCOURSE, Showing the CONSISTENCY of God's
Infinite Goodness With his Foreknowledge of the FALL of MAN.

By NATHANAEL WHALEY, A. M. Rector of Broughton in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed by J.H. for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. School.

A SERMON AGAINST ADULTERY.
Genesis XXXIX. 9. -- How then can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God?


IN the seven and thirtieth Chapter of this most Ancient and Authentic
History, Moses, the undoubted Author of it, is very exact in relating the
various and wonderful turns of Providence, which brought Joseph into
Potiphar's House; and here he leaves him, till he has given an account of some
Miscarriages in the life of Judah, Chapter 38.
which he draws with its Shades and Blemishes amongst the brighter and fairer
Passages of it. After this, Chapter 39.
he resumes the Story of Joseph, and acquaints us with his courteous
Entertainment in Potiphar's house, with the great Trust his Master reposed in
him, the mighty Reputation he gained by his prudent and faithful Management,
the strange Success which attended all his Undertakings, his grateful
Remembrance of the signal Honors and Favors his munificent Patron had
conferred upon him: And to complete his Character, the Divine Historian tells
you of his eminent virtue in defeating the perfidious and lewd Desires of his
amorous and importunate Mistress, whose wicked and shameless Courtships he
dashed with this short and pious Answer, How then can I do this great
Wickedness, and sin against God?

In the words the most obvious and material things are these two:

I. Joseph's Sentiment of Adultery, or the Violation of the Conjugal Union;
viz. that it is a great Wickedness and Offense against God.

II. The excellent use he made of it, which was to repel the rude Insults of
his salacious Mistress, and free himself from the danger of sinning with her.
How then can I do this great Wickedness? etc. As if he had said, I can never
consent to so false and vile an action as you tempt me to; a thing never to be
answered to God or Man: the God, whom from my Infancy I was taught to fear, by
whose Providence I was conducted under your hospitable Roof: Or the good Man
that has nobly cherisht my Ambition, and rewarded my poor endeavors to serve
him. Joseph, you see, had a present and lively sense of the Horror of the
Crime he was tempted to: and this was apparently owing to his religious
Education, by which his mind was strongly impregnated with the Fear of God: and
having these advantages, he easily overcame the surprising Temptation, and so
doing, has happily left us these three Instructions.

I. That the strongest Temptations to the most flattering and deceitful Vices
are not invincible.

II. That a good Education is a mighty advantage toward the leading a virtuous
and unspotted Life, and overcoming the greatest Temptations to Vice and
Wickedness.

III. That the Fear of God quickened with a present and lively Apprehension of
the great evil of Sin, is a sovereign and effectual Preservative against the
most charming and powerful Allurements to it.

To each of these Particulars I shall speak in their order: and first of

I. Joseph's Sentiment of Adultery, or the Violation of the Conjugal Union,
which he deservedly calls a great Wickedness and Offense against God. And this,
I doubt not, will appear from Principles generally allowed for the most exact
and authentic Measures of good and evil: such as the Light of Nature, the
declared sense of Mankind concerning the intrinsic Goodness and Turpitude of
Actions, the Authority of Divine Revelation, and the natural Tendency of things
(verified by continual Experience) to produce good or bad effects in the World.
If men will dispute such Principles as these, I have nothing at present to say
to them, but that they may do well no longer to dissemble their Sentiments, but
play upon the Square, and fairly tell the World, they know no difference in the
Nature of Actions, but what is made by the present Sense or Remembrance of Pain
or Pleasure: That Mankind is degenerated by aspiring to better Manners than the
Brutes: and that they are not at all ambitious to retain to that order of
Beings, that must needs distinguish themselves from their Fellow Creatures by a
lofty Pretense to Reason and Religion.

My Business, at present, is with men of a better rank, I mean such as are
sensible of the true Worth and Dignity of humane Nature, and that the worst
part of it (the Body) is much too good to be inslaved to obscene and unworthy
Lusts, and dragged through all the Filth and Dishonor of a madly voluptuous
Life; who when they are tempted to a Debauch, or overset by a violent Appetite
to unlawful Pleasures, do smartly feel a controuling Principle within them; or
if they have been overtaken in a Fault, do yet retain a blushing Sense of
Virtue and Religion, are willing to understand their Errors, to be reminded of
the danger of them, and to be armed against the worst that may befall them for
the future. And such Persons will, I hope, in kindness to themselves, have the
Patience and Ingenuity to consider,

1. That the Character in the Text is agreeable to the general Sense of
Mankind, especially of the most refined and civilized Nations. For that this
was no distinguishing Notion of the Family or Religion of Abraham, is evident
by Pharoah's Discourse with Abraham; Genesis 12.18, 19. Genesis 20.9, 10. Genesis 39.20.
and Abimelech's on the like occasion; and by Joseph's Imprisonment, to hide
the Naughtiness of his Mistress, who with an Impudence peculiar to her
character, vehemently accused him of attempting her Chastity. By these
Testimonies, it is plain that Adultery was esteemed a great Sin in the Courts
of Egypt and Palestine, and these are some of the most ancient Nations we read
of in authentic Histories. And indeed in all Countries, from the first Dawn of
Learning and Civility among them (not excepting those that pretend to greater
Antiquity) it has ever had an ill Name, China, Tartary, Peru.
and is generally looked upon as one of the rankest Debaucheries and Corruptions
of humane Nature. As such, it was condemned long before the Distinction of
Heathens, Jews, and Christians: and ever since by the wisest Nations, that had
nothing but the weak Taper of Nature to guide them. And therefore it must be
evil in it self; for the Light of Nature discovers nothing to be evil, but what
is evil in its own Nature: and what is so must be evil in all Ages, Persons,
and Circumstances. Nor does the practice of this Vice, without control, in
some wild and barbarous Nations, overthrow the force of this Argument, any more
than the Toleration of other Immoralities in some dark Ages and Countries, or
the open Profession of gross and palpable Errors, proves the Rectitude of such
Actions and Errors, or will excuse their Contrariety to right Reason and
Religion. It Is enough to justify the Censure in the Text, that it agrees with
the best and general Reason of Mankind.

And this, methinks, should satisfy those Men, who laying aside all
Revelation, depend upon natural Reason as the only Guide and Director of their
Thoughts and Actions; there being nothing plainer in the Eye of natural Reason,
than that the actions which are contrary to it are evil, and will be so, as
long as there is a rational Nature. That is, God has framed the Nature of Man
so agreeably to his own Perfections, as to show him what is essentially good
and evil by the Light of his own Reason, and to stamp the Dictates of it as a
Law upon his Mind; and therefore Sins committed against this Law must be great
Offenses against God, because he is both the Maker of the Law, and of the
Nature he designed to govern by it.

2. Adultery violates the Divine Institution of Marriage, which laid the
Foundation of all humane Society, was designed to perpetuate the Race of
Mankind, and unite Men by the most natural Ties and Endearments in all friendly
Offices, and in the solemn Worship and Adorations of God. The Union of Man and
Woman in the Conjugal State was ordained for these excellent ends; which,
considering the present Constitution of humane Nature, are no less necessary to
our Happiness in this World, than the Blessed Society of glorious Saints and
Angels is to the Happiness of the next. And accordingly this was one of the
transcendent Blessings of Paradise, without which the Garden of Eden, with its
rich and delicious Variety of all other Comforts and Conveniences of Life, had
been more like a Desert, than a Paradise, to any single Possessor of it. For if
we look into the Frame of our Nature, and consider how essential Amity and
Friendship are to the Felicity of a reasonable Creature, or that Greatness of
Soul Man (the designed Emperor of this lower World) was liberally endowed
withal, when first he came out of his Maker's hand, it was plainly impossible
for Man to be alone and be happy. For to be happy is not to have more good in
view than we can grasp or enjoy; This may make us miserable, but can never make
us happy. To be happy, is to have all things suitable to our just Desires: and
what can we imagine more desirable to Man in his solitary state of Innocence,
than to have something in his own Shape and Likeness, capable of conversing
with him, and, by dividing, of increasing his Joys? and then if God had denied
him this convenient help, after he had made him meet for Society, and exchanges
of Love and Kindness, he would certainly have been apt to languish, and (like a
disappointed Lover in the Absence of his peculiar Delight) to complain to the
Winds and Fountains, or the mated Birds and Beasts, of his unket and lonesome
State, and to grow melancholy upon the Walks of Paradise, while he had all the
Treasures, and all the silent Beauties of Nature about him, and wanted nothing
but another self to relish and complete his Happiness.

And this shows the state of Marriage to be Honorable, Heb. 13.4.
and consistent with the highest degrees of Purity and Innocence in our present
Circumstances: And that it was appointed for a general good, and for one of the
choicest Comforts and Entertainments of Life. The Time, Place, and Author of
this Institution are undeniable Arguments of its Purity and Wisdom; and the
Reason it was founded upon, viz. because it was not good for man to be alone,
recommends the Conjugal State as good and convenient in all Ages, Genesis 2.18.
and to Persons of all Ranks and Qualities that are sensible of the want of
this Friendly Society.

It Is farther observable, as an indelible mark of the Sanctity of this
Institution, that it was immediately declared by God himself; Genesis 2.24.
and at the same time was signally honored (as is thought by very learned
Interpreters) with the glorious Appearance of the Divine Majesty, attended with
the Heavenly Host, at the happy Espousals of our First Parents. And, we know,
when any occasion was offered to our Savior of speaking to this Argument,
Matthew. 19.3, 4, 5.
that he constantly affirmed the Sacredness of the Marriage-Union, as grounded
upon the original Institution; and that he chose to grace the Wedding in Cana
of Galilee with his first Miracle. Joh. 2.1. etc.


Now to violate this dear and sacred Union by Adulterous Mixtures, is a perfect
Contradiction to the Ordinance of God, and the kind Provision he has made for
the Harmony of the World; it is an insolent Contempt of his Sovereignty over
his Creatures, of his right to fix them in their several Stations, and appoint
them their bounds which they shall not pass, to limit their Desires to their
proper Objects, and restrain them from invading the Rights, and ravishing the
reserved and incommunicable Treasures of each other. For what greater insolence
can there be, than to dispute the Government of the World with the Maker of it?
To remove the Bounds of Intercourse and Society, which the Wisdom of God has
established from the Beginning, and prostitute his Holy Institutions to the
Gratification of a lawless and brutish Appetite? Was ever any Law given to Men
more plainly worded, more solemnly published, edged and enforced with sharper
Threatenings, or more frequently inculcated by the Prophets and Messengers of
God, than this, Thou shall not commit Adultery? The Violation therefore of this
Law must be highly dishonorable and offensive to him.

3. It is an act of shameful Turpitude and Impurity in it self. It stains the
Image of God upon the Soul, and defiles the Body; both which being consecrated
to God's peculiar Service in our Baptism, are properly styled his Temple in
Scripture; 1 Cor. 6.19.
Know ye not (says the Apostle) that your Body is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, which is in you? 1 Cor. 3.17.
And if any man defile the Temple of God, him will God destroy: for the Temple
of God is holy, which Temple ye are. And then Fornication and Adultery are no
common Pollutions in a Christian, but high degrees of Profanation and Impiety:
Tell it not to the Heathen World; they are certainly, next to Idolatry, the
most sacrilegious Abuses of the best things devoted to God's peculiar Service
and Honor. For Christians are not only the Temple of the living God (as St.
Paul calls them) but they are his living and most holy Temple; 2 Cor. 6.16.
His Spiritual House, in St. Peter's Phrase, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9.
nay his Holy and Royal Priesthood, ordained to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. So that for a Christian to defile himself
with fleshly Lusts, is to add Profaneness to Impurity. It is to defile at once
God's Temple, Priest, and Altar, and to make his best Sacrifices loathsome and
Abominable to him; to obstruct all kind and amicable Intercourse between God
and him, and to grieve and discharge his holy and ever Blessed Spirit, that
Divine Guest whom he has sent to abide with us for ever, and to sanctify, and
seal us to the Day of Redemption.

4. Adultery is a Crime of the greatest Baseness and Treachery toward our
honest and innocent Neighbor. There is such a Complication of Evils, so much
palpable Injustice, Infamy and Falsehood in every act of this Sin, that it is
commonly reckoned by the unhappy Relations of the offending Parties, that have
any Sparks of Honor or Virtue in them, one of the sharpest Trials of Patience,
one of the heaviest Crosses and Afflictions that are incident to them in this
World. By this means the good Man is not only deprived (contrary to all Law and
Equity) of his certain and apparent Rights; but he is shamefully betrayed and
supplanted in his choicest and most valuable Interests; things of that
extremely nice, tender, and peculiar Nature, that it is hardly possible to
compute the vast Injuries he suffers by the Invader of them; such are,

1. The Virtue and Fidelity of his Wife; to be wronged in whom, and bereaved of
that singular Delight and Complacency which flows from the Society of a chaste
and faithful Consort, is to lose the Flower of his Happiness in this World.
And be sure the more kind and virtuous the good Man is, the sharper is his Pain
and Anguish to behold the delight of his Eyes ravished from his own into the
circle of a Strangers arms, there by wicked Arts and Enchantments beguiled of
her Innocence, and transformed into a loathsome and perfidious Creature. For
what person can be more vile and nauseous (how fair soever in her Looks and
Pretenses) or more wretchedly false and treacherous than she, that in Contempt
of her Altar-Vows, her most solemn and religious Promises, before God and the
World, of untainted Loyalty and Affection to her Husband, consents to the
lewdest Practices, and commits the foulest Treasons aganst him! That with her
veil of Modesty casts off all regard to the Honor of her Religion, her Birth,
and Family, prostitutes her self to a mean and ignoble Passion, and forsakes
the Crystal Stream of Conjugal and Chaste Enjoyments, to wallow in the Mire and
Puddle of dishonest and brutal Pleasure! 1 Timothy 5.6.
She that lives in Pleasure (says the Apostle) is dead while she lives. And
certainly it is the worst kind of Death ante mortem perire (as Seneca speaks) to
perish alive, Ep. 93.
and meet Corruption on this side the Grave, as many of the wild Lovers of
Pleasure choose to do, rather than lead (as they esteem it) a dull, virtuous
life; the mean while they are dead to all the good purposes of living, and not
only so, but live in a state of Death and Putrefaction; they feel themselves
rotting and perishing before their time, till their Life grows a Burden to
themselves, and a Nuisance to all that are about them; As if they only came into
the world to annoy it, and had contrived to do the Work and Business of the
Grave, before they descend into it.

Such is the Tendency of this pernicious Course, the very entrance into which,
as it often proves, is more than half the way to the Depths of Hell: and then
it must needs grieve the heart of any Generous and good-natured Man, to see the
Wife of his Bosom, whom he loved as his own Soul, and cherisht as his own
Flesh, so far engaged and so miserably lost in the Paths of Vice and Ruin, and
to lose one half of his Life and Happiness by her vile Apostasy. To give the
true Accent to such a sorrow as this, when it first throbs and beats against
the Breast that is deluged with it, is not in the power of Eloquence: Nature
only can do it by inimitable Sighs and Pangs, whilst the greatest degrees of
Grace are little enough to bear up the Spirit of Man, under so pressing and
unwieldy a Calamity.

2. His own Reputation and Honor suffer greatly by this foul and treacherous
Act. For though the good Man never exposed himself to the Censure of the world;
though it may be he has all the true Principles of Honor, Prudence, and
Integrity in him, and the worst that can be said of him is; the poor Man was
unhappy in his Choice: yet such is the Ill Nature of the World, and the Levity
of vain people (who must be ever talking of the Crimes, and entertaining
themselves with the Misfortunes of their Neighbors) that he is sure to be
upbraided with his Calamity, and to have his good Name bandied in Sport and
Scurrility: and perhaps a great deal more than if he had blackened it himself
with Vice, or had not provoked a perverse and adulterous Generation by daring
to be chaste and virtuous in it. It Is very unnatural, I am sure, to jeer and
raily upon men's Misfortunes, i.e. to abuse my Neighbor merely for being
unhappy, and leave him nothing but his Innocence to support and comfort him: to
revive his sorrows, and keep his mind upon the rack, when he needs the very
kindest and tenderest Usage I can possibly give him. And this, as light a
matter as it seems, we cannot but observe, is very hard upon the sufferer in
the present Case; nay, is often reputed one of the most grievous Circumstances
in his sorrowful and uneasy Condition.

3. He is continually liable to be teased and tortured with the Spirit of
Jealousy. And surely there is not a greater Torment to any Candid and
ingenuous Person: But when it seizes a Man of high and violent Passions, what
strange Combustion does it make in his Spirit! He is instantly all in a Flame,
his Breast glows, his Heart burns with Revenge, his Eyes flash with
Indignation, not to be quenched with his own or the Tears of his compassionate
Friends; now he appears like a perfect Fury, fierce and inexorable; Curses his
Bridal Day, nay the Day in which he was born; Then thinks of a thousand
Revenges, but knows not which to pursue, till some unlucky Accident determines
his choice; and then, if he either falls short of his Design, or over-acts it
with Rage and Cruelty, he presently turns pale like a Ghost, slarts and
trembles at every shadow, as if every thing that approacht him now, came to
upbraid him with his Folly or Misery.

I don't say this is the constant or the only effect of Jealousy, it being
true of this as of all other Distempers of the Mind, that it varies according
to the different Complexion of the Patient, and the good or bad Habits his Mind
is furnished or infested with. And hence Jealousy (as St. Chrysostom observes)
has two very contrary effects, which he calls (...); (...), Cap. 52.
the first is such a Dullness and Heaviness of Mind, as makes a man perfectly
stupid and insensible of all things but his proper grief: The other is
insatiate Rage and Fury, always prompting and provoking him to hasten and
signalize his Revenge; not to be discouraged with difficulties, nor softened
with Entreaties; not to be pacified with the deepest Submissions; not to be
satisfied with the largest Overtures; not so much as to wait the Leisure of
public Justice, but follow his own Methods, pursue his Adversary with the
utmost Severity, and inflict the speediest and sharpest Vengeance upon him. And
this Solomon long since observed, Prove. 6.34, 35. Jealousy is the rage of a
Man: therefore he will not spare in the day of Vengeance. He will not regard
any Ransom, neither will he rest content, though thou give many gifts.

4. The good man is greatly wronged in the Honor and Interests of his Family,
his innocent Children suffering with their abused Father, and inheriting the
vast Infelicities, their lewd Mother has liberally entailed upon them. It Is
their unhappiness to descend from a naughty and perfidious Woman, to want the
Influence of a Mothers Care and Piety in their tender Years, and it may be to
derive a sickly and ill-addicted Nature from her, a tainted Constitution of
Mind and Body, instead of the true Principles of a virtuous and happy Life.
It Is their continual Grief to observe the Jarrs and Dissentions of their
divided Parents, especially when they come to learn the dismal occasion of
them, and behold their Estate and Patrimony melting away between the unnatural
Heats of Contention, and the prodigal Flames of Lust. It Is their wrong to have
the Brood of the Adulterer cherisht and brought up with them, who through the
Subtilty of her that bare him is often made the Darling of the Family, and too
often goes away with a fairer Portion than any of the Legitimate Children of it.

These are the genuine and most ordinary Effects of this rampant and furious
Lust. These are the kindnesses of the false Adulterer to his harmless
unthinking Neighbor, while he carries on his amorous Plots against him with
the fairest Pretenses, and the highest Protestations of Love and Friendship to
him and his Family; a Love more fatal than Death, and cruel than the Grave;
especially to its dearest Object, against which it levels its fieryest Darts,
and for which it reserves the deepest and sorest Ruin. Its very first Wound is
deadly and desperately cruel; the Chastity of a Wife being deservedly esteemed
at a much higher Value than the brightest and most charming Beauty, the finest
and pleasantest Wit, the richest Dowry, or even the sweetest and most agreeable
Mien and Temper. And the Reason why men generally set a greater price upon this
than other good Properties is, because of all others it is most essential to
Conjugal Love and Union; insomuch that the Violation of this one, breaks the
whole Chain of amicable and social Virtues, without which no Society, tho
founded upon Divine Institution, can possibly hold and be happy. And this
doubtless was the reason why our Savior, who was infinitely tender of the
Rights of Mankind, Matthew, 19.9.
gave the Jews a liberty of Divorce in the desperate Case of Adultery. The want
of some Accomplishments in a Loyal Consort may be made up by a Plenitude of
other Graces and Advantages: but the Loss of Chastity can never be repaired in
kind or value; No equivalent can be given for it, the stolen Treasure can never
be restored; the Flower that is blasted, can never recover its verdant Beauty.

5. I might add to this heavy Charge, that Adultery is highly injurious to the
common good and welfare of Men. The Contention it kindles in a private Family
is seldom extinguished there, but frequently breaks out, alarms and inflames the
Neighborhood into Riots and Factions, to the Disturbance of the public Peace,
the levying of war, and the Subversion (sometimes) of Kingdoms and Governments;
to the grief of all good men, and the Encouragement of the boldest and most
impudent Vices. It were endless to reckon up the Judgments and Calamities which
this Sin alone has brought upon the World. Who can count the Treasure it has
wasted, or tell how much Virtue it has betrayed, how many Duels it has fought,
how many Lives it has cost, how many Innocents it has massacred, how many
strong men have been slain by it; Prove. 7.26.
what Havoc it has made in ancient and illustrious Families, and what
Confusion in the Race of Mankind?

6. The last Argument I shall name of the greatness of this Sin, is the
Punishment which God, whose Judgments are always righteous, and never exceed
the measure of our Iniquities, has allotted for it. And this makes another
very dreadful Scene. There is Infamy, Hatred, Pain, and Poverty coming on like
an armed Man; Prove. 6.24, etc.
then a dismal Train of cruel, noisome, and fierce Diseases, followed close by
the ghastly King of Terrors in a sorrowful and untimely hour; All gathering
about the Criminal, till the latter having pierct his Liver with a poisoned
Dart, seizes and carries him off to God's high Tribunal; Prove. 7.23.
the mean while the Heavens show their Displeasure in terrible Flashes of
Divine Wrath upon the Conscience of the Sinner, who had been often told from
thence (but perhaps till his dying Day, and his uneasy Pillow forced the
unwelcome thought upon him, never laid it to his heart) that no Whoremonger,
Ephesians. 5.5.
nor unclean Person has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God.
The Air of that holy place is infinitely too pure for him, the Conversation too
refined and spiritual, the Company too noble and excellent to admit so sordid
and corrupt a Member into their Blessed Society. And because such men are every
way apt to turn the Grace of God into wantonness, and to argue from it, that
for short Pleasures he will not exclude them from eternal Joys, and much less
inflict eternal Torments upon them; he has given them fair warning to expect
that he will be true to his Threatenings. Be not deceived (says the Apostle)
neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, shall inherit the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. But still there is a much sadder Doom behind, the
Terror of which is beyond all Conception, Rev. 21.8. where Whoremongers (with
other very bad Company) are sentenced to the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, the fiercest Emblem of Divine Indignation, for ever and ever; and
who can dwell with everlasting Burnings!

Thus I have proved, that the Violation of the Conjugal Union is a great
Wickedness, which was Joseph's Sentiment of it: And the Result of what has
been spoken is, that whosoever indulgeth himself in so vile a Practice,
renounceth the Principles of natural, as well as revealed Religion, and is an
utter Apostate from Virtue and Honor. For, in good earnest, what is he, who to
gratify the Passion of a Goat, deflowers the Image, and despises the
Institutions of his Maker? Defiles his Temple, and cares not what Infamy and
Mischief he brings upon his honest and inoffensive Neighbor? who is guilty of
the foulest Treachery toward him, tempting his Wife out of his Bosom to commit
Lewdness and Perjury, Prove. 2.17.
to break her most sacred Vows, to forsake the Guide of her Youth, and renounce
the Covenant of her God? To be the Plague and Ruin of her Family, to endure the
utmost Hatred and Scorn of Men, and for a few Moments of false Pleasure to be
eternally damned? who is a common Enemy to Mankind, who defies the impartial
Justice of Heaven, and breaks through all the Fences of Modesty, Religion, and
the Fear of Hell, to steal a forbidden Pleasure, and to ravish an infamous and
impure Enjoyment? If this be a Man of Virtue and Honor, it is time to cashier
the Distinctions of good and evil; After this let all Contradictions be
reconciled; let Light be clothed with Sables, and Darkness put on the
Brightness and Serenity of the Day; let there be no more dispute about the
Nature or Merit of Actions, but let all things be just, as every man's Fancy or
Humor paints them. Eccles. 11.9.
Rejoice, O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of
thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes.
But pause a little, and know thou, that for all these things, God will bring
thee into Judgment.

I proceed now to the second General.

II. The use which Joseph made of this Thought upon the rude Assault of his
Master's Wife. By the Impulse of it he immediately dashed the Temptation, and
rescued his Innocence with this pious Answer, How can I do this great
Wickedness? etc. which came very naturally from one that had been blessed with a
virtuous Education, that was brought up in the Fear of God, and descended (as
Joseph was) from the best-ordered and the most religious Family upon Earth;
whose great Ancestor was dignified with the character of the Friend of God, and
of one that would command his Children and his household after him, Genesis 18.19.
that they should keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment. Jacob
also had frequent Intercourse with God, Genesis 37.3.
and Joseph being his Father's Darling, there is no doubt but he took
particular care to adorn and enrich his M^nd with good Principles, as he had
done to cloth him with costly and invidious Raiment. And this was it that
preserved his Innocence, upheld his Integrity, and laid the Foundation of all
his Greatness in Egypt: It was the Fear of God timely and gradually instilled
into him by his religious Parent, which made him inflexible to all Temptations,
even in his boiling Youth, and amidst the most inflaming and importuning
Circumstances. And from hence we gain the following Instructions.

1. That the strongest Temptations to the most flattering and deceitful Vices
are not invincible. There is no Age of the Life of Man so eager of forbidden
Pleasures, or so little acquainted with the Fallacies of them, as Youth. And if
frail Youth, when so highly tempted can refuse to sin, and is able to withstand
the Charms and Allurements of Female Courtship; if a Hebrew Servant can despise
the Flames of an Egyptian Lady, was not caught by her treacherous Wiles, nor
bended by her Commands, neither by her smiling nor imperious Looks; was not
vanquished by her repeated Importunities, nor awed by the Fears of her Revenge,
nor inveigl'd by the hopes of Secrecy, nor softened by the Liberties of Egypt,
nor betrayed by the Frailties of Flesh and Blood; then surely are all the
Forces of Vice resistible, and there is no Danger of any Compulsion to be
wicked. If Joseph refused the most flattering Pleasures, and Moses the Royal
Honors and Delights of the Court of Egypt, choosing rather to suffer Affliction
with the people of God, Heb. 11.25.
than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; No man in the like circumstances
can have any reason to complain that he lies under a necessity of sinning. For
let the man that would fain discharge his sins upon the Fatality of humane
Actions consider with himself, whether he has not the same Faculties which
other men have; the same power of choosing and refusing what is fit and unfit to
be done, of weighing the Arguments on both sides, and determining on that which
best recommends it self to his Reason and Judgment: And what it is that hinders
him from being as stanch and resolute against a wicked Custom or Action, as
those whom the same Arguments which lie before him have prevailed upon, and the
excellent Men of all Ages have ever been. If he thinks that all Mankind are
determined by a rigid and irresistible Fate, to do all the evil that has been
done in the world, let in reconcile his opinion, if he can, to the general
Sense and Experience of Mankind, who are conscious of nothing more than a
Freedom of Choice and Action, and find it natural to chide and accuse
themselves for acting contrary to the Dictates of their own reason, and the
holy Oracles of God; insomuch, that if they had the highest Freedom imaginable,
they could not have greater Assurance of it, than they now have of that degree
of Liberty which is commonly ascribed to them, and every penitent Sinner is an
undeniable Witness and Confessor of. And here I would ask the Fatalist a fair
question or two.

As first, what greater Evidence can there be of a free Agent in any criminal
Case, than his pleading guilty to the Indictments of his own Conscience?
Secondly, What better Argument than this, can he or any other Fatalist bring to
prove the contrary? And then Thirdly, I would only ask him, How he knows
himself to be a necessary Agent, since no other Agents of this kind have any
Knowledge of the Principles they are acted by? And it is certain, they have no
use of any such knowledge, being wholly moved and determined by external Causes
and Objects, or some secret instinct, whose Powers they never dispute, or fail
of their obedience to; and yet as truly serve the end of their Beings, as if
they had all the Perfections of an Angel to dispose them to it.

And the like answer may be given to the Plea of humane Frailty, as it is
frequently urged to lessen the Grace of God, and to magnify the power of
Temptations above the stated Measures and Seize of it; viz. that it
contradicts the experience of all the great Examples of Virtue and Piety, and
the Confessions of penitent and selfconvicted Sinners, who when they are most
sensible of the Frailties of humane Nature, and are themselves some of the
saddest Instances of them, do heartily bewail their easy Compliances, and
score their Miscarriages upon their own Folly and Wickedness. It Is indeed a
common (and in some men's esteem a very plausible) excuse to say, It was ill
done; but what Flesh could withstand such Temptations? The greatest Virtue must
have submitted to them: But how do they know this, that have so little Virtue
as to libel the Grace of God, and the Integrity of all good Men, who have stood
their ground, and maintained their Innocence against the most violent Gusts of
Temptation, and the fiercest Assaults of Hell? The World is not ignorant, that
there have been Persons of eminent Goodness and Integrity in all Ages of it;
Men that have filled the Mouth of Fame with their generous and noble Actions,
that have had the hardness to resist the softest charms and the grimmest
Terrors of Sense, and have encountered all kinds of Temptation with good
Success, while they stood upon the same level, and were subject to like
Passions and Infirmities with our selves. And since we have the same Assurances
of Divine Grace and Assistence which they had, it is impious and infinitely vain
to think of easing our guilty Minds, by throwing off the blame of our
Impurities and Sins upon Fate, or Nature, or the Temptations which are common
to Men, when nothing can make us Sinners but our selves. Infinite power it self
cannot compel us to a Fault; I mean, not only because it is inseparable from
infinite Goodness; but because it is irresistible, and there can be no fault in
yielding to a Force which there can be no possibility of resisting. And this
will justify the Dealings of God with the Despisers of his Grace and Gospel to
all Eternity, that they have chosen their own ruin, and left him no way to
prevent it, but to put up their intolerable Contempt of his Laws and Sanctions,
or break their specific Frame, and destroy the Freedom of their Wills, which
is essential to all true Virtue and Happiness.

II. That it is a mighty advantage toward the leading a virtuous and unspotted
Life, and avoiding the great Gulphs of Vice and Wickedness, to be brought up in
the Fear of God, and to have our Minds (while they are green and tender)
seasoned by a good and pious Education. The Tenor of our Lives generally
depends upon the first Principles that are planted in us, and the Customs we
begin in our Youth and Childhood; If they be good, there is nothing so sure and
powerful to oppose the Decoys and Flatteries of Sin and Vice. And where such
Principles are not timely sown and cherisht, so as to grow into some Strength
and Consistence, and be of some use and service to us in our Youth (while
Temptations to Pleasure and Vanity look fresh and gay, and the Snake hides it
self under the Flower) vicious Inclinations will certainly grow up in their
room, and being more taking and natural to the depraved Soil, will mightily
obstruct the Culture and Improvement of it. And hence you may observe, as much
as the fashion is to Dispute over all the Principles of revealed Religion, no
man questions the Currency of such Maxims as these, That the greatest Errors
both in Faith and Practice are the unhappy Fruits of a careless or vicious
Education; That Youth let loose from the Reins of Discipline runs the wildest
of any thing in the World; That good Instruction and Education are necessary to
govern youthful Passions, to manage wanton and unruly Nature, and keep it in
the way it should go; and that the effects of them are commonly very happy and
durable; as the wise Observator tells us, Prove. 22.6.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not
depart from it. Having drank in the Principles of divine Wisdom, his Eyes are
suddenly enlightened; and being gradually exercised in discerning between good
and evil, he quickly sees through the Disguises of Vice and Folly, and so
easily evades the Delusions of them.

And this was Joseph's Happiness, and a singular Advantage it was to him, when
he came to live in a Family, and to make a figure in a Court, where he had so
much occasion for it. Alas! what would the young man have done, had he been
bred up in the Mode and Fashion of our Age, to dress, and comb, and dance the
round of Luxury and Vanity? To court the Daughters of Canaan; and Revenge the
Rape of Dinah upon the Sisters of Sichem, under the sparkish Pretenses of Love
and Honor? Had he learnt his Lesson from the Stage, or the Schools of
Skepticism and Profaneness, been taught to shrug and smile at the grave
Precepts of Morality, and call every thing silly that is serious, to defy the
Threats of Religion, to bury his Fears in Wine, and then make a mock at sin,
and a Jest at being damned? Had Joseph been thus initiated in the Mysteries of
Iniquity he had certainly flown into the Tempters Arms, Prove. 7.23.
like a Bird (as Solomon speaks in his case) that hastes to the snare, and
knows not that it is for his life. He would surely never have disparaged his
Breeding so much as to stagger at the greatess of the Crime, or allow himself a
moment to think of the fatal consequence; but without Fear or Foresight have
followed his Leader to the Chambers of Death, Prove. 7.27.
in the Paths that go down to Hell.

It Is true, that the choice of our Education lies very little (if at all) in
our own Power: but therefore it infinitely concerns those into whose Arms (by
the Providence of God) we are cast in our Infancy, and on whom we are forced to
lean all the time of our Weakness and Childhood, to principle our Minds with an
early Sense of God and Religion, to supervise our Actions, and rectify our
Errors, and as it were lead us by the hand through the first Stages of Virtue
and Piety, till we are past the mighty Dangers of Youth, and in some measure
able to grapple with the Temptations of Sense, and secure our selves against
the Fallacies and Seductions of the Devil. This, we all know, is the immediate
and indispensable Duty of Parents and Guardians, the neglect of which has
ruined prodigious Numbers of ignorant Souls, yea thousands of the bravest of
our Youth, who might have proved the Strength and Ornaments of our Church and
State, had they begun at the beginning of Wisdom, Prove. 9.10.
been timely trained up in the Fear of God, and carefully taught to approve the
things that are excellent. If therefore you desire to see your Children happy,
live virtuously, and escape the Pollutions which are in the world through Lust;
If you would not leave an accursed Brood behind you, to wast your Estates with
riotous living, and curse you when you are gone, and to your Faces, when they
meet you at God's Tribunal; let your care of them appear, by teaching them
betimes whom they should fear, that when they are attackt by any Temptation,
they may be able (as Joseph did) to reason themselves into a Victory over it;
which leads to the third and last Instruction:

III. That the Fear of God quickened with a present and lively Apprehension of
the great evil of Sin, is a sovereign and effectual Preservative against the
most charming and powerful Allurements to it. It Is the Nature of Fear to lay a
Restraint upon the Mind, while it views the Danger that lies before it: and
since the greatest Danger lies in provoking infinite Justice armed with
infinite Power, the Fear of God who is invested with both, and has threatened
the Sinner with everlasting Destruction, must, while he is under the lively
Impressions of it, deaden all the force of Temptations, and infallibly restrain
him from closing with them. And for this reason it is, that God, who is
infinitely tender of our immortal Souls, Rom 1.18
has revealed his Wrath from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of Men, and kindly threatened Destruction on purpose to preserve
us from it; it being greatly to be feared, that the Promise of Heaven and
everlasting Life would very hardly have made the best Men good, if they had not
been also quickened with the Fears of everlasting Perdition. For it is certain,
that in this guilty and degenerate State we are generally much more afraid of
being miserable, than ambitious to be truly happy. Of which I think there needs
no plainer Demonstration than this, viz. that the Generality of Men, even when
they are grown weary of this World, would be well contented to stay here in a
tolerable condition to Eternity, or when they die to vanish into nothing, only
to be eased of the danger of being everlastingly miserable. Nay, I doubt not
but some good men of the lower Size in Religion, that have but a moderate share
of the Sorrows and Calamities of this Life, would be (were it left to their
choice) almost willing to resign their weak Hopes of Heaven, for such
infallible Securities against the dreadful and eternal Torments of Hell. And
since the fear of endless Misery has taken so deep a root in humane Nature,
were our Minds duly Impregnated and kept awake with the Fear of God, who is
both able to save and destroy, it is morally impossible, but that it must
prevail over all Temptations to incurr his Displeasure, and effectually curb
our wildest and most unruly Inclinations to any Lust or Vanity. And hence is
that excellent saying of the Wife-man, Prove. 28.14. Psalm. 36.1.
Happy is the Man that fears elways, i.e. that has the Fear of God
continually before his Eyes, as a faithful Watch or Sentinel to discover all
Approaches of Danger, and call in the Powers of Reason and Religion to his
Defense against them.

No Motive indeed, though never so powerful in it self, has any force upon us
any longer than we apprehend our Concernment in it; for which Reason an actual
Apprehension of the evil of the Crime to which we are tempted, is absolutely
necessary to restrain us from it, by awakening the Fear of God in our Minds.
And therefore when any Temptation is presented to us, if we look only on the
glossie side of it, and think of nothing but the delicious Pleasure or Profit
the Sin is varnisht or gilded with, and are not aware the mean while, that God
has revealed his Wrath against it, it is evident that what ever we are at other
times, we are not now afraid of offending him; and then his Fear can have no
present effect upon us, and so it is all one in the Issue, as if we never had
any true Reverence for him.

And this was it that made the great Difference between Joseph and David in the
matter we have been treating of. David had an habitual Fear of God, and surely
in as high a Degree as Joseph had: But then there was this Disparity in his
Case, the Fear of God was not before his Eyes when he bathed them in the naked
Beauty of unguarded Bathsheba; he did not, like Joseph, awaken himself into a
vigorous Consideration of the great Wickedness of defiling Vriah's Bed. He
never argued thus to himself, How can I harbor so impure a Thought, and stain
my Royal Purple with so foul and Action, a Sin of a far deeper Dye? Shall I
thus offend? Thus requite the good and mighty God, who changed my homely Crook
into a glorious Scepter, and advanced me (the youngest of Jesse's House) over
all the Sons of rejected Saul, to the highest step of Imperial Honor, next to
himself in Power and Dignity, and from those few sheep I kept in the
Wilderness, has made me Ruler over his beloved Israel? Shall I thus provoke the
Lord to Anger? Am I stronger than he? Had David thus awakened himself into an
holy Awe of God and his Goodness, he had surely beat off the Temptation that so
easily foiled him, been innocent of both his presumptuous Sins, and perfectly
clear in the whole matter of Vriah.

And now, having given you the true Character of Adultery, and the Instructions
left you by the young and pious Example in the Text, I shall close all with a
brief Application to two sorts of Persons.

1. To such as are burdened with the guilt of this heinous Crime: who are to be
admonisht, that a Sin of so vast Malignity requires a very solemn piercing and
unfeigned Repentance; and that the conscious Eye and Impartial Justice of God
are not to be deceived by any Forms or Flashes of a transient and impenitent
Sorrow. Consider then, yours is a crying Sin; To Heaven it cries for Vengeance,
and to you it calls aloud for the deepest Humiliation in Dust and Ashes, the
greatest Contrition of Mind and Spirit, the utmost Satisfaction in your power
to the injured Parties, the freest and most abasing Confessions to Almighty
God, the sincerest Vows and Resolutions of a new and unspotted Life, the
strictest Covenant with your Eyes, the strongest Guard upon all the Avenues of
Lust and Wantonness, and the nicest Care to avoid the very least Pollutions of
the Flesh or Spirit, together with a most passionate endeavor to rescue the
poor Captives that are tied and bound with the Chain of your Sins, and were by
you betrayed into the Snare of the Devil. What Rivers of Tears can wash away so
deep a Stain? What Piercings of Heart and Soul? What Self-Condemnation and
Abhorrence? What lively Applications to the Merits of your Redeemer ought to
accompany your fervent and constant Prayers for the Forgiveness of so great a
Wickedness? A Wickedness so great, that the greatest Purity of Life is little
enough to take off the Blemish of one single Act of it, Psalm. 51.12.
and restore the Joys of that blessed Hope of being meet at last for the
glorious Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And then, into what a wretched
Condition has that man brought himself, that has a long course of Fornications
and Adulteries to answer for, and is still to begin the whole Christian Race?
He had need, I am sure to live the reverse of his Life apace; I mean, to spend
the remainder in continual Acts of Mortification, Devotion, and Preparation for
his dying hour; in unravelling (as far as he is able) all the evil he has done,
and doing all the good, which the Mercy and Patience of God, his short time,
and unhappy Circumstances may have left him opportunity for. It Is certain that
God has pardoned some very great and infamous Sinners; but then they were great
Penitents too. And surely there is nothing more becoming such as have been very
bad themselves, than to attempt some generous and eminent thing toward the
Reformation of a degenerate and adulterous Age; something that may heal the
Honor of Virtue, that may help to appease the Anger of Heaven, and to banish
the Vices which they, their Families, and Country have dearly smarted for; that
the World may be once the better for them before they leave it, and their good
Actions may help to bury the Memory and I fection of their bad.

2. Such as have not defiled themselves with carnal Lusts, and particularly
those that are young and tender of the Honor they owe their Bodies, or are
curious in their Washes and Dresses, and love to appear orient and gay, without
the least Spot of Soil or Impurity, ought to be extremely cautious of all
Approaches to this notoriously shameful and odious Vice. 1 Cor. 6.18.
Other Sins comparatively (as the Apostle speaks) are without the Body; but he
that commits Fornication, sins against his own Body, i.e. he deflowers
the Purity of his excellent Nature, he commits a Rape upon himself, and so
defiles his holy Profession, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
which is to preserve his Body (as a sacred Vessel) in Sanctification and
Honor, and to keep himself unspotted from the World. And then what foolish and
fulsome Hypocrisy were it, to pretend to the minutest Decencies, and profess
the highest Degrees of Nuptial Sanctity, and after all contract the indelible
Stain, and perfidiously embrace such a Dunghill Lust? Take heed therefore of
every impure and guilty Thought, of all unchaste Desires and Complacences,
lascivious Glances and Dalliances, of all Immodesty in Word or Gesture, with
all other Incentives to gratify the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts.
These, besides their proper Guilt and Defilement, are the common Anteludes by
which the sly Tempter seeks to play you into the dreadful Crime: and then by
shunning the Occasions of them you keep out of the road (at least) of vulgar
Danger, in the pure Ethereal way, whither the unclean Spirit never or rarely
presumes to come. But suppose you were surprised by a rude and violent
Temptation (as Joseph or sad Lucretia was) Lusts fiery Darts will not enter
into a chaste and undefiled Breast, where there is nothing gross enough to catch
or feed the Flame. Prove. 4.23.
Keep therefore thy Heart with all Diligence; and if thine Eye chance to be
struck with strange erratick Beauty, call in the mighty powers of Faith and
Reason, arm your self with a Reverence of God's all-seeing eye, Ps. 139.3.
which pierces into all your Paths, and is ever about your Bed; call to mind
your infinite Obligations to him, and look on every Instigation of lustful
Appetite, as a dangerous Approach to the flaming borders of Hell and Ruin,
where the Worm of Conscience dies not, and the Fire of Divine Wrath is not
quenched. Say now to thy self, How can I do so false, so foul an Action, that
have plighted my Faith, and espoused my self by most solemn and religious Vows,
as a chaste Virgin unto Christ, as a Lover of the purest and holiest Jesus? How
can I hope to appear before him amongst those bright and spotless Souls, Matthew.
25.33.
that have escaped the Pollutions that are in the World through Lust? May he
not justly set me with the Goats on his left hand, in the great discriminating
Day, if here I should live like them in turpid and lawless Pleasures? Should I
stoop to this lewd Desire, Whither, oh whither shall I cause my shame to go?
How shall I behold the Face of God or Angels? Is this to purify my self as
they are pure? Shall I then for a moments Pleasure forfeit an immortal Crown,
and incur the eternal Anger of him whom at last I must obey, when he bids me
depart into everlasting Fire? Shall I show less reason in my Conduct, be more
brutish than any Man, and run directly upon the Rock by whose fatal side I have
lately seen the Ruins of so many tall and gallant Vessels, so many brave and
goodly Persons, fearless and undaunted Men, with desperate Numbers of the
smaller Craft, miserably lost and cast away for ever? And for those few
Adventurers that have hardly escapt with Life and Limb, how have I seen them
stalking about the Streets like Ghosts, with Death and strange Remorse in their
Faces? Only more changed from what they were, than Death usually alters a man
from his living Form?

I will say but one thing more; you have Life and Death before you; consider
the various Issues of a wise and foolish Choice, declared by the everlasting
Gospel, which forbids you no innocent Pleasure. Rom 8.13.
If you live after the Flesh, you shall die: but if through the Spirit you
mortify the Deeds of the Body, you shall live, in ravishing and endless Joys,
in eternal Acts of unspotted and Seraphick Love, in the Arms of him that loved
you to the Death, in the Beatific Vision and Fruition of God, and the dearest
Embraces of Virgin Spirits made perfect in Heaven. To which God of his infinite
Mercy guide us through the Snares and Fallacies of this evil World, for the
Merits of his Blessed Son Jesus Christ our Lord.

A SERMON ON THE Christian Warfare.
S. James IV. 7. -- Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.


It Is a peculiar Thought of a late conceited Philosopher, who loved to quarrel
with the best sense of Mankind, that War is founded in Nature; or a Right (as
he calls it) in every man, according to his power, to seize on every Man's
Possessions, till he gives it away by Compact. The plain and naked Meaning of
which Assertion is, That Power and Right are but one and the same thing in
Nature; That all the difference between them arises from positive Laws and
Covenants; That till such Laws and Covenants were made, no man was bound to his
good Behavior to his Neighbor; that to oppress, ravish, and murder, were
once fair and innocent Actions, the harmless Effects of Power, pursuant to that
original Right, which fond Nature gave the stronger to all the Delights and
Possessions of the weaker. But not to follow the Chase of this wild and impious
Hypothesis, we need go no farther than the Text to discover the great
Incendiary of War and Contention, and the first Cause and Author of all
Disorder and Confusion in the World; that is, the Devil, the common and
inveterate Enemy of God, and every Creature that bears his Image. Him therefore
S. James exhorts us to resist; and least we should be daunted at the Fame of
his mighty Conquests, and the vast Destructions he has every where wrought in
the Earth, to support us under this Discouragement, the Divine Herald assures
us, that the Issue of our Conflicts with him will be safe and honorable; that
Victory shall always attend our Arms, and the Flight of our Enemy adorn our
Triumph. Resist the Devil and he will flee from you.

These Words deserve a very serious Consultation with our selves about them;
especially when we first enter into the Christian Warfare, or whenever we are
allarmed by any violent Temptation, or are likely to be engaged in any sharp
encounter with our Spiritual Adversary. No wise Man begins a War without
considering who, and how powerful his Enemy is; what play he is like to have
from him, and what Force he is able to advance against him; at least, if it be
a War (as the Christian is) that will surely hold him in breath till he has
breathed his very last in this world. And this Wisdom our Savior teaches his
Followers, as a common instance of military Prudence, Luke 14.31. For what King
going to make war against another King, sits not down first, and consulteth
whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him that comes against him with
twenty thousand? where we see, the necessary points to be resolved before we
enter into the Field of Action are, What Forces our Enemy is provided with, and
what power we have to make good our Defense against him. And since it is
evident by our Savior's Argument, that the success of our Spiritual Warfare
depends upon the right and timely Resolution of these weighty Questions, and a
competent Understanding of them is apparently necessary to such a Resolution,
to make this Discourse the more clear and practical, I shall distinctly
consider these three Particulars.

I. The Strength of our Enemy, and wherein his great Power to hurt us lies.

II. What Power we have to resist him, or by what means we may effectually
guard and secure our selves against him.

III. What Assurance we have, that the Devil will yield to our Resistance, and
flee from us.

I. The Strength of our Enemy, and wherein his great Power to hurt us lies. The
Fall of the Apostate Angels from Heaven, has (by Divine Permission) filled this
lower World with innumerable envious and malicious Spirits, under one Sovereign
Prince or Leader, whom the Scripture commonly calls the Devil or Satan. This is
that malignant Spirit, who first (of his own wicked Motion) raised Rebellion in
the calm and peaceful Regions of Heaven and Paradise, and has ever since made
it his business to seduce and destroy the Worshippers of God, to draw the World
to his own Altars and Oracles, and to put all the Foundations of the Earth out
of Course. It is not at all improbable, that he beguiled our First Parents by
appearing in the shape of a Seraph or flaming Serpent, Numb. 21.6
in which they had seen the Heavenly Seraphim attending the Divine Majesty,
when God was pleased to shade himself with visible Glory, and condescended to
converse with Man. And though we know not the Devil's particular Station before
his Fall, yet an Angel of some superior Order in the celestial Hierachy we may
certainly conclude he had been, from his ancient Supremacy over the Spirits of
his own Kingdom, and the great and eminent Titles by which he is frequently
distinguistt in Scripture from them; Matthew 9.34.
such as the Prince of the Devils, Joh. 12.31.2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.
the Prince and the God of this World, and the Prince of the Power of the Air;
the latter of which denotes also the place of his Habitation, or the Camp where
his great Armies meet, and receive his Orders to deceive the Nations, and
enlarge his Kingdom over this inferior Orb. But whatever his place, or
whatever his Crime in Heaven was, no sooner was he driven thence into the
Regions of the Air, but like the Firstborn of the Children of Pride and
Malice, he prepares to revenge his Fall upon the Favorite of the new Creation.
And observing Man, the Offspring of Dust and Clay, curiously wrought into a
Creature of surprising Form, dignified with the Image of God, and a Majestic
Awe and Authority over all below him, he presently began to envy and molest his
Happiness, and (which is all the happiness he has reserved to himself) to
conspire and procure his Ruin.

To carry on this design the Devil has vast Legions of desperate Spirits
continually at his Beck and Pleasure; All delighting in the same Employment,
all of them fired with the same Revenge, and involved in the same irreversible
Doom; all immortal and unbodied Spirits, and therefore superior to our frail
humane Nature, which is but Spirit mingled and allayed with Flesh and Blood;
and by the weak Contexture of its unequal Principles, and the affinity of our
Bodies to the Elements of this World, is liable to the Fallacies and
Distractions of sensual Objects, and so the easier to be imposed upon by the
greater Craft and Sagacity of our ghostly Adversaries. For we must yield them
the Pre-eminece in all the powers of Understanding and acting suitably to their
Dispositions and Purposes. And as our Savior tells us, that the Children of
this World are in their Generation wiser than the Children of Light; Luke 16.8.
so the Spirits they are acted by, have doubtless a sharper Insight into the
Nature of things than either of them, a stronger Judgment in the fitness and
choice of Means, greater Quickness and Dexterity in their Applications to them,
together with unwearied Vigor and Diligence, animated by a perfect and
incurable Hatred of God and Goodness: Besides the vast Improvements they have
made by long and successful Practice in all the Arts of Ruin and Seduction.

But besides this veterane Army (in which not one of all the Tribes is missing
since the War began) this mighty Warrior has innumerable other Forces and
Auxiliaries to assault us with. The ill Men and Examples of the World, which
make the far greatest Figure and Party in every Age, are all entire on his
side. Yea, all that is called the Wealth and Glory of this World, the blazing
Honors and Riches of it, its stately Pomp and Pageantry, attended with all the
Charms of Wit, Beauty, Parentage, and Power (the splendid Furniture of Pride
and Luxury) do readily contribute their Service to him, and assist his
Instigations to idolize and worship them. Out of these he weaves his silken
Snares, and forges his golden Chains; with those to entangle the careless and
effeminate, and with these to lead the Worldling Captive at his Will. He also
attempts to beat us off from the Paths of Piety and Virtue, with the Frowns of
this angry and supercilious World: and when he finds us stiff and resolute in
our Course, he commonly sends whole Vollies of Curses and Reproaches after us,
belcht from the Mouths of his impious Children, on purpose to lame and obstruct
our Progress. Nay, what is sadder than all this, he opposes our Salvation with
the choicest Blessings and Assistances we receive from Heaven, 2 Cor. 12.7.
its immediate Inspirations and divinest Gifts; and has a strange Art in
turning the best Means and Overtures of Grace to his own malicious and
destructive Purposes; in making the word of Life a savor of Death, 2 Cor.
2.16. 2 Cor. 4.4.
and blinding the Minds of them that believe not, least the Light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them. And
when with all his Powers of Darkness he cannot extinguish this glorious Light,
he sets up new Lights and apish Revelations against it, to dazzle the minds of
ignorant and unstable Persons, while he winds them into his Interests, and
through a Mist of obscure, and a Maze of wild and intricate Doctrines, leads
them into damnable Errors, 2 Pet. 2.1.
by which (as St. Peter speaks) they bring upon themselves swift Destruction.

I might add, that this subtle Enemy of ours frequently plays upon us from our
own Castles in the Air; our vain Imaginations and foolish Fancies, our high
Conceits of our own Gifts, and Seize, our Ambitious and towering Hopes of
earthly Grandeur and Felicity, with all the enchanting Delights and Gayeties of
an Vtopian Paradise; our vexatious Fears of merely contingent or improbable
Accidents, our groundless Confidence and Security in all the Flatteries of a
sinful course, and (be that never so long or sinful) our fallacious reckoning
on a Deathbed Repentance after it.

The Truth is, the main Strength and Interest of Satan lies in our selves; in
our weak and shallow Judgment of Things, and disorderly Wills and Affections
toward them. Our Understandings are easily misled with the Glare of sensible
Objects; and the Lusts which war in our Members, Jam. 4.1.
against the Dictates of our Reason and Conscience, are a strong Party on the
Enemies side, ready on every Instigation of his to challenge their lawless
Liberties, and to betray our Souls into his merciless hands. And this has been
a growing Accession to the power of Satan ever since the Defection of our first
Parents; he has gained all the ground that we lost by our fall, and has so many
Confederate Lusts in all the weak parts of our Nature, that wherever almost
he chooses to assault us, he is sure to find a well-affected Party within our
selves, to promote his banefull and malicious Designs upon us. To this end he
is very exact in observing our Complexions, Educations, and Customs, out of
which he easily spells our Inclinations, and then applies his Temptations to
our particular Likings and Aversions; and so follows Nature in the way she is
most disposed to wander and prevaricate in. This is a signal Instance of the
fatal Craft and Sagacity of our Enemy, to which I will only add two or three
remarkable Advantages the Devil has to ripen his dark Designs, and accomplish
his wicked and destructive Projects. The first is,

1. The silence of his Attacks, which he usually begins and carries on without
the least Noise or Signal of War, when he is minded to do us the greatest
Mischief. For though his Motions are sometimes rapid and furious, as when he
raises a Storm of Persecution in the Church; yet generally speaking, they are
so very soft and insensible, that without a strict and mighty Care, it is hardly
possible to discern them from the Motions of our own, Luke 9.55.
or (in all cases) from the placid and gentle Breathings of the Divine Spirit.
So that commonly the War is begun before ever we are aware of our Enemy; and
the Devil is busy with us while he is farthest from our Thoughts, and we think
of nothing less than of serving his Designs and Interests; nay it may be, while
we think the contrary, and are verily persuaded we are doing God Service. Acts
26.9. Joh. 16.2.
And thus he at once conceals his Enmity to us, flatters our Infirmities, and
pleases our Fancies, prevents our Vigilance, animates his own Party within us,
sets the Battle in array, and many times steals the Victory, before we have any
Mistrust or Intimation of his tampering with us, or the least warning from him
to put our selves into a Posture of Defense against him.

2. His restless and indefatigable Diligence in laying his Snares, contriving
new Plots and Devices, and improving all Accidents and Advantages to compass
his pernicious Purposes. He is continually going to and fro in the Earth, and
walking up and down in it: Job 1.7.
Traversing all the ways that go down to Hell, or lead up to Heaven, and
beating out untrodden and nearer Paths to ruin, than Man himself (left to his
own happier Ignorance) could possibly have devised to his own Destruction. He
is never weary of ill-doing, he is always moving and coasting about, intruding
into all Places and Companies, listening to every Word, and prying into every
Corner, to spy out opportunities of hatching Mischief. This is his manner of
Life: and in this Posture St. Peter describes him, 1 Pet. 5.8. Your Adversary
the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. No
Place, not Paradise it self; no Person, not the purer Son of God, could escape
him. The Sanctuary is no priviledg'd Place; the Society of our Blessed Savior
on Earth, Mar. 8.33.
no certain Defense to his domestic and best-beloved Disciples; the miraculous
Gift of the Holy Ghost, which cast the Devil out of his miserable Vassals, 2
Cor. 12.7. 1 Cor. 10.13.
could not secure the Enjoyer from his Assaults and Treacheries. His
Temptations are common to Men, even the devoutest Votaries at the Throne of
Grace; nor does the special Presence of God in the place where his Honor
dwells, Job 1.6.
always protect us, from this insolent Intruder into his holy Assemblies. Rev.
12.10.
In short he is so impudent as to accuse the Children of God before him, and
renew his Encounters after the most shameful Baffles; yea, so maliciously bent
upon our Destruction, that he tugs at it Night and Day, sullies our Dreams, and
defiles our Recreations, perplexes our Business, and distracts our Devotions; a
thousand Snares he lays about our Tables and our Beds; neither allowing himself
nor us any rest, till he either despairs of Success, or glories in our ruin.

3. His great Artifice in deceiving us with false Appearances, and raising our
Expectations of delicious Pleasures and Profits from extremely bitter and
losing Practices. He has a wonderful Art in laying beautiful Colors on the
most deformed and pernicious Actions, and hiding the Sting while we taste the
Sweet of his disguised Dainties. This is indeed his sovereign and most
successful Policy, to amuse our Minds with Images of things which are not, and
entertain our Fancies with gay and winning Objects all the way he is leading us
to ruin. By this Decoy he draws off our Attention from the Truth and Reality of
things, and so leaves us to embrace the Shadows, and rue the consequence of our
Folly and Rashness. I will not undertake to determine how far the Devil is
chargeable with the Crimes which he tempts us to; but this I doubt not may be
truly said, That whenever we are strongly tempted to any Action which in cool
thoughts we know to be vile and hateful, and (perhaps) would not do to
purchase the greatest Temporal Good, the Devil by mysterious Craft, and sly
Impressions on our Animal Spirits, raises such fair and charming Ideas of it,
as insensibly alter our opinion of the dreadful Act, gradually subdue out
Aversions to it, and at last (if not prevented by severer Reflections)
assuredly gain our Consent to the Commission of it.

Thus you have seen your Ememy at the head of his mighty Armies, with his
wonderful Train of Artillery about him, posted on the higher ground, superior
to you both in power and policy, tall and terrible as the Anakims, flusht with
Victory, and possessed of many strong Holds and enchanted Castles: full of
Treachery and Malice, close and secret in his Motions, while he pushes on his
Designs with a restless and fatal Diligence, and in a most perfidious and cruel
manner seeks to play you into ruin, to make you the Instruments, and to please
you in the methods of your own Destruction.

After all, our comfort is, that this great and formidable power of the evil
Spirit is ever under the check of a superior and infinite Power, so that it
cannot exert it self farther than God is pleased to permit it; the Bounds of
whose Permissions are discoverable only by his Word and Promises, of which
there may be a fitter occasion to speak hereafter.

And now having viewed the strength, and detected the Dispositions and Motions
of this potent and terrible Enemy, let us turn the Perspective, and consider,

II. What Power we have to resist the Devil, and by what means we may
effectually secure our selves against him. That the Devil is no irresistible
Enemy, is as clear as that we are both commanded and encouraged to resist him.
For to what purpose were it to encounter with invincible Power? Or what hope of
an Enemy's flying from us, that has Victory it self at his Command and
Pleasure? If we must sink under his Power, serve only to glorify his Triumphs,
to furnish him with malicious Joy, and be dragged at his Chariot Wheels, as the
wretched Captives of his Wiles and Fallacies, why should we struggle any
longer, or think to break the Adamantine Chains of our Fate and Misery? In vain
are all good and pious Endeavors toward the recovery of our degenerate Nature
into a state of Virtue and Perfection, if the Enemy of all that is good and
virtuous has an absolute and uncontrollable Power to interrupt and stifle
them. And so all the Motives of the Gospel would be mere Flam and Mockery
without the Promise of an Assistance equal to the Difficulties of our Spiritual
Combats; And had God denied us that Assistance, and for ever abandoned us to
the Malice and Tyranny of evil Spirits, there could have been no room for a
Covenant of Grace; nothing but a fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery
Indignation to devour us. Again, why are we baptized in the Name of Jesus, if
there be none to save us? No escape from the everlasting Chains prepared for
the Devil and his Angels? And how is it possible to love that Being with all my
Heart, and adore him with all my Soul (be his Power and Majesty never so
immense) that should let Hell and Destruction loose upon me, when I have no
more power to resist them, than when I lay in my Swadling-Bands, helpless and
innocent of all actual Crimes? To bring both Extremes of a Contradiction
together, or do that which in the nature of it can never be done, is more than
Infinite Power it self can do; and therefore Infinite Wisdom and Goodness
cannot require it of frail and finite Creatures, especially under an Infinite
Penalty. And since it is plainly impossible to withstand irresistible Power, it
can be no less than an Infinite Absurdity to suppose the Enemy of our Salvation
to be irresistible.

It Is true, there are considerable odds between the powers of the Angelical and
Humane Nature, especially since we are so much shattered by our Fall, and have
lost so much of the Vigor and Bravery of our Primitive Faculties; but this
only proves, that we are no equal Match to our Adversary in single Combat, and
that we stand in need of better Powers than our own to fight our way through
the many Dangers and Difficulties of our Christian Warfare; and this I easily
grant. But then it is certain, that the Christian is, in the Nature of it, a
Confederate War; that Heaven it self espouses our Cause, and that we still
retain those noble and excellent Faculties, which being animated and supported
by Divine Assistance, and duly exercised according to the Christian
Discipline, are at least sufficient to defend us against the utmost Efforts and
Attempts of Hell. This is the true state of the W^r betwixt us and our
invisible Adversary; for the clearer Understanding of which, I shall show these
three things.

I. That to resist the Devil is only to withstand his Temptations.

II. That we are not destitute of sufficient Powers and Assistances (if we are
not wanting to our selves) to withstand the Assaults and Temptations of the
Devil.

III. By what means we may effectually resist them.

I. For the First, To resist the Devil is only to withstand his Temptations,
and oppose his crafty and malicious Endeavors to betray us into Sin and
Misery. He has indeed no other way to assault and hurt our Souls, than by
tempting them to evil; I mean, al long as we are in a state of Trial, and are
not judicially delivered up to his Rage and Fury. And therefore our only way to
resist him, is to foil his Temptations, and take effectual Care that he does
not fasten any of his Fallacies or Delusions upon us. For it is evident, while
we are under the Influence and Conduct of Divine Grace, that the Devil neither
does nor can act immediately upon our Wills, or force us to do his pleasure by
any physical determining Power, whatever he may do with those miserable
Wretches whom God has forsaken, and turned over to this dire Executioner of
his Wrath and Vengeance. He has leave indeed to bring us to our Trial, and the
Decision of the grand Controversy, whether we will choose to be subject to God
or him; but then our very Trial supposes, that we are not liable to any
compulsive or determining Power, during the whole Process of it, but are left
to our Liberty to choose whom we will serve, Josh 24.15.
and which of the two contrary Masters we will love and cleave unto. For it
would be a strange Trial to put men upon Difficulties, that cannot stir the
least Finger to remove them; and when I throw up a Stone into the Air, I might
as well and wisely charge it to lodge it self in the Clouds, and not obey the
Laws of Gravity, or return (as Nature bids it) to the Bosom of its beloved
Center, as suppose God has obliged me to encounter an Enemy, whose Power I am
forced to obey, who drags and determines my Will which way soever he pleases,
and leads me about in Triumph, without the least Ability to resist him, or
dispute his Pleasure.

But more than this, the Temptations of the Devil are as great a Demonstration
as we can desire, that he himself is conscious of his Impotency to force and
constrain our Wills, and that he has no direct and infallible way to deceive
and ruin us. For if he has, why does he use so much Art and Insinuation with
us, which often fail of the end they are used for? Would so malignant an
Adversary go about, as he does, to charm us with tempting Objects, and court us
with a thousand Gauds and Flatteries to a wicked Action, while he has Power
enough in his hand to compel us to it, and knows a much surer and shorter way
to execute his pernicious Designs upon us? If his power was not inferior to
his Malice, an Enemy so utterly divested of all Goodness, would certainly make
us feel the dismal Effects of it without Mercy or Delay, and not put it to our
Choice, or leave it to a Trial of Ingenuity, to comply with him or not. Could
he twine and bend our Wills as he pleases, and elicit what kind of Acts he is
most delighted and gratified with, he would surely never suffer us to refuse
the evil, or to choose the good. However, it is in vain for us to resist the
power that can determine our Wills: and because it is so, and we are expressly
commanded to resist the Devil, we may be sure he has no such power, and then it
can be no part of our Duty to resist it.

The meaning therefore of our Resistance must be, that we resolutely oppose the
Temptations of the Devil: whether they come immediately from himself, or from
any of his inspired Agents or Instruments, whether by way of external
Representation, vocal Suggestion, Matthew. 4.1, 2, etc.
or Argument (with all which he at once accosted our Savior) or by secret
Strokes and internal Impressions upon our Imaginations and Fancies, whereby he
assists the natural Rhetoric of outward Objects, and supplies their Absence by
their Idea's and Pictures. And here he commonly shows the fineness of his Art,
by retaining the Likeness, while he improves the Graces and Deformities of
Things, according to his Design to inflame our Affections, or to raise our
Aversions to them. It Is beyond our Conception what variety of Methods and
Occasions he takes to beguile and supplant our Souls; and particularly what
Advantage he makes of our Animal Spirits for the framing of those little Cupids
and Images, which seem to play without Design in our Fancies, but are often
managed and prepared by him on purpose to entertain our Minds with vain and
idle Speculations, to solicit our corrupt Affections, to distract our purer
Thoughts, and obstruct our most serious and important Endeavors. But though we
cannot pry into all the curious Arts and Mysteries of this invisible Tempter,
or tell exactly how he mixes and lays his Colors upon the Tablet of our
Fancies, yet a careful Observer of the Impressions they make upon his Thoughts
and Passions, may plainly discern the Artist by certain inimitable Strokes and
Lineaments, which distinguish almost all his Pieces, and which no other Genius
than himself can reach: 2 Samuel 14.19.
As David discovered the hand of Joab in the sly and crafty Carriage of his
Familiar of Tekoah.

For instance, whenever we find our Inclinations or Passions rushing against
the Convictions of our Duty, and clashing with the best Principles of our
Reason and Conscience: when we feel something within us prompting us to break a
Divine Commandment, in view of the glittering Vengeance that hangs directly
over the Transgressors of it: when the Byas of our Minds, after it was rightly
set, suddenly turns the quite contrary way: or our Thoughts are roving in the
midst of our Devotions after secular and impertinent Objects, or bewildred in a
Maze of vain and distracting Imaginations: When we hate to think, or have the
Confidence to resist the clearest Evidence of Truth, and are angry with the
Light for detecting our Follies; in these and many other Instances we may
certainly know that we are tempted of the Devil; that now the evil Spirit is
busy with us, and he that betrayeth us is at hand. Of this, I say, we may be
very certain, because such Impulses and Disorders in our Spirits do apparently
promote the Designs of Satan, and can serve no other Interests than his;
because they are every way like him, and carry his very Mark and Image in their
Foreheads, exactly answering the Mein and Character by which the holy Oracles
of God have described him to us. And now is our time and duty to resist him, to
break his Measures, and defeat his Temptations and Charms: to stand upon the
Freedom and Dignity of our Nature, and the Honor of our Christian Profession,
and not yield to any of his Instigations or Flatteries; Ephesians. 4.27.
i.e. not give place to the Devil by complying with them, as St. Paul
interprets St. James's meaning by resisting him.

II. We are not destitute of sufficient Powers and Assistances (if we are not
wanting to our selves) to withstand the Assaults and Temptations of the Devil.
For

1. We have all the Natural Faculties that are requisite to resist Temptations.
We neither want a Power of discerning between good and evil, or of knowing what
we ought to avoid, and what to choose and practice; neither can we pretend that
we have no power to make a right Choice or Refusal; for that were to say we are
no reasonable Creatures, the proper use of Reason being only to direct our
Choice, and to govern our Actions aright in relation to it. And therefore a
wise and good Creator could never make us reasonable, without making us free
Agents; and if we were not so, there would be no occasion for resisting
Temptations, since none but a free Agent is capable of being assaulted by them.
All Temptations are levelled against the right use of our Freedom; and the only
use the Tempter makes of them, is to betray our Wills, and abuse our Liberty by
them; which shows that he cannot fasten any guilt upon us against our Wills,
and that the utmost he can do, is to solicit, excite, and cheat us (if we will
be cheated by tinsel and faithless Promises) into a fatal Compliance with his
Methods of Ruin and Destruction. I say, if we will be cheated, for there is no
Necessity that we should; our Freedom is our own by a natural Right, and the
exercise of it is so essential to our present state of Trial and Probation,
that there is no Fear, if we believe a Providence over us, that our Enemy (were
it in his Power) should be permitted to wrest it from us. All the Fear is of
our selves, lest we should unhappily use our Freedom, and by an awkard and
unnatural Abuse of it enslave our imperial Faculties to sensual and Diabolical
Lusts, and so for ever make our selves miserable by it. We are safe in the
hottest Battles and Encounters of our Spiritual Adversaries, so long as we are
true and faithful to the Rights and Interests of our rational Nature, i.e. so
long as we judge nothing but what is right, and choose nothing but what is
virtuous and good.

Neither can we complain that we have no power to correct the Levity of our
Thoughts and Fancies, or to order and regulate our outward Actions. There is
nothing so free as Thought, or more evident than that the Mind of Man has power
within it self to shift the Scene of its Contemplations, and divert from one
Imagination to another, as often as it pleases. A man may think of Hell when he
is tempted, and of the all-seeing Eye before he ventures upon unchaste Embraces.
And so the Organs of Sense and Motion, the immediate Causes of outward Actions,
are very much in our Power: and by guarding these Inlets of Lust and Vanity, we
certainly avoid the strongest and most dangerous Temptations to Sin and Folly,
help to starve our inbred Coruptions, and cut of all Communication with the
Enemy, that is so much concerned to relieve and cherish them. And these are all
the Natural Faculties which are requisite to defend and secure us against
Temptations.

2. We may be sure of all the supernatural Aids and Assistances, which are
necessary to enable us to make a vigorous and effectual Resistance. For since
we are so much weakened by our Fall, and by indulging our carnal and corrupt
Affections have extremely spoiled the natural Tone and Rectitude of our
Faculties, it is apparent that we are never likely of our selves ( i.e. merely
by our own Strength and Constancy) to stand the mighty Shock of Temptations,
which at every turn of our Lives and Fortunes are ready to assault us: and that
the Grace of God is as necessary to animate and enforce our Endeavors, as our
Resistance is to baffle and overcome the Temptations we are assaulted with.
Now, as in Reason we may hope, that God will not refuse to assist us against
the impious Power and Tyranny of Satan, in Vindication of his undoubted Right
and Title to our Service: so to raise our Confidence in him he has expressly
declared, that his Grace is sufficient for us, yea, to make us more than
Conquerors: 2 Cor. 12:9.
that he will give his holy Spirit to them that ask it, Romans 8.37. Luke 11.13.
1 John 3.8.
and has sent his own Son from Heaven on purpose to destroy the Works of the
Devil. To this end the Captain of our Salvation sent forth his Heralds into
the World, set up his Standard, and displayed his Banners to the Nations,
appointing all that came to him, or that should believe in his Name, to be
listed into one Army, or Church Militant on Earth, under the Conduct of such
Generals and Officers as should receive a Commission from him, Under the Broad
Seal of Heaven [ As my Father has sent me, so send I you, John 20.21.] Then,
to animate his Followers, he entered the Lists with the Prince of Darkness, by
dying vanquished all-conquering Death, and having spoiled Principalities and
Powers, Col. 2.15.
he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them by his glorious
Resurrection.

Now these are the highest Assurances we can have, that God has taken us into
his holy Protection, and that he will not suffer us to be tempted above our
ability: 1 Cor. 10.13.
but will (according to his Promise) when we are beset with any Temptation,
make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it. Which implies, that his
Providence watches over the Motions of our Enemies, that they are disposed to
tempt us above our Strength, and that he has set them their Bounds which they
cannot pass, viz. that Measure of Strength which he is always ready to supply
us with; and then it must be our own fault if we don't make a happy End of this
sharp and tedious War, and follow our glorious Leader into endless Triumphs.
It Is true, that all the Promises of victorious Grace depend upon our earnest
Prayers and Endeavors to acquit our selves like Good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ: But surely, if we may have Grace for Asking, and Victory for Fighting
for it, we cannot desire either upon easier Terms: For now all we Want falls
within the verge of our Power, and if we lose the Victory we know who to thank
for it. The Spirit that is in us is greater (says St. John) than he that is in
the World: 1 John 4.4.
And while we keep him on our side we may Justly Glory in this Happy
Confederacy, by virtue of which we can do all things, that Omnipotency it self,
guided by Infinite Wisdom, can do for us. I come now to show,

3. By what means we may effectually resist the Assaults and Temptations of the
Devil. It was an Infinite Condescension in God to offer us an Alliance by the
Me^iation of his Son, when our Impotency was the mere effect of our Folly and
Enmity to him. And as in this respect we have all imaginable Reason to adore
the Divine Goodness toward us, so it is our apparent Interest and Policy to
embrace the Terms, and observe the Orders our great Patron and Ally has
prescribed to us. And the rather because there is a Mighty Noise and Combustion
in the World, which Serves the Devil under the specious pretense of Resisting
him. There are those that inveigh heartily against him (whose Ill Word he does
not much value) and with Armed Zeal and Orthodoxy lay about them at a wonderful
rate, as if they would drive all the Powers of Darkness before them, (...) apud
Herod. Hist. lib 1. p. 71, 72.
and carry their Conquests to the very Gates of Destruction: Like that foolish
People in Caria, of whom the Historian reports, that to drive away their
strange Gods, they Arm^d themselves, and went up in Battle array to the
Bordering Mountains, beat and stabbed the Air with their Doughty Weapons, and
to Crown so brave an Act of Defiance proclaimed the Banishment of those
Intruding Deities. Ephesians 6.12.
Spiritual Wickednesses are not to be quelled with Martial Force, or with Giddy
and Popular Tumults: They laugh (like the Leviathan in Job) at the shaking of
the Spear, Job 41.^9.
and are never better pleased than to see Men Tilting with Luciferian Pride and
Fierceness at one onothers ^ollies and Opinions, quarrelling with every thing
they Dislike in Others, and mistaking the true seat of War, which certainly is
in every man's Breast, and will find him work enough while there is a Devil to
tempt him, or but one Treacherous and Unmortified Lust within him. And no less
Absurd and Ridiculous is it, to encounter the Devil with senseless and hideous
Forms of Words, Spells, and other Magical Rites: Or to Accost him with such
Wooden Artillery as the Romish Exorcists use, and ascribe a Divine Efficacy to,
I mean their Relics. Incense, Consecrated Salt, Holy Water, Breathings and
Crossings, and what they call the Chrism of Salvation. The true Weapons and
Methods of our Spiritual Conflicts are extremely different from these, and all
Modern Inventions of Superstitious and Fanciful Men: and indeed deserve a much
larger Discourse than the remaining Minutes will allow, which will therefore
oblige me to speak the more briefly of them. The first is

1. A true and lively Faith in all the great Articles of the Christian Doctrine.
Faith is the Principle of all Spiritual Life and Operations, and therefore the
Power of all other Graces is virtually contained in it; the Consequence of
which is, that the Christians Power to resist the Temptations of the Devil is
exactly equal to the Measure and Energy of his Faith. 1 Timothy 6.12.
And hence S. Paul expressly calls the Christian Life the Good Fight of Faith;
and gives the Preeminence to this Grace above all the Weapons of our Spiritual
Warfare, Ephesians. 6.16. Above all take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be
able to quench all the fiery darts of the Wicked. 1 John 5.4.
And This (says St. John) is the victory that overcomes the World, even our
Faith. And a noble Victory it is, beyond any the World it self ever saw, since
it reaches even Him who is called the God of this World: For the World is the
Great Magazine of Temptations, out of which the Devil has all along furnished
himself with the choicest Materials for his Wicked War. Besides, to Overcome
the World, is to Subdue and Mortify our Inordinate Affections to it; and when
they are Dead, the Glories and Vanities of this World will affect us no more
than the Flowers that are strewed upon our Graves, or the sad Pomp and
Solemnities that attend us thither. We shall then have no Lusts to gratify,
being Dead to this World, and living upon the Faith and expectation of a
Better: and then it will be no longer in the Tempter's Power to Gull us with
his Gilded Toys and next-to-nothings: with his Fairie Money, and Fantastic
Braveries, with his Crackling and Blazing Honors, or the Guilty and Griping
Pleasures with which he liberally Rewards his Fools and Properties. Heb. 11.1.
The Evidence of things not seen, which is the Life and Essence of our Faith,
will give us such a Prospect of Celestial Glory and Happiness, as will raise
our Spirits to the Noblest Heights, and darken all the Splendour and Gayety of
this Tempting Life: It will also inspire us with Invincible Fortitude in the
sharpest Fight of Afflictions, Heb. 10.32. Heb. 12.2.
while we look unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, and learn of
him, for the Joy that is set before us, to endure the Crosses, and despise the
Shame and Reproaches of this Angry and Virulent World. So that by Overcoming
the World, i.e. Mortifying our Affections to it by a lively Faith in God and
our Redeemer, we spoil the Tempter's Designs, drive the Enemy out of his Head
Quarters, nail up his Murdering Cannon, and render all his Great Engines of War
utterly useless and unserviceable against us.

2. Frequent Application to God by Devout and Fervent Prayers to preserve us
from the Danger, and assist us in the hour of Temptation. To this Relief we are
directed by our Savior, who taught his Disciples to Pray, that they might not
be led, Luke 11.4.22.40.
and that they might not enter into Temptation: The meaning of which could not
be, that we should beg the Favor of God to be wholly exempted from all
Spiritual Trials, or desire a clear and absolute Discharge from the Christian
War: For that were to Pray against some of the best Means for Implanting,
Exercising and Improving Grace, and against all Occasions of Victory and
Triumph, and to prescribe a new Method and Dispensation to God for the Training
us up to Eternal Life and Glory, contrary to that which his other Children have
been always accustomed to. Our Savior's meaning therefore must be, that
whereas in our present Circumstances we are surrounded with innumerable and
sore Temptations, we should pray to our Heavenly Father to Relieve us, and not
suffer us to be Over power d or to enter too far into the Danger of being
worsted by them. And this is so much our Interest, that were there no shadow of
Duty or Piety in it, one would think a Sensible Man should not need any other
Incentive to it. For is it not an Inestimable Privilege, that my Safety lies in
one that commands all the Powers of Nature, and the Angels of Light and
Darkness, and has promised that nothing shall tempt me above my Power? As it is
impossible any thing should, if I will make his Power mine, which by humble and
fervent Prayer I am sure to do; and since my Prayer can reach him every moment,
shall I wave his Defense, vainly rely on my own Strenth (at which my Enemy
laughs) and venture alone into the Battle amidst all the mighty Darts and Fire
of Hell, and thereby lose an Immortal Soul, and with it a Victory so easy to
be gained, over which there hangs an Eternal Crown? Such Presumption as this is
the highest Provocation to Almighty God to forsake us in our greatest
Extremities, while we carry it as if we would Steal a Victory without him, or
tamely give place to the Devil, rather than be obliged to Him for it.

3. Good Principles of Life and Practice are an admirable Fence and
Preservative against Temptations. These, like the Ballast in the Ship, will
keep the Soul Tight and Steady while the Man is Floating on the Waves, driven
by the Angry Winds, and tossed by the Changes and Accidents of the Fickle and
Tempestuous World. Thus, we see, in all the Whirlings and Revolutions of State,
as well as those of a private Fortune, it is the Man of Principles still, (...)
(as Aristotle calls him) the solid square Man, who has a basis of Integrity on
every side, that bravely Out-rides the Storm, and smiles at the Dangers which
loudly Threaten him. And for those becalming Temptations which lie in Pleasure
and Sensuality, a Man that has settled his course of Life the contrary way,
that steers by Wise and Virtuous Principles, is in very little danger of coming
within the reach of their Allurements and charms. Having found the Pleasantness
of Religion, and tasted the Delights of the World to come, he is prepared
against the Temptations of this: He knows better things than to act against his
Best Judgment, Experience and Interest, than to forego his Innocence, to Ruffle
his peaceful Mind, and forfeit the Love and Favor of God, only to enjoy the
short Pleasures of Sense, which the Meanest Soul in the World could never find
any competent Satisfaction in. And hence it is Remarkable, that Good Men are no
less the Wonders of the World, when through Surprise or Inadvertency they fall
into the Snare of the Devil, than when they nobly withstand the greatest
Temptations, and maintain their Integrity without any visible support besides
it.

4. A Right Understanding of the Wiles and Stratagems of Satan. It Is no unusual
thing with him, since Life and Immortality are brought to Light by the Gospel,
2 Cor. 2.11.
to transform himself into an Angel of Li ht, and play the Devil under the
Prophet's Mantle; to delude poor Ignorant Souls with Counterfeit Miracles and
Prophecies, Corrupt Glosses and Interpretations of Scripture, and wondrous
shows of Sanctity and Self-denial, beyond the line of Mortality, and the utmost
stretch and possibility of Humane Frailty. Too often he betrays Men of Rare and
Lively Phancies into Novel and Fond Conceits, to the apparent and mighty
Prejudice of Truth and Piety, and the ensnaring of some of the most Passionate
Lovers of the Beauties of Holiness. By varnishing Old exploded Errors with New
Phrases and Fallacies, he recommends them for New and Choice Discoveries of
Gospel Truths: And when he is most intent on disturbing the Peace and Harmony
of the Church, he commonly adds some Immunities and Favors of his Own to the
Royal Charter of Christian Liberty; for the Currency of which he Inspires his
Ministers with Invincible Assurance, and with Unfortunate Arts of Insinuation
and Eloquence.

With these and other specious Devices does the Devil play upon the Ignorance
of many that warmly profess the Gospel, and under color of Resisting him and
his Doctrines engage them against the Life and Power of Godliness. It concerns
us therefore to be acquainted with his Methods, and to Match his Policies, by
furnishing our selves with the Wisdom which is from above, of which the Holy
Scriptures are a most Rich and Invaluable Treasury. By the Light of this Sacred
Lamp we may both discover the Tremendous Depths of Satan, and the certain way
to Countermine and Defeat them. Here we have a safe and ample Prospect of all
the chief Battles that were fought for several thousand years, between the
Greatest Worthies and Champions of former Ages, and this All-defying Enemy of
theirs, together with the Good and III Conduct, and the various Successes and
Occurrences on either side. Here we read of the famous Trial of Skill in the
Land of Vz; Job 1.11, 12. Numb. 26.65.
of the Prodigious Slaughter of a False-hearted Army in the Wilderness, without
a visible Enemy; of many Noble and Heroic Actions of Patriarchs, Prophets and
Apostles, and other Excellent Men, not without some deplorable Mixtures of
sinful Failings, purposely written for our Admonition. Interwoven with these
Relations we every where meet with the Wiles and Stratagems, the Windings and
Fallacies of the old Serpent: the diligent Observation of which, added to the
skill we have purchased by dear Experience, or at easy Rates may be gained by
the Follies and Misadventures of others, will be so much Spiritual Armor, and
ward off many deadly and surprising Strokes from our ever-waking and intriguing
Enemy. For what is easier, when we see the Train, than to avoid the Blow? In
vain (says Solomon) is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird. Prove. 1.17.


5. Vigilance and Sobriety are also necessary to defeat the Policies and
Delusions of Satan. If we have not a Presence of Mind to discern an approaching
Danger, if we sleep over our opportunities of resisting, 1 Samuel 26.12, 15.
like King Saul and his careless General, in useless Armor while their
Bolsters were decked and guarded with glittering Weapons, it is no wonder if our
watchful Adversary invade us when we least expect him; deride our Sloth and
Folly, and steal away the Arms that should defend us from him. The Devil is as
subtle and circumspect as he is malicious, and doubtless gets a great deal more
by surprising us, than by all his fair Battles and formal Encounters with us.
He cares not much to assault us when he sees we are prepared for him: and were
it not to keep his hand in, or that he hopes to tire us out with watching and
observing his Motions, with sending so often to Heaven, and waiting so long (as
becomes us) for Relief against him, he would surely never trouble us with so
many frivolous and forlorn Temptations, as he frequently does. It concerns us
therefore (as we are often warned) to be very cautious of our wakefull Enemy,
to watch lest we enter into Temptation, Matthew. 26.41. 1 Pet. 5.8. Luck 21.34.
and to be sober that we may be vigilant; to take heed lest our Hearts be
over-charg'd with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
so the evil day, and the evil Spirit, come upon us unawares. For, alas! what
Resistance are we like to make, while we stagger with Wine? While our our
Spirits are dissolved in Luxury and Pleasure, our Hands bound with Multiplicity
of Business, and our Hearts disquieted and broken with the vexatious Pursuits
and Distractions of this present evil World?

6. Lastly, Industry and Faithfulness in our Callings are great Securities
against the Baits and Temptations of the Devil. The wise and good Providence of
God has so happily ordered our Affairs in this World, that there is really
more satisfaction and pleasantness in an active and virtuous course than was
ever found in all the envied State of the most splendidly idle and unprofitable
Life. And methinks this Argument alone should be enough to convince an
observing Atheist, that Infinite Wisdom sits at the Stern of the World; since
he cannot but perceive that the least honorable and most toilsome Employments
(which are most necessary to the welfare of Mankind) are delicious Sport and
Recreation to the patient Labourer, in comparison of the Fatigue of having
nothing to do, and the tiresome Vanity of wasting time for want of skill or
business to employ it. And hence it is, that Men that are diligent and
faithful in their Callings do generally meet with fewer Temptations, and find
more Strength and Spirit to resist them, than those that are foften'd with Ease
and Idleness, and have so much time upon their hands that they are willing to
afford it at the cheapest rate, and take even the Wages of Sin, rather than
work out their own Salvation. Phil. 2.12.
A Man that lives upon his honest Labor and Industry has something else to do
than to sport and drink away his time, or to fool it away in dressing, gaming,
and other lurching and prodigal Expenses; and therefore when the Devil comes to
tempt him to these and the like sharping and extravagant Courses, he easily
detects his Fallacies and resists his Charms. He finds his Diligence brings him
Riches and Honors, and that his faithful Dealing keeps his Mind always serene
and cheerful; he feels himself satisfied in his virtuous and conscientious
way, and knows that Vice and the Devil are Cheats, but that God and Goodness
will plentifully reward all them that diligently seek them. It remains, in the
third and last place, to show

III. What Assurance we have that the Devil will yield to our Resistance, and
flee from us. By his flying is surely meant his withdrawing his great
Temptations, and leaving us to enjoy the Victories we have fairly won by our
vigorous and undaunted Resistance of him. Every Repulse we give him drives him
to a greater distance from us, and makes him more wary for the future how he
repeats his Error, and meddles any more with those that are clad in Armor of
Light, and to his peril he has found too strong and well-appointed for him. So
that if every way we guard our selves against him, if we mortify our
Bosom-Lusts, clear our Hearts of the Love of this World, and fortify every
weak Grace and good Inclination in us, we shall soon be eased of our Adversary,
and by degrees advance to that secure and impregnable State St. John speaks of,
as the peculiar Privilege and Happiness of eminent and victorious Christians
(whom he describes by their high and divine Extraction) 1 John 5.18. Whosoever
is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one touches him not. And,
(...)

A DISCOURSE Showing the CONSISTENCY OF God's Infinite Goodness With His
FOREKNOWLEDGE Of the FALL of MAN.

By NATHANAEL WHALEY, A.M. Rector of Broughton in Northamptonshire.

LONDON, Printed by J. H. for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. School.

TO THE READER.
THE Minutes of this Discourse were formerly sent to a Person of good Quality,
who was pleased to desire my Thoughts upon the Question, How the Infinite
Goodness of God was consistent with his Foreknowledge of the Fall of Man? I was
well assured this Desire did not proceed from an ill Tincture of Mind, from a
Skeptical Levity, or any other Principle but what became a very serious and
prudent Inquirer; accordingly I applied my self to one of that Character; and
am now encouraged by the Success of that Essay, to publish this little Tract;
which, I heartily wish, may be useful also to another sort of Inquirers, I
mean those who in their own Defense are forced to question every thing in
Religion, be it never so clear, if it does not shine upon their ill-chosen and
fallacious Interests.

N. W.

Q. How is the Infinite Goodness of God consistent with his Foreknowledge of
the Fall of Man?
THere are two things evidently Implied in this Case:

1. The Infinite Goodness of God: which duly considered will effectually
scatter all our Melancholy Thoughts, and Misgiving Apprehensions of his
Arbitrary Dealings with us. For if God is Infinitely Good in himself, he must
be naturally disposed to be Kind and Beneficent to his Creatures: and therefore
he could not make them with a Design to make them Miserable, either in respect
of their Original Frame, or for want of due Conduct toward the Good and Happy
ends for which by his Sovereign Pleasure they were at first Created.

2. His Foreknowledge of the Thoughts and Free Actions of Men, which is the
Highest and most Perfect Degree of Knowledge. It is a far less Perfection to
Know what is Past, or Present, or Dependent upon Necessary Causes, than merely
by the Force of Thought to Foresee the Motions of Voluntary Agents, and
Infallibly Discover which way they will Determine themselves. This is the
wonderful Prerogative of the Divine Understanding, which being Infinite (as
the Psalmist styles it) must be extended to all the Objects of Knowledge, Ps.
147.5.
and therefore to the Free and Future Actions of Men: For, that they are within
the sphere of Omniscience, the Actual Completion of many Eminent Prophesies in
Scripture is a plain Demonstration, and such as the Eagle-eyed Socinian could
never bear the Dazzling Evidence of, but Flutters and is forced to show his
Dizziness and Blindness, as often as it is Objected to him. And surely nothing
can derogate more from the Wisdom of our Creator, than to say of him, that he
knew not what he was doing when he made Man (the Masterpiece of the visible
Creation:) Or that he did not see the End of his Work, when he Inspired him
with Reason and Freedom; as certainly he did not, if he did not foresee his
Fall, and Discover what Use he would make of his Faculties, till his Creature
disclosed it to him.

But it is not my present Business to clear the Doctrine of Prescience, but
supposing God's Foreknowledge of the Fall of Man, to show the Consistency of it
with his Infinite Goodness, which I shall endeavor to do by the Evidence of
the Following Propositions.

Prop. 1. That the most Perfect and Comprehensive Thought or Notion we can have
of God, is that he is a Being Infinite in all Kinds of Perfection, such as
Existence, Power, Knowledge, Wisdom, Goodness, Holiness, Justice, etc. each of
which, to the utmost Possibility of Perfection, is no less Essential to the
Divine Nature, than the Faculty of Reasoning is to the Humane: So that whenever
we speak of God, we are supposed to speak of that Glorious Being that has all
Transcendent Excellencies in himself. And hence it follows,

1. That the Attributes or Perfections of God are very agreeable and consistent
one with another: or that there is a mutual Concent and Harmony between them,
without the least Jar or Contrariety to obstruct their happy Union in the same
individual and ever blessed Nature.

2. Since all Perfections are united in the divine Nature, and essential to it,
they must be also inseparable one from another: so that God must be infinitely
good and just at the same time that he is infinitely wise, powerful, and holy,
i.e. all his Perfections must be co-existent, seeing they all Center in one and
the same unchangeable Nature. And hence we may be sure that God never devests
himself of one Attribute, when ever he chooses to glorify another, how
inconsistent soever they may seem to our weak and inadequate Apprehensions of
them. And therefore

3. We must expect no act of Goodness from God, but what is consistent with
infinite Knowledge, Wisdom, Justice, and Holiness: nor need we fear any
Severity or Punishment from him, but what a good, a holy and righteous God can
inflict upon us.

4. Hence it follows, that no seeming Contrariety between the Perfections of
God, or any of his Actions and Dealings with his Creatures, is any real
Argument against the Consistency of them. For instance, it may seem to some
very serious Persons to reflect upon the Goodness of God, at the same time to
foresee the Sin of Man, and to put him into a condition in which he might sin
and be miserable, which (they will say) might have been prevented by staying
his creating hand. But how hard soever it may be for a finite Understanding to
account for it; this no reasonable Objection against the Goodness of our Maker;
it being no less certain that God is good, than that Man is created and fallen,
or that there is such a glorious Being as God in the World; for, if such an one
there is, he is infinitely perfect, and then he must be infinitely good, and
was so when he made the World, and will be so to eternal Ages, being the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever. This is as bright a Truth as any is within the
whole Circle of Science. There is no foundation of Certainty, if there is no
God; and there can be none that is not perfectly good.

Let us therefore hold to this Principle, that God is Infinite in Goodness, and
Knowledge, and all other Perfections, and the consequence will be, that his
creating Man after he had foreseen his Fall, is no reasonable Objection against
his Goodness, or any of his glorious Attributes; because it is impossible for a
Being that has all possible Perfection in himself, to act beneath the Dignity
of his Nature, or to injure his Creatures by doing any thing which they might
justly to Eternity accuse him of.

This, I confess, does not ease us of the difficulty of apprehending, how it
consists with the Goodness of God to make a Creature, who (he knew) would sin
and be miseralbe: But then the greater that Difficulty is, the more clearly it
shows the Weakness and Incompetency of our Understandings to censure and sit in
Judgment upon the Actions of God; and that it becomes us to content our selves
with what we certainly do or may know and believe concerning him and his
Attributes. Who art thou, Romans 9.20, 21.
O man, that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that
formed it, Why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter power over the Clay?
Romans 11.33.
Oh the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

Prop. II. Though God is infinitely good in himself, we must not expect that he
should make his Creatures perfectly good and happy. For, as absolute Perfection
is essential to the Notion of God, so is Dependence and Imperfection to the
Notion of a Creature: which proves that there are Degrees of Perfection which
are not communicable to Creatures; and for those which are, all we can expect
from a good Creator is, that he should communicate such competent Degrees of
Goodness to every Creature, as are agreeable to their several Natures and
Capacities, and conducive to wise and excellent ends, i.e. that every thing
should be made good in its Kind, and in Proportion to the good end of its
Creation. And this Rule (as Moses tells us) was exactly observed to the least
Mite or Insect. Genesis 1.31. And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold
it was very good: Which could not have been said of every Creature, if there
was any Defect in the Creation of Men or Angels, who are the Top and Glory of
the Creation. And if they were made very good in the unerring Judgment of God,
tho we may fancy still that they might have been made better, we cannot accuse
the Goodness of God for making them as they were made, both because he judges
infinitely better than we do, and because to be made very good implies no less,
than that God advanced them at first to a very happy Condition, and gave them
all that was needful to secure and improve their Happiness; and more than this
we have Reason to think was not suitable to his infinite Wisdom; and since God
is as wise as he is good, all we can promise our selves is, that he will do all
the good that can be wisely done, but no more.

The Sum of this is, that absolute and perfect Goodness being essential to
God, we must not look for it in the Creatures, whose Natures are incapable of
it: and that relative or creating Goodness, is and must be commensurate to the
Nature of Creatures, and the good ends for which they were created. And then,
if God gave Man an excellent Nature, and endued him with all the Perfections of
Mind and Body that were requisite to his temporal and eternal Happiness, it is
evident that he has done all that became a good and bountiful Creator to do
for him.

Now let us put the matter upon this Issue: all that was requisite to the
present or future Happiness of Man was provided to his hand, when God made him
a reasonable, innocent and immortal Being, and gave him power to secure and
enlarge his Happiness by acting according to the Dictates of his Reason, and
persevering in his Innocence and Obedience to his Maker. Was not this an Act of
adoreable Goodness? And did it not deserve the highest Returns of Duty and
Gratitude to the Author of it? But where was then the Error in Man's Creation?
Was it that it brought him into a State of Subjection to his Maker? But this is
essential to every Creature; and by this Argument there ought to have been no
Creation at all. Or was it, that Man being made a free and reasonable Being,
might possibly abuse the Goodness of his Maker, transgress his Commandments,
and so make himself miserable, when nothing but himself could do it. It Is true,
this was the primitive State both of Angels and Men: but the question is, where
is the fault of it, when both the one and the other were made faultless and
happy, and might have continued so (had they pleased) for ever? If there was no
fault in the Creature, there could be none in the Creator: and then it will be
hard to find one any where else.

But still some Men cannot bring their Minds to apprehend, but that it must
needs argue a Defect in creating Goodness, to make a Creature of the most
curious Form, and the noblest Endowments of Mind and Spirit, that can act below
the Dignity of its excellent Nature, and by sinning make it self miserable. But
I would fain know what rational Ground these Men have for so transcendent a
Conceit as this. Would they be more than Angels, or any Creature they can
possibly frame an Idea of? And because God is unchangeably good and happy, will
they charge his Goodness for not making them equal to him? They don't use to
question the Goodness of God for making so vast a difference as he has done
between the several Orders of Creatures, for not giving every Plant the
Fragrancy of a Rose, or every Flower the Beauty of a Tulip, or every Beast the
Courage and Majesty of a Lion; or for making the Earth and all the Furniture of
this inferior World for the Service of Men. And far less Reason they have to
tax him for creating Man for his own reasonable and peculiar Service, which is
the highest Freedom and Glory of a Creature; or for not setting him above the
Angels of Heaven, as he must have done, if he had created him in a fixed and
unchangeable State of Happiness. And why should they imagine that God cannot,
without reproaching his Goodness, make a reasonable Creature subject to Change
and Vanity, to Sin and Misery, when they see a World of such Creatures before
them? Do they really think that God created the World only to disparage his
Goodness, and expose the best of his Creatures to Misery? Does every free and
reasonable Being reproach the creating Goodness of God? If it does not, there
could be no Fault in creating it, though it might sin and be miserable; if it
does, then in Honor and Equity God ought not to have made one reasonable
Creature or free Agent: and then he could not have made one happy Creature,
since none but reasonable Creatures are capable of true and proper Happiness.
And what is the consequence of all this, but that God ought to have made no
World at all? For if Honor and Equity would not suffer him to furnish a World
with reasonable Creatures, who might abuse their Reason and be miserable:
Honor, Wisdom, and Goodness would not suffer him to make a World without them,
since such a World would not be worthy of its Creator, having no Creature in it
that could relish his Goodness, celebrate his Praise, partake of any of his
Moral Perfections, or receive any true Happiness from him; and better none,
than such a dull, useless, and insignicant World as this.

Prop. III. That nothing could better become the Goodness and all other
Perfections of God, than to make a Creature after his own Image, because this
is the highest Manifestation of creating Goodness. The Image of God is the most
absolute Pattern of Being and Excellency; and therefore to make a Creature
after his Image, is to make the most absolute and excellent Creature: and to do
this is most agreeable to the Divine Perfections; and then nothing can be more
unreasonable than to suppose any Discord amongst them in the Accomplishment of
it. When God therefore said, Let us make Man in our Image, Genesis 1.26.
after our Likeness, it is plain that this was done with the Approbation of all
his Attributes; and that there was nothing tostruct his making Man a reasonable
and free Agent, and endowing him with divine and virtuous Principles, because
this was to make him after the Image of his Maker. Now a reasonable Creature
having Freedom of Choice, may choose well or ill; for though he cannot choose
Evil for its own sake, because there is nothing in the Nature of Evil to
recommend it to him: yet when it is varnisht with a show of Pleasure or
Advantage, that is, when it puts on a Vizzor or Appearance of good (which all
evil may do, except apparent and immediate Destruction) it may be unhappily
mistaken, and so chosen for it. It Is certain there was no natural Propensity to
evil in the original Constitution of Men or Angels: but still where there is a
Liberty of choice, there is and must be a Possibility of choosing Wrong; for he
only is free that chooses the good or evil which he had power not to have
chosen: if he could not refuse either, he cannot be said to act upon Choice,
but Necessity. And indeed the very Notion of Moral Evil implies a choosing or
voluntary Agent, there being no other way for sin to enter into the World, but
by being chosen, i.e. by the Act of some voluntary Agent which might choose
amiss; and so a voluntary Agent implies a Possibility of sinning. Man therefore
might sin, though he was made very good, or, as it became his Creator to make
him, a free and reasonable Being, after his own Image and Likeness.

But here the Question may be asked; Might not God have given Man a reasonable
Soul without a Liberty of Choice? and so prevented the Entrance of Sin into the
World? I answer, it is hard to say what God cannot do merely with respect to his
infinite Power, since by that he can do all things that do not imply a
Contradiction in the Nature of them. But then it is utterly unaccountable, that
a wise, a good, and a just God should make a Creature only to understand what
is fit and right to be done, and not give him a power to choose what is good and
right. For what use is there of Reason, but to teach us what we should choose?
And what advantage is it to know this, if we can make no use of our Knowledge,
as certainly we cannot, if we have no Faculty to choose what we discern to be
good and excellent? What were we the better for knowing there is a God and a
Heaven, if we could not love and choose them for our Happiness? It Is not the
Knowledge of any Excellency that can make us happy, without a Disposition to
enjoy it; and what we are disposed to enjoy we love, desire, and choose to have
a Propriety in; and then a Creature that cannot choose at all, cannot be happy:
and then, I am sure, he cannot be made after the Image of God.

Are not Moral Goodness and Virtue absolutely necessary to make a reasonable
Creature happy? And does not Morality in the Nature of it imply a free as well
as a reasonable Agent? Do not the greatest Pleasures in the World, in the
Judgment of the wisest and best Men, flow from this Reflection, that they have
chosen the better part, and preferred the pleasing of God, the Honor of their
Nature, and the Peace of their Consciences, before the Charms and
Gratifications of Sense, when they might have chosen and enjoyed them? Now, if
the great use of Reason be to guide our Choice, and if Liberty of Choice be
necessary to the Happiness of a reasonable Being, it is a plain Contradiction
to the Wisdom and Goodness of God, (how fecible soever it may be to his Power)
to suppose him to make a reasonable Creature without a Liberty of Choice.

Again, A Being that has no Freedom to dispose of its own Actions, cannot
deserve well or ill, or be accountable to God for any thing it does, or does
not do. and then were the World made up of such Creatures, there could be no
such thing as Religion in it, no room for Virtue or Vice, for Rewards or
Punishments, or any occasion for a just or governing Providence; Man would be
no better than an intellectual Machine, or a curious Piece of Clock-work,
which, how true soever its Motions are, makes no Returns of Praise or Gratitude
to the Author of it. And what a wild supposition is this, that to introduce a
reasonable Creature in the room of Angels and Men, excludes almost all the
glorious Attributes of God, from having any thing to do in the Creation and
Government of the rational World? But to come to the greatest difficulty in the
case before us.

Prop. IV. God's Foreknowledge of the Fall of Man cannot blemish his Goodness
in creating him. It has been already proved, that God who is infinitely good
might make a reasonable Creature and a free Agent: and that it highly became
him to do this, because this was to make a Creature after his own Image, and
that is the highest Instance of creating Goodness; and one would think, this
was enough to clear at once the Goodness and every other Perfection of God,
from the least Defect or Error in the Creation of Man. But still some Persons
are troubled to think that God should entrust Man with a Liberty of Choice,
when he was infallibly certain beforehand that he would abuse it; and this they
apprehend to be inconsistent with perfect Goodness. But what Reason have they
to think so? And what is their meaning by this Objection? Is it to blemish the
History of Man's Creation, or to clear the Goodness of God by denying his
Prescience? Do they mean to prove, that God did not create Men or Angels, and
then leave them to their own Choice, to stand or fall, to be happy or
miserable? This they may be sure he did not, if it was inconsistent with his
Goodness: and if it was not, why are they troubled to think that he did do it?
Or would they prove that God did not foresee the consequence of creating a free
Agent? Let them first answer all the Arguments, Affirmations, and Predictions
in Scripture, which plainly prove that the free Thoughts and Actions of Men lie
open and naked to the Prescience of God; and then let them consider what they
gain by excluding his Prescience. Does it at all mend the matter to say, that
God made innumerable Creatures that would sin and be miserable, but knew it not
till it was too late to prevent it? or can they seriously allow themselves to
think, that he laid the Foundations of the Earth, and created Man upon it
before ever he was master of his Design, or was sure whether it would turn to
account or not? How could he make a Covenant with Abraham and his Seed for
ever, Genesis 18.18, 19
and distinguish them from all the Families of the Earth, if he did not foresee
that his Children would keep the way of the Lord; or that there would always be
a Generation of Men in the World of the same Stamp and Integrity, that would
prefer the Worship and Service of the true God before the Pleasures of Sense,
and signalize their Faith (as Abraham did) by the Freedom and Ingenuity of
their Obedience to him? Let them. I say, impartially weigh the Consequences on
both sides, and they will clearly see that they bear as hard upon the Wisdom of
God, by denying his Prescience, as they fear they should do upon his Goodness,
by asserting it.

Now to ease them of this Fear; that God's Foreknowledge of the Fall of Man was
no blemish to his creating Goodness, will, I doubt not, sufficiently appear, if
they heartily consider these three things.

1. That his Prescience had not the least Influence upon their Fall or
Disobedience to him. Our first Parents might have lived and been eternally
happy upon the Stock of their original Virtues and Endowments, and the Divine
Favor reflected upon them, had they used them as they ought; and if they had
done so, God had never foreseen their Sin or Misery. Neither did they sin
because he foresaw they would, but merely because they would sin: and therefore
they would have sinned, whether he had foreseen what they would do or not; and
so their Fall could not in any respect be imputed to his Knowledge of it, no
more than the Death of those eighteen Persons upon whom the Tower in Siloam
fell, Luke 13.4.
was imputable to the Eye that beheld the Falling of that fatal Tower. Now if
the Prescience of God had no Influence upon the Apostasy of his Creatures, his
Goodness in creating them in a happy State could be never the less for his
Knowing that they would abuse it.

2. That his Foreknowledge of their Fall did not hinder him from using the most
proper and likely means to prevent it. When God made Man upright, he gave him
power to stand and and persevere in his Innocence, and to secure, improve, and
immortalize his Glory and Happiness; and when he had done this, he gave him a
loud and timely warning of the great danger of Failing in his Obedience to him,
telling him that in the day of his Transgression he should surely die. Genesis
2.17.
And is not this a fair Representation of the Goodness of God in the utmost
degree that became a wise, a holy, and a faithful Creator? Does not this
plainly demonstrate, that the making Man a free Agent was no Contrivance of his
Creators to draw him into Sin or Misery? And that his Prescience was so far
from serving any such end, that it took the most natural and proper course to
prevent it; admonisht him of his imminent Danger, and foretold his dying day to
be the same with that of his eating the forbidden Fruit? Which certainly God
had never done, after he had put him into a way to live for ever, if either he
had not foreseen his Danger, or was willing to connive at his Death and Misery.
But more than this,

3. God's Foreknowledge of Man's Abuse of his Goodness was no real
Disparagement to it, because it was in his power to turn that Abuse to an
excellent end, and to take occasion by our Fall to manifest the Glory of his
Attributes in a far higher degree than was possible merely by his act of
Creation. It Is the glorious Prerogative of God to bring good out of evil, which
must have been concealed for ever, if he had never suffered evil to have entered
into the World. The Glories of the Divine Wisdom, Love, and Goodness in the
Redemption of Mankind; the Glories of God's Patience, Mercy, and Justice
toward the different Ranks and Degrees of Sinners, do all depend upon his
Permission of the Sins and Follies of Men, and applying suitable Remedies to
them, and had never appeared upon the Theater of this World, if it had not been
for the tragical Miscarriages of our first Parents. The fall of Man was indeed
a vast Unhappiness in it self: but then it opened wonderful Scenes of happy
and surprising Providence, 1 Pet. 1.12
which the Angels of Heaven desire to look into, and will be the Delight and
Admiration of all good Men to Eternity. Above all, the Incarnation of the Son
of God (for which there would have been no occasion in a State of Innocence)
was a prodigious Demonstration of his unparallelled Love and Favor to the
lapsed Race of Mankind, a strangely proper and most powerful means to
reconcile the World unto himself, to promote Holiness in several Instances, and
Virtue in several Kinds, which could never have grown in Paradise, and to
advance the humane Nature far above the State and Dignity from which the first
Adam fell. For the Union of the humane Nature with the Divine is not only an
Argument of the sincerest Love and good Will to Men, but a most efficacious and
transcendent Principle of the highest Perfection and Happiness that the Nature
of Man is capable of. It is certain, the Recovery of Mankind required another
kind of Dispensation than what was suitable to a State of Innocence; and surely
God would never have manifested himself in the Flesh, or discovered such
infinite Treasures of Grace and Wisdom in the Gospel of his Son, but to exalt
the Nature he took upon him to a more eminent Height, to enlarge our
Capacities, and to make us Partakers of the Divine Nature, in a new and
extraordinary Measure, that (as the Apostle speaks) we might be filled with all
the Fullness of God. Ephesians. 3.19.


Now, if the Fall of Man was an occasion of greater Manifestations of the Glory
of God, and his Love to Mankind, than were possible in a State of Innocence, it
certainly can be no Reproach to his Goodness, when he had foreseen, that he did
not prevent his Fall. For what Reason is there, that the foreseen Unhappiness
of a Creature, which is purely owing to himself, should confine the infinite
Goodness and Wisdom of his Maker, who can as easily bring good out of evil, as
a Creature out of nothing? Was the immense Bounty of God exhausted by his act
of Creation? or can his infinite Wisdom find no other ways of expressing his
Goodness? Cannot he that made us after his own Image, create us anew after the
Image of his Son, without breaking and dissolving our Frame? Or can we think
that when God foresaw our Fall, he was not aware of the opportunities it gave
him of magnifying his Grace and Goodness, his Wisdom, Patience, Holiness,
Veracity, and Justice, in contriving and carrying on the stupendous Work of our
Redemption? Nay who doubts but the Saints in Heaven are advanced to more
eminent Degrees of Glory by the Merits of their Redeemer, than they could have
been by the Merits of their own Righteousness, in case our first Parents had
never fallen? In a word, God can serve his own wise and gracious ends by the
Sins of Men, without contributing to them; and since he can, and has taken care
to raise us by our Fall to higher Capacities and Seize in Virtue and
Happiness, than we enjoyed or could have reached in our former Station; it is I
think a very plain and evident Truth, that God's Foreknowledge of our Fall was
no blemish to his creating Goodness: or that his Goodness was consistent with
his Prescience, as well as with all his other Perfections.

And now, I hope, I have said enough to satisfy any candid inquisitive Person,

1. That there was no Defect or Blemish in the Creation of Man, or in his being
made a reasonable and free Agent, since he was created in a State of Innocence
and Pleasure, and wanted nothing to crown and complete his Happiness, but what
depended on himself, the right use of his own Reason and Freedom, whithout
which it was impossible for him, or any other Being to be happy. Thus it became
God to make him, and thus through his good Pleasure he was created: so that,
after all the Ruins of Humane Nature, Man's original Frame still stands as a
glorious Monument of his Creator's Goodness, and will do so to Eternity.

2. That the Fall of our first Parents from this good Estate was not owing to
God's Foreknowledge of it, or any Act or Influence of his, or to any want of
Power or Warning they might justly have expected from him. And since their Fall
can in no Respect be imputed to him, we may be fully assured that his Goodness
is not in the least degree disparaged by his Prescience or Permission of it.
For is not he infinitely good to me, who puts it into my power to be happy, if
I please, for ever? And lest I should neglect my own Happiness, kindly warns me
of the Danger and dismal Consequence of it; though after he has done all that
became him to prevent it, he should not think fit to control my Will, when he
sees me bent upon my own Destruction?

3. That we have abundant Reason to praise and adore the Goodness of God, who
at first created us after his own Image, in all the happy and delicious
Circumstances, we could desire for our selves; and when we had wasted our
original Stock of Happiness, was pleased to open the mighty Treasures of his
Grace, and to give us new and surprising Demonstrations of his Infinite Love
and Favor; by which we are infallibly sure, that his Permission of our Fall
was grounded upon great and admirable Reasons; and that God did not envy or
neglect our Happiness, or want any Kindness for us that became the Creator and
Preserver of Men.

And here I should conclude, were it not for one Objection which is apt to
stick with some Persons, whose Satisfaction is chiefly designed in this Paper:
and that is this;

Seeing God is essentially good, might it not be expected that he should have
overruled the Will of Man, when he saw him warping from his Obedience to him,
and so prevented all the Sin and Misery, in which he has involved himself and
his unhappy Posterity?

This Objection I might fairly wave, having already said enough to furnish an
Answer to it, and the rather because it does not lie against the Goodness of
the Creation (the Vindication of which is my proper Task) but against the
Goodness of Providence, and indeed against the whole economy of it. For if God
ought to have prevented the first Commission of Sin, because he is essentially
good, for the same Reason he ought not to suffer Sin to continue in the World,
having ever had the same power to hinder the Progress, which he had at first to
prevent the Entrance of Sin into the World. On the other hand, if God, who is
essentially good, was not obliged to hinder the first Transgression, as I have
formerly proved, neither is he obliged (farther than may serve the ends of his
Providence) to put a stop to the Progress of Sin and Wickedness.

But to speak more directly to the Objection it self; there is no doubt but the
Will of Man is subject to the sovereign Will of God; otherwise God must have
made a Creature that he was not able to govern, which is utterly inconsistent
with the natural Notions of an infinitely wise Creator and Governnour. But
therefore the proper question is, whether it becomes so wise a Creator and
Governor to overruled the Will of his Creatures, after he has put them upon an
easy Trial of Obedience to him, at least in the same act on which the grand
Issue of the Trial depends? or, since God had given our first Parents a Liberty
of Choice, whether it was suitable to his infinite Wisdom to hinder them by his
irresistible Power from choosing and eating the forbidden Fruit? Now the
Resolution of this question is not hard, if we consider,

1. That God being infinitely wise, could not possibly lose an opportunity to
do that, which was most agreeable to his infinite Wisdom and Goodness: and
therefore since he did not hinder our Fall, when he did not want power to do
it, the Event undeniably proves that he did not esteem it fit or prudential to
interpose his irresistible power, and by it to save us from the Guilt and
Misery which he saw us drawing upon our selves. There is nothing surer than
that God, who looks through all the Natures, and comprehends all the Reasons of
Things, has always some wise and unanswerable Reasons for every thing he does,
or does not do, or permits the doing of by others in the World; and then I am
sure nothing can be more reasonable than for us to acquiesce in all his
Permissions, as well as in all the Disposals of his Providence, and not think
our selves wise enough to mend the Wisdom and Rectitude of them. A wise and
good Man wants no Argument to convince him that any thing is wise or just, so
far as infinite Wisdom is concerned in the Doing or Permission of it.

2. That the great Beauty and Wisdom of Providence, and the most natural and
equitable Rule of Government consists in governing the several Orders of
Beings, according to their respective Natures; and then to rule a free Agent by
mere Force and Compulsion, to give Man a Liberty of Choice, and not permit the
exercise of it, must needs derogate from the Wisdom and Beauty of his
Providence: because this is to govern his Creature contrary to the Nature he
himself had given him, i.e. contrary to the natural and most equitable Rule of
Government. For why were we made free, if our Creator did not intend to leave
us to our Choice? Is any Man the better for being forced to do a good Action,
or violently restrained from a bad? A forced Obedience can never deserve a
Reward, or improve the least habit of Virtue or Goodness in us; both which
depend upon the free and ingenuous Motions of the Will, exerting its own
Liberty, and following the Light of Reason and Revelation, which is the true
and only Perfection of it. Now, if a forced Obedience could be no real
Advantage to us, then it could not be expected from the Goodness of God that he
should have overruled the Will, and suppressed the noblest Principle he had
planted in the Mind of Man, only to extort a thankless Obedience from him. But
you will say, might not this have prevented his Fall? I answer, Man had
certainly sinned, if he had not freely performed that easy and reasonable
Obedience his Maker required of him: and if he had, there would have been no
occasion of God's overruling his Will; and therefore there can be no Reason to
object against his not doing of it. But suppose at last, that God had done
this, and that Man had been under a Necessity of being innocent, (or rather of
not sinning) there could then have been no such thing as true Virtue and
Obedience in the best Estate that ever the World was in; which is such a
character of the Paradisiacal State, and the Wisdom of the Divine Government,
as can never be reconciled to the essential Properties of either.

3. Lastly, It is a palpable Contradiction to the Divine Perfections to
suppose, that the Goodness of God should oblige him to act contrary to the
Rules of his Wisdom; or that God should abridge our first Parents of the
Liberty of tasting the forbidden Fruit, upon the Penalty of Death, on purpose
to prove their Obedience to him, and while they stood upon their Trial, render
it utterly useless by his own Act, i.e. by determining their Wills contrary to
the Freedom and Inclination of them.

To Conclude.
There is one Meditation which methinks should be sufficient of its self to
revive the Spirits, and dispell the Doubts and Fears of all disconsolate
Christians, concerning the Creation of Men and Angels, and the Carriage of the
Divine Providence toward them; viz. that there is an innumerable Company of
blessed Angels and Saints in Heaven continually adoring the glorious
Constellation of Divine Attributes, admiring and celebrating, in joyful Hymns
and Anthems, the indissoluble Union and harmonious Consistency of them; while
we short-sighted Mortals, dwelling in a dark and pensive Vale, under the Clouds
of Melancholy and Ignorance, are apt to fancy an unnatural War and Incongruity
between them, and vainly disquiet and perplex our selves about them. In Heaven
we know there is and must be a right and perfect Understanding between all the
blessed Inhabitants of that holy Place; and that there (as one that had been
there tells us) we shall know as we are known; 1 Cor. 13.12.
and the mean while we may comfort our selves with this, that the excellent
Spirits above do all find their Happiness in God's infinite Goodness to them,
and are able to answer all Objections that we, or any of his Creatures, are
able to frame against it.

FINIS.
Some Books printed for B. Aylmer.
THirty Nine Sermons upon the Fifth Chapter of St. Matthew; being part of
Christ's Sermon on the Mount. By Anthony Horneck, D. D. late Preacher at the
Savoy. To which is prefixed his Life, writ by the Bishop of Bath and Wells: In
two Vol. in 8vo.

The Council of Trent no Free Assembly: more fully discovered by a Collection
of Letters and Papers of the learned Dr. Vargas, and other great Ministers, who
assisted at the said Synod in considerable Posts. Published from the Original
Manuscripts in Spanish, which were procured by the Right Honorable Sir William
Trumball's Grandfather, Envoy at Brussels in the Reign of King James the
First. With an Introductory Discourse concerning Councils, showing how they
were brought under Bondage to the Pope. By Michael Geddes, L. L. D. and
Chancellor of the Cathedral Church of Sarum. In 8 vo.

A brief State of the Socinian Controversy, concerning a Trinity in Unity. By
Jsaac Barrow, D. D. late Master of Trinity College in Cambridge. In 24 's.
Price two Pence stitcht.


