A COPY OF THE PETITION OF THE DIVINES OF THE ASSEMBLY, Delivered to both
HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, July 19, 1643.

TOGETHER, With the Houses ANSWER to the said PETITION.

This is Entered according to Order,

Henery Walley.



August 4th LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Christopher Meredith, at the Sign of
the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XLIII.

A Copy of the PETITION OF THE DIVINES of the Assembly, Delivered to both
Houses of PARLIAMENT, July 19, 1943.
To the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
The humble Petition of diverse Ministers of Christ, in the name of themselves,
and of sundry others,
THat your Petitioners upon serious consideration and deep sense of Gods heavy
wrath lying on us, and hanging over our heads and the whole Nation, and
manifested particularly by the two late sad, and unexpected defeates of our
Forces in the North, and in the West, do apprehend it to be our duty as
Watchmen for the good of the Church and Kingdom, to present to your religious
and prudent consideration these ensuing Requests, in the Name of Jesus Christ,
Your Lord and ours.

First, That you would be pleased to command a Public and extraordinary day of
Humiliation, this week, throughout the Cities of London, Westminster, the
suburbs of both, and places adjacent within the weekly Bills of Mortality,
that every one may bitterly bewail his own sins, and cry mightily unto GOD
for Christ his sake, to remove his wrath, and to heal the Land, with professed
and renewed resolutions of more full performance of the late Covenant for the
amendment of our ways.

Secondly, That you would vouchsafe instantly to take it into your more serious
consideration, how you may most speedily set up CHRIST more gloriously in all
his Ordinances within this Kingdom, and reform all things amiss throughout
the Land, wherein God is more specially and more immediately dishonored: Among
which we humbly lay before you these particulars.

1. That the brutish ignorance and palpable darkness possessing the greatest
part of the people in all places of the Kingdom, whereby they are utterly
unfit to wait upon God in any holy duty (to the great dishonor of the
Gospel, and the everlasting endangering of their poor souls) may be
remedied, by a speedy and strict charge to all Ministers constantly to
Catechize all the youth, and ignorant people, (they being commanded to be
subject to it) and all sorts to be present at it, and information to be given
of all persons who shall withstand or neglect it.

2. That the grievous and heinous pollution of the Lords Supper, by those that
are grossly ignorant, and notoriously profane, may be henceforth with all
Christian care and due circumspection prevented.

3. That the bold venting of corrupt Doctrines, directly contrary to the sacred
Law of God, and religious humiliation for sin, which open a wide door to all
Libertinisme and disobedience to God and man, may be speedily suppressed every
where, and that in such manner as may give hope that the Church may be no more
infected with them.

4. That the Profanation of any part of the Lords Day, and the days of
solemn Fasting, by buying, selling, working, sporting, traveling or
neglecting of Gods Ordinances, may be remedied by appointing special Officers
in every place for the due execution of all good Laws and Ordinances against
the same.

5. That there may be a through and speedy proceeding against blind guides and
scandalous Ministers, by whose wickedness people either lack or loath the
Ordinances of the Lord, and thousands of souls perish, and the removeall of
the Arc from among us, is (to the trembling of our hearts) evidently
threatened. And that your Wisdoms would find out some way to admit into the
Ministry such godly and hopeful men as have prepared themselves and are
willing thereunto, without which there will suddenly be such a scarcity of able
and faithful Ministers, that it will be to little purpose to cast out such as
are unable, idle or scandalous.

6. That the Laws may be quickened against Swearing and Drunkenness, with
which the Land is filled and defiled, and under which it mourns.

7. That some severe course be taken against Fornication, Adultery and Incest,
which do greatly abound, especially of late by reason of impunity.

8. That all monuments of Idolatry and Superstition, but more especially the
whole body and practice of Popery may be totally abolished.

9. That Justice may be executed on all Delinquents, according to your solemn
and religious Vow and Protestation to that purpose.

10. That all possible means may be used for the speedy relief and release of
our miserable and extremely distressed Brethren, who are prisoners in Oxford,
York, and elsewhere, whose heavy sufferings cry loud in the ears of our God;
and it would lie very heavy upon the Kingdom, should they miscarry, suffering
as they do for the cause of God.

That so God, who is now by the Sword avenging the quarrel of his Covenant,
beholding your integrity and zeal, may turn from the fierceness of his
wrath, hear our prayers, go forth with our Armies, perfect the work of
Reformation, forgive our sins, and settle Truth and Peace throughout the
Kingdom.

And the Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

THis Petition being read in both Houses, Answer was returned to the Divines
that presented it to this effect; That the Petition was very well approved,
that both Houses had agreed to have a Public Fast in all the places mentioned
in the Petition, on the Friday then next following, being July ^1. (which
accordingly was very solemnly performed by both Houses of Parliament and the
Assembly all together, as well as by the Cities,) and that they would take the
other particulars into speedy consideration.

FINIS.

