ENGLANDS ILIADS IN A NVT-SHELL.

OR, A brief Chronology of the Battails, Sieges, Conflicts, and other most
remarkable passages from the beginning of this Rebellion, to the 25. of March,
1645.

CICERO. Incerti sunt exitus pugnarum, Marsque est communis, qui saepe
spoliantem, jam and exultantem evertit, and perculit ab abjecto.

OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1645.

THE PREFACE.
Readers,
YOu have here presented to your view a Little-great Book; Little, in respect
of its bulk; but Great in its Contents: Wherein the sad effects of a Triennial
Rebellion are epitomized with candor and impartiality. Herein whoever
considers the number of persons slain, the destruction of Houses and Families,
the desolation of Cities and Towns, the increase of Widows and Orphans, may
easily determine, whether Jupiter or Mars, whether the white Angel or the
black, whether Jehova or Abaddon, gave beginning to this pretended Parliament:
and whether has had the greater influence on their actions, who (being
inspired by a fatal Genius) have plotted to bring this late flourishing*
Kingdom to utter ruin. In a word, if the representment of the crying guilt of
blood may work any remorse of conscience in the Rebellious, or the evidence of
a good cause infuse any encouragement into His Majesty's loyal Subjects, it is
the utmost aim this labor looks to, and may happily be a means of the
continuance of this Work, till such time as Almighty God in his goodness shall
please to set a period to this Rebellion, by rewarding it with its due Guerdon;
by restoring Religion to its genuine purity, freed from Sectaries and
profaneness; by re-establishing the King in his just rights and prerogatives;
by re-inforcing the known Laws of the Land, freed from Fellow Subjects Tyranny
and Arbitration; and by re-estating the Subject in his ancient Liberties, freed
from Rapine and Plunder. Which that we may quickly see, let it be the subject
of every good Christians Prayer.

May 20. 1645.
Memorable Occurrences since the beginning of this Rebellion.
Anno Dom. 1641.
IN December 1641. The House of Commons published a Remonstrance of the State of
the Kingdom, therein setting forth all the errors of his Majesty's Government,
a mere design to alienate the affection of his Subjects from him.

The tenth of January following, his Majesty with the Queen, Prince, and Duke
of York, left White Hall, and went to Hampton Court to avoid the danger of
those frequent tumults then hazarding the safety of his royal person.

February the 23. the Queens Majesty took shipping at Dover, having been driven
before from White Hall by the frequent tumults of the Rebels, And soon after
his Majesty went to Newmarket and from thence to York, where (after the rebels
had Guards for 3 months before) the Gentry of the country raised a Guard for
his Majesty's person.

Anno Dom. 1642.
MAY the 20. it was voted by both Houses, That the King intended to levy war
against the Parliament: which they did on purpose to excuse themselves for
raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, as appeared within few days after.

July the second the Kings ship called the Providence, landed in the Creek of
Kenningham near Hull, till which time his Majesty had not a Barrel of powder,
nor any Arms, or Ammunition whatsoever.

July the 12 the pretended two Houses Voted, That the Earl of Essex should be
General of their Army, and that they would live and die with him.

August the first, the Earl of Essex caused all the men then raised (being in
number about 10000) to be committed to Officers, and divided into Regiments,
which men had been raising ever since the 12 of July 1642. at which time he was
made General of the Rebels.

August the 6. the Earl of Bedford having fruitlessely besieged the Lord
Marquess of Hertford in Sherburn Castle for 4 days before, retreated to
Yevell; the Noble Marquess sallied after him, and with a small number fell on
that great body of the Rebels, killed above 140 whereof 9 Commanders, took
diverse prisoners and routed the rest; so as he marched away, and after divided
his small Forces, going himself into Wales, and Sir Ralph (now Lord) Hopton
into Cornwall, of both which there followed so good an effect.

August the 22. His Majesty set up his Standard Royal at Nottingham, for
raising of Forces to suppress the Rebels then marching against him.

September 23. Prince RVPERT with about 11 Troops of Horse gave a great
overthrow to the Rebels, in Wikefield near Worcester, where Colonel Sands
that commanded in chief, received his mortal wound, Major Douglas (a Scot) and
diverse other Captains and Officers slain and drowned, Captain Wingate a
Member of the House of Commons, with four Coronets taken, and two more torn in
pieces. This body of the Rebels was observed to be the flower of their Cavalrie.

October the 23 was that signal great battle fought between Keynton and
Edgehill by his Majesty's Army, and that of the Rebels led by the Earl of
Essex: wherein the Rebels lost above 70 Colors of Coronets and Ensigns, and
his Majesty but only 16 Ensigns and not one Coronet. The exact number that
were slain on both sides in this Battle is not known: But it is certain
that the Rebels lost above three for one. Men of eminence of his Majesty's
Forces, who were slain in the battle were, the two Noble and valiant Lords,
Robert Earl of Lindsey Lord High Chamberlain of England, and George Lord D.
Aubigney brother to the Duke of Richmond, and Lenox, Sir Edmund Verney, Knight
Marshall to His Majesty, with some other worthy Gentlemen, and Soldiers, but
besides these three named here was not one Nobleman or Knight killed, which
was an extraordinary mercy of Almighty God, considering what a glorious sight
of Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Barons, Knights and Gentlemen
of all Orders, were not only present but engaged themselves against the Rebels
as much or more then Common Soldiers, which they most cheerfully did by
example of his sacred MAJESTY, whose Royal undaunted Courage put life into
every man, exposing His Sacred Person to so much danger as all good men do
tremble to remember; His Royal Sons (the two young Princes) CHARLES Prince
of Wales, and JAMES Duke of York, being also in the field in very much danger,
if God whose cause it was) had not covered their heads in the day of battle.
The Rebels as they had few men of quality to lose, so those they had, were
sensible of their guilt, which then they expressed by their flight, some
sculking into holes and Saw-pits, and others running out before they were well
in the field. They lost of note the Lord Saint John, eldest son to the Earl
of Bulling brook, Sir Charles Essex, with many inferior Officers.

October the 27 His Majesty to complete his victory in Keynton field, drew his
whole Army before Banbury; but after the firing of one piece of Ordnance, the
Rebels submitted to His Majesty's mercy (which were in number about 800 foot
(of the Earl of Peterboroughs, and Lord Says Regiments) with 10 Colors, and a
Troop of Horse) and yielded the Town and Castle to the King: at which time the
Earl of Essex with his shattered Force, were crept over the river Aven into
Warwick (full 8 miles backward from the place where they were beaten) there to
secure those few he had left under the protection of the strong situate Town
and Castle, leaving behind him above 20 wagons loaded with powder and other
Ammunition.

November the 12 His Majesty after 48 hours fight forced the Town of
Brainford, where Lieutenant Colonel Quarles that commanded in chief was
slain, and at least 400 more of the Rebels killed and drowned, as many taken
prisoners, with little loss to his Majesty's part, these thus taken and
killed, were observed to be the best foot soldiers the Rebels had.

November the 13 (being Sunday) certain of the Rebels had come down the Thames
from Kingston, with 13 pieces of Ordnance, which (so soon as they could see)
they fired against Sion house, and His Majesty's Train of Artillery; but did
little or no harm. Whereupon Order was presently given for drawing down some
Pieces into the Meadow and to the River side against them; which was
accordingly done: and likewise a Demy-Canon planted near the South-end of the
Town. All which were so judiciously plied, that they shot through their Boats
and Barges, and at last fired the Powder in one of them, which blew up diverse
of the Rebels: Those Rebels which escaped took them to their heels, leaving
behind them their mangled Boats and Barges, with all their Ordnance, and the
remainder of their Ammunition, on which His Majesty presently seized, and
afterward made an honorable and safe retreat to the City of Oxford.

December the 5. His Majesty's Forces under the command of Lieutenant General
Wilmot, having his own Regiment of Horse, with the Lord Grandisons, and Lord
Digbies, and Sir William Pennimans, and Colonel Blagues Regiments of Foot, and
Col: Ushers, and Colonel Grayes of Dragoones, took the Town of Marlborough,
defended by Robert Ramsey (a Scot) and about 500 Foots Ramsey and diverse of the
chief rebels brought prisoners to Oxford; all their Arms taken, and four
Colors.

On the same 5 day, the Earl of Newcastle laid siege to Tadcaster, where at
that time was all the strength of the rebels in Yorkshire (excepting Hull) and
by several assaults on the Town (from 10 of the clock in the morning, till 7
at night) killed Captain Lyster, and about 60 more of the rebels, who found
such hot service that they stole away in the night to Cawood and Selby, leaving
Tadcaster fortified for His Majesty's service.

January the 19. A great victory was obtained by the Lord Hopton, near Bodmin,
in the County of Cornwall, where was slain in the pursuit 200 of the Rebels,
and 700 taken prisoners (amongst whom was Sir Shilston Colmadee) and 8 Colors;
good store of Ammunition, and 5 excellent Brass Guns, and one of Iron.

January the 22. the Lord Hopton assaulted Saltash, forced the Town, where he
took 10 pieces of Ordnance, 700 more prisoners, 4000 Arms, and a ship with 16
pieces of Ordnance.

January the 27. certain of the rebels under the command of Master John
Hampden, to the number of 1800 foot, and 7 or 8 Troops of horse, with two
pieces of Ordnance, came before Brill, and made an assault upon it: But were so
bravely repulsed by his Majesty's forces there, under the command of Sir
Gilbert Gerard (the then Governor thereof) that they made all possible have
away; his Majesty's horse having the pursuit of them, for above 4 miles, about
80 of them being found dead, and betwixt 40 or 50 men wounded, which they had
left together in a private house.

February the first, Lieutenant General King, and Lieutenant General Goring
coming from Newcastle with a great Convoy, of much Arms and Ammunition: and
being faced at Yarum, with 400 foot, 3 Troops of Horse, and 2 pieces of
Ordnance of the Rebels, fell upon them, slew many, took the rest of the Foot,
and most of the Horse prisoners, with their Ordnance and Baggage.

February 2. Cyrencester, (or Cicester) in Gloucestershire was taken by his
Highness Prince Rupert, with the loss of less then 20 men of his Army, there
being above 300 of the Rebels stain, and near 1200 taken prisoners. Of Colors
taken, one Coroner, two of Dragoons, and fourteen foot Ensigns, together with
all their Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

February 13 the QVEENS Majesty left the Hague, and went to Sciveling. And on
the 16 day Her Majesty embarked again in the Princess Royal of Great
Britain. And on the Sunday after came within sight of Flamborough-head.

February the 20, She cast Anchor in the Harbor of Burlington bay. And the 22
day following (upon sight of 1000 of his Excellency the Earl of Newcastles
Horse) landed at Burlington Key.

February the 24 in the morning four Ships and a Pinnace, in the Rebels
service, (which came over night into the Road) made above 100 great shot at the
houses in the Key, for two hours, shooting Crosse-barre-shot, and bullets of
12 pound weight, all of them aiming so near as they could, at the house where
the Queen lay. Insomuch that her sacred Majesty was forced to make what have
she could out of Her Bed, and to get under an hill to save Her life from the
fury of those bloody Rebels, who endeavored to murder Her. But God Almighty
preserved Her Majesty both by Sea and Land.

March the 18 and 19 was a great battle on Hoptonheath in Staffordshire,
wherein Gell and Brereton (two cowardly Rebels) were routed by his Majesty's
forces under the command of the Right Honorable Spencer then Earl of
Northampton, inwhich fight, above 300 of the Rebels were taken and killed; at
the least 200 more wounded; above 300 of their horse taken, 4 pieces of Canon,
and a case of Drakes, with some Ammunition, here was the most noble and valiant
Earl of Northampton unfortunately slain, with C. Middleton and some few others
on his Majesty's side.

March the 23. Grantham was taken in, by some of His Majesty's Forces under the
Command of Colonel Charles Cavendish: wherein were taken 360 prisoners, with
all the Captains and Officers, three foot Ensigns, 2 Cornets, together with 3
loads of Arms and Ammunition. And afterward the works demolished.

Anno Dom. 1643.
APril the third Prince Rupert entered, and possessed that seditious Town of
Burmingham, wherein was 300 foot, and two Troops of Horse, who being gallantly
charged by the Welch-men, in less then half an hour forsook their
Breast-workes, and retired to their Barricadoes within the Town, wherein they
found such slender defense, that they took them to their heels, and that so
fast, that though they were pursued as scone as the Prince had possessed the
Town, yet few of their Horse were overtaken, only about 80 of the rebels were
killed, and as many prisoners taken; together with about 150 Muskets, and
betwixt 4 and 500 swords, and 3 Colors; In this service the noble Earl of
Denbigh received a wound, whereof he afterward died.

April the 11 there was a fight near unto Ancaster in the County of Lincoln,
betwixt the Kings Forces under the command of Colonel Cavendish, and the
rebels of that County, under young Hotham (their then General) in which fight
the most part of the rebels were slain, and taken prisoners, their General
put to flight, and their whole Body totally routed.

On the 21 day (being Friday) the Close at Lichfield (after three wekees siege,
and the loss of some men) was yielded upto Prince Rupert, together with the
Ordnance, and Ammunition, all sorts of Arms (except the Horse-mens Arms, and
a certain number of Muskets) and all such Treasure which had been formerly
conveyed in thither and did not properly belong to the Soldiers there. These
soldiers were part of those Forces under the command of the late Lord Brook (a
great Leader in this Rebellion, and a malicious enemy to the Church) who was
killed in his assaulting this Church by a shot into the eye, on Saint Chads day
who was the first Bishop of this See, in memory of whom this Cathedral was
built, and called Saint Chads Church.

The last day of April his Excellency the Earl of Newcastles Forces,
encountered with, and totally routed a whole Body of the rebels (consisting of
above 3000 men) which were going to relieve the Town of Leedes, killed 150 of
them in the place, took 240 prisoners, 3 pieces or Ordnance, together with all
their victual and Ammunition.

May the 6 James Earl of Northampton (the true heir of his Fathers Loyalty
and valor) encountered with a Body of the Rebels in Middleton Cheny
Town-field, near Banbury (consisting of about 700 foot, and 5 Troops of Horse)
where he wholly routed their Foot, killed 217 upon the plain, took above 300
prisoners, all their Ordnance and Ammunition, 416 Muskets, 150 Piques, and
above 500 swords, pursued the fugitive horse, and killed, and took many of
them: the rest made what have they could to Northampton. In this fight his
Lordship lost but three men, and those not of any note: Nor had above one
Officer so much as hurt.

Upon the 16 of May the Lord Hopton assaulted the great rebellious Body then
entrenched near Stratton on the Borders of Devonshire, fought with them full
ten hours, and having spent his Ammunition, insomuch that he had not powder
left to serve one hour longer, fell upon the rebels with Swords, Piques, and
Musket stocks: And (with unexpressible valor) wholly routed the rebels Army,
killed many hundreds of them in the place; wounded many more; took 1700
prisoners, whereof above 30 Commanders, all their Canon, being 11 Pieces of
Brass Ordnance, and 4 of Iron; 2 Mortar pieces; 75 Barrels of Powder, with
Shot and March proportionable, betwixt 2 and 3000 Arms; and 3000l in money;
there being not above 46 of the Kings Forces killed and hurt, and amongst those
not any one Commander or Gentleman of Quality.

May the 23. The Queen was most traitorously voted a Traitor, for her love so
exemplarily expressed to the King her husband.

May the 30. Master Robert Yeomans and Master George Boucher, two Citizens of
Bristoll, were there publicly murdered by Colonel Nathaniel Fines for their
loyalty to His Majesty.

June the 18 1643. His Highness Prince Rupert beat up the Quarters of the
rebels at Postcombe and Chinner in Oxfordshire, killed some 50 of the rebels
there Quartered, took about 120 prisoners, almost all their Horses and Arms,
and three of Sir Samuel Lukes Dragoon-Cornets: obtained a great victory in
Chalgrove field, and utterly defeated the rebels horsemen and Dragooners, slew
diverse of their Commanders, especially Colonel John Hampden (one of the five
Members accused of high Treason) who in this fight received his mortal wound,
in this very Chalgrove field, where he first mustered, and drew up men in Arms
to put in execution the rebellious Ordinance for the Militia.

On Friday the last of June: His Excellency the Earl of Newcastle obtained a
great victory against the Northern rebels under the Lord Fairfax upon Aderton
heath, within the County of York. In which fight my Lord soon put the rebels
into such confusion, that they could not be reduced again into any Order;
until he had gained all their 5 pieces of Canon; which he presently turned
against them; the sight whereof did so terrify them, that they made what have
they could toward Leedes. But finding that his Excellencies horse had
intercepted that passage; their last shift was to recover Bradford, which was
done in such a disorderly manner, that his Excellency in the pursuit of them
killed and took above 2000, whereof above 1500 prisoners. As for their General
Fairfax, he with much ado made shift with one poor Troop of horse to get (at
night) into Leedes, leaving the rest to the mercy of the Victor.

July the 1. The Earl of Essex being with his Army at Tame in Oxfordshire,
sent Colonel Middleton with 500 horse and Dragoones to Padbury to way-lay
Prince Rupert and his Forces from returning from Buckingham to Oxford, while
Essex with his Army fell on the Prince, but Sir Charles Lucas by his Scouts
discovered the rebels design, and accordingly met them with three Troops of
his own Regiment, wherewith he routed all Middletons 400 horse and dragoons,
pursued them to their pass at Werthill brook, followed them through the foard
(in despite of all their Musketeers there) slew above 100. took 40 prisoners,
and prevented the rebels hopeful design.

The same day the Marquess of Newcastle besieged Bradford, bestowed upon it
above 40 shot from his great Artillery; and the morrow after made himself
master of the Town. In which he took 2000 prisoners, with all the Horse Arms,
and Ammunition, which either the rebels found in the Town, or brought thither
with them.

Hereupon the rebels deserted the Town of Hallifax, and presently after Sir
Hugh Cholmely fell upon Beverly, and took it for his Majesty.

July the 5. Master Tomkins and Master Challoner were most barbarously
murdered by the rebels in London for their Fidelity to his Majesty; And the
same fifth day, there was a fight on Landsdown-hill, betwixt his Majesty's
forces under the command of the Marquess of Hartford, and the rebels under Sir
William Waller; who (after 11 hours fight) stuck their lighted matches in the
hedges, and ran quite away; leaving behind them above 500 Muskets, 14
barrells of powder, a whole Stand of Piques, with good store of all sorts of
Arms. Their foot were absolutely routed, and all dispersed: his loss of
Officers and horse were great, many hundreds of his men were killed; his
Majesty's force having the pillage of the field. And here was that most
valiant Knight Sir Bevill Greenvill unfortunately slain in the Front of his
men, with some others of less quality.

The 13 of July about 4 a clock in the afternoon the King and Queens Majesty
mer at Edgehill, where the rebels had received their maine overthrow: and
the same day and hour his Majesty's Forces under the Command of the Lord
Wilmot Lieutenant General of the horse, the Earl of Carnarvon, the Earl of
Crawford, and the Lord Biron obtained another great and strange Victory upon
Round-way-downe, with 1500 horse, and two small pieces of Canon only:
wherewith they totally routed the rebels Army under the command of the
oldbeaten soldier Sir William Waller, consisting of above 2500 Foot, and 2000
horse, besides 500 Dragooners, with 8 pieces of Brass Ordnance: slew 600 of
them in the place, took above 900 prisoners, all their Canon, Arms,
Ammunition, Wagons, Baggage, and Victual, 28 Foot-Ensignes, 9 Cornets, and
left not one rebel, but whatwas either killed, taken prisoner, or
narrowlyescaped.

Upon the 24 of July his Highness Prince Rupert having joined his Forces to
his brothers, and the whole body of their strength being brought together, they
sat down before Bristoll, and began their Batteries. And the 26 day (with
unexpressible valor) they gained the Outworks, and the 27 day following the
City and Castle was delivered up to his Sacred Majesty, with all the Ordnance,
Arms and Ammunition. At this siege were slain on his Majesty's part Sir
Nicholas Slanning, one of the Lunsfords, with some few others, and that valiant
Lord, the Lord Grandison, did here receive a wound.

August the 3 Corf-Castle in the Isle of Purbecke (which had been so often
before besieged by Sir Walter Earley but had always beaten off the rebels, and
killed their Cannoniers, was once more fallen upon by the rebels, who were so
bravely received by Captain Laurence, that 60 of them were killed in the place:
the rest hearing of the most valiant Earl of Carnarvons approach, ran away.

Soon after, the Earl of Carnarvon, Summoned Dorchester, which was thereupon
delivered up to his Lordship, with all the Arms, Ammunition, and Cannon: which
were disposed of for his Majesty's use.

About the 9 of August, the Castle and Isle of Portland were reduced again
under his Majesty's command; And the Town and Haven of Weymouth and Melcombe
submitted to his Majesty.

August 20 Colonel Io. Digby defeated the rebels of Biddeford and Barnstable,
killed 100 of their Foot, took 211 Officers and common soldiers prisoners,
(most of which were miserably wounded) 2 pieces of Ordnance, 6 barrels of
powder, 400 weight of Bullet, 200 and a half of match, and above 300 Arms;
besides all the Foot-Officers horses: Pursued their horse to the very works of
Biddeford, and returned victoriously, without the loss of more then one man,
not one of the rest of his soldiers being so much as hurt all that day.

Upon the 2, and 3. of September, the Towns of Biddeford, Appleford, and
Barnstaple, delivered up their several Garrisons to his Majesty.

Upon the same third of September, Prince Maurice gave a very hot assault upon
the City of Exeter, and battered the walls, whereupon the rebels desired
Parley; but refusing the conditions, the assault was afterward eagerly
pursued, and the next day after won the great Sconce, turned the Ordnance
there against the Town. Whereupon the Rebels craved to be admitted unto those
conditions which before they rejected, and obtained the same, delivered up the
Town and castle to the Prince his Highness, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition, after it had been blockt up and besieged about six weeks.

September, 17. the Rebels Army (stealing out of Gloucestershire toward
London) surprised part of a new raised Regiment of his Majesty's horse at
Cirencester, but were overtaken by Prince Rupert with His Majesty's horse,
near Auburne in Wiltshire, where he gave them two charges, the one by a
commanded party under Colonel Urrey, the other by the Queens Regiment,
commanded by the Lord Iermin, who performed it so well on the rebels whole
Army, that many great bodies of Foot were routed, and many of them slain in
the place, without any loss to his Majesty's Forces, save two common Soldiers
killed, and the Marquess de la Vieuville taken prisoner, (who was afterward
murdered by the Rebels in cold blood) and the Lord Digby and Lord Iermyn
lightly wounded: by which two charges the rebels Army was so retarded, that his
Majesty had time to overtake them with his Foot, And on Wednesday after (the 20
of this month) upon an Hill (near Newberry and Enborne heath) His Majesty
fought with the rebels, who were seated in the most advantageous place
imaginable: yet in despite of all their Canon, Foot, and horse, his Majesty
beat them from their ground; gained the hill, and one piece of their Brass
Ordnance, and quickly routed all their horse upon the Heath. The most that were
killed in this fight of his Majesty's Forces, exceeded not the number of 300,
though above 600 of the rebels were slain, and a very great number wounded. In
this fight were slain the most noble and valiant Earl of Carnarvon, the Earl
of Sunderland, the Lord Viscount Faulkland, Colonel Morgan, Captain William
Symcots, with some other Gentlemen and Commanders. After this fight the rebels
were further pursued, and routed again, so as they fled into Reading, where
they durst not stay, but left the Town for his Majesty.

September 25. That pernicious confederacy, called the National covenant, was
taken by the members of the House of Commons at Westminster, in Saint Margarets
Church.

October 18. the Prince of Harcourt Lord Ambassador Extraordinary from the
French King and Queen Regent, (after he had been most barbatously used in his
passage by the rebels) came safe into Oxford, where he had entertainment more
suitable to the worth of so great a Personage.

In this month of October, his Majesty's forces under the command of the Lord
Widdrington, and Colonel Henderson a Scot received a defeat near Horne-castle
in Lincolneshire, by the rebels under the command of Manchester, Cromwell, and
Fairfax; there were taken prisoners near 600 of his Majesty's forces, Sir
Ingram Hopton and some few others slain, not without some considerable loss to
the rebels, it cannot be said that in any other battle since this rebellion,
but this, that his Majesty's forces made a dishonorable retreat, where the
fault was, I cannot say.

November 11. An Ordinance for authorizing the counterfeit great Seal.

November 21. Sir William Armine, and others (sent by the Houses at
Westminster) arrived at Edenborough with Articles of accord, and advance money,
to hasten the Scots Invasion.

November 27. The Kings Messenger hanged at London for discharging his duty in
serving his Majesty's Writ.

December. 4. Hawarden castle surrendered to his Majesty's Forces.

December 8. John Pym died (de morbo pediculoso) at Derby house in Westminster,
in which place the medley Scots, and others sit, and hatch their contrivances
for support of the present rebellion.

December 12. Beeston castle assaulted, and taken for his Majesty.

December 21. Lapley house taken by Captain Heavenningham for his Majesty,

December 28. Colonel Nathaniel Fines, one of the first that appeared in this
rebellion, was in a court of War at Saint Albans by his fellow rebels
sentenced to be hanged for a coward.

December 29. The stately Screene of copper richly gilt* set up by King Henry
the seventh in his Chapel at Westminster, was by order of the Houses
reformed, That is* broken down, and sold to Tinkers.

Anno Dom. 1644.
January 16. The perfidious Scots (contrary to the solemn Pacification) invaded
this Kingdom.

January 22. The members of Parliament assembled at Oxford according to his
Majesty's Proclamation.

March 2. The Scots came over the river of Tyne, General King pursuing their
rear, sorced them into Sunderland, whereupon the Marquess of Newcastle sent
for Sir Charles Lucas out of Yorkshire, who had been Ordered to stay there to
fortify Doncaster.

March 13. Hopton castle in Shropshire taken by Col. VVoadhouse for his Majesty.

March 18. VVardour castle in Wilsthire after long siege was taken by Sir
Francis Dodington for his Majesty.

March 22. Newarke, after three weeks siege was happily releived by his
Highness Prince Rupert; in which action the rebels forces there were totally
defeated, all their Arms and Ammunition consisting of 4000 muskets, 11.
pieces of Brass Ordnance, 2 mortar pieces, and about 50 barrels of powder,
etc. were taken. And soon after, Lincoln, Sleeford, and Gainsborough were
quitted by the rebels, and many pieces of Ordnance, with good store of Arms
left behind them.

March 23. Sturton castle in Staffordshire rendered to Sir Gilbert Gerard,
Governor of Worcester for his Majesty.

March 24. The Scots being much provoked to come out of Sunderland, came to
Bowdon hill, whence with great loss they were forced back into their Trenches,
but next morning they came with many of their horse and foot on the Marquess
of Newcastles Rear, and had so disordered it, that the whole Army was
endangered, but Sir Charles Lucas, who was then in the right Wing, hasted to
the Rear, and with his own Regiment fell upon the Rebels Lanciers and routed
them, which made the rest fly from pursuing their advantage.

March 24. Apley house in Shropshire, Garrisoned by the rebels, was taken by
his Majesty's Forces, commanded by colonel Ellis.

April 3. Longford house in Shropshire rendered to his Highness Prince Rupert,
wherein was taken 100 muskets, etc. and about the same time, Tongue-Castle in
the same county was likewise surrendered to his Highness.

April 13. The rebels from Gloucester assaulted Newent (then a Garrison
commanded by Colonel Mynne) but were gallantly repulsed and pursued, leaving
behind them two pieces of their Canon, and many dead bodies before the Works.

April 17. The Queens Majesty began her Journey from Oxford into the West.

April 17. Brampton Bryan in Herefordshire (a castle of Sir Robert Harleys)
after 3 weeks siege, and the loss of 7 or 8 men, summoned and rendered (at
mercy only) to Sir Michael VVoodhouse, wherein was taken 67 men, 100 arms, 2
barrels of powder, some plate, and a whole years provision.

April 17. Dunfreize in Scotland taken in by the Marquess of Montrosse, etc.
for his Majesty, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

April 22. Stutcombe in Dorsetshire assaulted and entered by the force of his
Highness Prince Maurice, wherein was taken 5 Captains, and 16 other Officers,
114 soldiers, with all their arms, 6 Colors, one piece of canon, and 2
Murderers, good store of Ammunition, and one Seditious Lecturer.

May 6. His Majesty's Forces in Latham house in Lancashire made, amongst diverse
others, a most remarkable sally; wherein they killed many of the besiegers in
their trenches, and continued the execution to the park side, and slew near 300
rebels, took 3 great pieces of Ordnance, having since the 10. of April then
last taken 7 of their Cannon, besides one mortar-peece, many colors, and
killed above 600 of them.

May 12. The rebels from Plymouth assaulting Mount-Edgcombe house in Cornwall
(which was only defended by 30 musquettiers) were bravely repulsed and 80 of
them killed in the place.

May 24. The rebels having formed two Armies, (consisting for the most part of
the London trained bands and auxiliaries under the command of the Earl of
Essex and Sir William Waller) this day joined about Blewbury in Berkeshire,
and bent their course toward Abingdon.

May 25. Prince Rupert assaulted and took Stepford, a strong Garrison of the
Rebels in Cheshire, together with all their canon, most of their Arms and
Ammunition, and about 800 of them prisoners. Hereupon Latham house after at
least 18 weeks siege, was timely releived by his highness Prince Ruperts
approach into those parts.

May 28. His Highness Prince Rupert summoned Bolton, (the Geneva of Lancashire
as the brethren call it) the first Town in that County and consequently in
England, that put in execution the militia, as the readiest means to ruin the
Kingdom. But they out of a zealous confidence hanged one of the Princes Capt:
which they had not long before taken prisoner, whereupon the Prince stormed the
town, and in the 2 attempt took it, wherein were killed at least 800 rebels, 600
prisoners taken, with all their colors, Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition. The
justice of which act was foreseen by master Booker, who about this time had
noted it in his Almanac thus, Authors dissentionum and sang uinus
profusionum, absque dubio mercede sua mulctabuntur.

May 29. The Rebels Armies severed, The Earl of Essex marching from Abingdon
to Islip, with purpose to distress Oxford on the North part, as Waller at
Abingdon on the South part.

May 30. The Rebels attempted to cross the river Charwell at Gosworth Bridge,
but were gallantly repulsed by a small party of his Majesty's forces that had
the guard of that pass.

May 31. Waller attempting to pass Isis at Newbridg, and being then repulsed,
retired to Abingdon, where he, to revenge himself, demolished Abingdon cross,
defaced the Church, burnt all the Tables and Chesse-boards in Abingdon, and
plundered most of the people of their goods.

June 1. The rebels did attempt in several places at once, to cross the river
Charwell, but could speed at none, being still beaten off with great loss, and
particularly at Gosworth Bridge, where they lost above 100 men.

June 3. His Majesty perceiving the rebels intention to besiege Oxford, lest a
sufficient strength for defense thereof, and (to disburthen the city of
unnecessary Force,) marched with the rest of his Army this evening toward
Worcester.

June 4. The Earl of Essex perceiving the Kings Forces drawn away, passed
Charwell with his Army, and hearing of his Majesty's departure from Oxford,
hastened after, but upon Campsfield near VVoodstocke there fell upon his Army
such a prodigious and violent storm of hail and rain, accompanied with such
terrible thunder and lightening for the space of two hours, that some of them
took occasion to say, That the conjurers at Oxford had engaged all their
Familiars to work them a despite, there being some hail as big as Nurmegs.
Others more nearely touched with an apprehension of the wickedness of their
actions, confessd, That they suffered the violence of Heaven. No such storm
being seen at Oxford, nor in any the adjacent Villages. But the besotted Rebels
contemning this presage from heaven, went on to their own ruin.

June 5. The Earl of Essex went this day as far as Chipping-Norton after the
King.

June 6. But unwilling to lose his labor any longer, returned to Burford,
where he deputed Sir William Waller to proceed in the adventure of
King-catching, that himself might have the sole honor of taking in
Les^ithiell.

June 11. Dudley castle (which had been gallantly defended by Lieutenant
Colonel Beaumont for 3 weeks before) was releived, and the siege raised by his
Majesty's forces sent from Worcester, who took a colors of the rebels horse,
2 Majors of foot, 2 Captains, 3 Lieutenants, killed about 100 in the fight, and
took above 50 common soldiers prisoners, without any considerable loss on his
Majesty's part.

June 12. Colonel Gage with some forces from Oxford took in Borstall house, a
Garrison of the rebels in Buckinghamshire.

June 18. His Majesty in Worcestershire having intelligence that the rebels
Armies were now severed, (whilst Sir William Waller to get before the King
ran into Staffordshire) resolved to reinforce himself with the Regiments left
at Oxford, and encounter Sir William, to which end he returned and came this
day to Witney.

June 20. His Highness Prince Rupert being then in Lancashire clearing the
county, Colonel Shuttleworth with 400 rebels came to beat up some of his
quarters, and fell in at Blackburne. Where that vigilant Commander Sir Charles
Lucas was so ready for him, that he killed and took above 100 of the rebels,
making the rest run for their lives.

June 22. Sir William Waller having run himself out of breath, gave over the
pursuit of the King, (the rather for that his Majesty was provided for him)
whereupon his Majesty directed his march toward the rebels associated
counties, and came this night to Buckingham, where he received the joyful
news of his Queens safe delivery of the Princess Henrietta, who was borne at
Exeter the 16 of this month.

June 25. Sir Charles Lucas hearing Colonel Shuttleworth had gathered 300
horse and 100 Dragoones at Colne on the borders of Yorkshire, marched to him,
and fell on with such skill and courage that he totally routed all the rebels
both horse and Dragoones, had execution for 3 miles, wounded Shuttleworth
himself, who with very few others escaped; all the rest Sir Charles killed and
took, and brought their colors with the prisoners to Prince Rupert.

June 26. Waller to recruite his weary Army from the Garrisons of Gloucester,
Warwick, Coventry, Northampton, and Kenelmworth Castle, had this day a
rendezvous in Keinton field, whereof the King having notice turned his march
toward him, and quartered this night at Brackley.

June 28. This day the King coming before Banbury, found Waller drawn up in
Battalia Westward from the Town, on the side of Crouch hill, taking advantage
of the hills, bogs, and ditches.

June 29. His Majesty discerning that Waller would not come into the plain,
nor could be assaulted as he lay but with much disadvantage, removed somewhat
Northwards, to see if thereby he could draw him from his station, which
succeeded accordingly, for Waller likewise advanced on the other side the
river, whereupon the King at Cropready marched further off the river, leaving
the Bridge in hope to draw them over, which Waller greedily apprehending as an
advantage, put over 2000 horse and a great body of foot, with 14 pieces of
cannon. The Rebels being thus divided were immediately charged by the Kings
Rear, The brave Earl of Clevelands horse, and Sir Bernard Astleys foot,
routing all that had past the bridge whilst the Earl of Northampton charged
the rest of the Rebels horse that were fording over: In this fight were slain
at least 300 rebels, and many of them taken prisoners with their 14 pieces;
there were slain on his Majesty's part two gallant Knights, Sir William Butler
and Sir William Clarke, and not above 14 common soldiers besides, and so much
for Wallers Army this Summer.

July 3. The King having thus defeated one of the Rebels Armies bent Westwards
after the other, and came this day to Evesham to refresh his soldiers after
their hard duty, from whence he sent to Westminster his message for Peace of
the 4 of July.

In the beginning of this month his Highness P. Rupert marched out of
Lancashire with a considerable Army for the releife of York, which had bin two
months besieged by an aggregate body of Rebels, consisting of the Earl of
Manchesters Army, the Lord Fairfax, and the rebellious Scots under command of
Lesley. The Prince had no sooner releived York, but drew forth after the
Rebels, and in Marstone Moore there began a terrible fight, wherein his
Highness had at first much the better, took the Rebels Ordnance, and many of
them prisoners, insomuch that Lesley and the Lord Fairfax thinking all had been
lost, fled many miles from the place where the battle was fought, and never
came to the remainder of their Armies till 2 days after the fight, but in
conclusion (whether by fate which attends the event of war, or by neglect I
know not) the fortune of the day turned, and the Rebels recovered their lost
Ordnance and took some of the Princes baggage, and with it Sir Charles Lucas,
Colonel Porter, and Colonel Tillier prisoners. In this battle were slain on
his Majesty's part, the Lord Carry, Sir Thomas Metham, Colonel Ewer, Colonel
Townley, with some others of note, and about 1500 common soldiers. On the
Rebels part were slain Sir Charles Fairfax (younger son to the Lord Fairfax)
with many other of their commanders, and at least 3000 common soldiers.

This done, the Rebels rally, and sit down again before York, which was
valiantly defended for 3 weeks after by Sir Tho: Glenham, and then delivered
upon honorable conditions, to march away with Arms, beg and baggage, which
conditions were most perfidiously broken by the Rebels.

July 6. The Lord Hopton routed 350 of the Rebels near Warmister, which were
pursued above twenty miles by Sir Francis Dodington.

July 15. The King came to Bath with his Army, which day the Queens Majesty
arrived safe at Breast in Britanny, notwithstanding 50 great sho made at her by
Batty, the rebels Vice Admiral.

July 23. The King made his speech to the Sommersetshire men on Kings-moore,
who came in to his Majesty's assistance very cheerfully.

July 31. Middleton the Scot furiously assaulted Denington Castle, and received
a most shameful repulse, leaving dead behind him one Col. 8 Captains, 1
Sergeant Major, with many inferior Officers, and Soldiers.

August 1. His Majesty with his Army passed into Cornwall over Tamar at Polton
bridge in pursuit of the Earl of Essex whom he had now chased through
Devonshire.

August 25. The King gained from the Rebels the Castle of Lestithiel, (where
their Army lay strongly encamped) and in it took Col: Butler, and some others
prisoners.

August 30. The rebels horse in the night passed between his Majesty's Quarters
and fled toward Plymouth.

August 31. The rebels foot making toward Foy were beaten from 5 pieces of
their Ordnance.

September 2. The rebels being deserted by their General the Earl of Essex,
(who with the Lord Roberts fled to Plymouth in a Cock-boat the night past,)
this day yielded up to his Majesty all their Train of Artillery, viz. 49.
pieces of fair Brass Ordnance, 200 and odd barrels of Gunpowder, with match,
ball, etc. proportionable, above 700 Carriages, and betwixt 8 and 9000 Arms.
His Majesty out of his wonted Clemency granting them their lives.

September 5. His Majesty having obtained so complete a victory over the
rebels, did (as formerly after the defeat of Waller) from Tavestocke send his
second message of Peace to Westminster.

In the beginning of this month his Majesty's forces in Scotland under the
command of his Excellency James Lord Marquess of Montrosse, and General Major
Mackdonald (who not long before landed in that Kingdom with 1000 Irish)
obtained a great victory over the rebels there upon Newbigging moore, near
Saint John's Town, where were killed above 1200 rebels, among which was the
Lord of Rires and some others of note, and 7 brass Pieces taken; this done,
his Majesty's forces pursued them to St. John's Town and took it, and therein
and in the battle took 2000 of the rebels prisoners, with 2 pieces of
Ordnance more, all their Arms, Ammunition, and Baggage, and this done with the
loss of not above 60 men on his Majesty's part. The rebels in this battle
were commanded by the Earl of Tullibairne, the Lord Drummond, the Lord Elcho,
and Sir James Scot of Rossy, their word was Jesus, No quarter.

And within a fortnight after this success, his Excellency the Marquis of
Montrosse and Major Genesis Mackdonald obtained a second victory over another body
of rebels in that Kingdom commanded by the Lord Forbes, Burly and others near
Aberdeen, wherein the Marquess killed and took prisoners at least 1000. with 3
pieces of cannon, and all their baggage, without any considerable loss on his
Majesty's part; among the prisoners taken by the Marquess, there was Sir
William Forbes of Craigyvar, and John Forbes of Boynly with others of note: And
soon after the Marquess took the Town of Aberdeen, with all the Ordnance,
Ammunition and Arms, and many of the fugitive rebels therein.

September 11. The Garrison of Basing (after 18 weeks siege wherein the rebels
lost many hundreds of their men,) was releived from Oxford by Sir Henry Gage.

September 12. Ilfercombe in Devonshire rendered to General Goring for his
Majesty.

September 17. Barnstaple in Devonshire (that had revoled upon the Earl of
Essex his approach) submitted to his Majesty, and obtained from him their
second pardon.

September. 23. Colonel John Fines (having besieged the castle of Banbury above
a month before) hired his men to storm it in five places, in all which they
were shamefully beaten off with great loss.

October 7 In the night Sir Rich. Greenvile took the Town of Saltash by
storming, wherein 400 rebels were killed, and at least 300 taken prisoners with
their Arms, this Town had been quitted by his Majesty's forces not long before
without any considerable loss.

October. 25. The Earl of Northampton and Sir Hen. Gage raised the siege of
Banbury castle, fell upon Colonel John Fines his flying troops, slew about 60
of them, took above 100 prisoners, with about 200 horses, one piece of
Ordnance, all their Ammunition, and many Arms.

October. 27. The rebels having thus lost two of their Armies, called the third
(under the Earl of Manchesters command) out of the Associated Counties, and
forced other Regiments out of London to withstand the King, who was now
advanced to Newberry with part of his Army, where the rebels apprehending a
great advantage in regard that the rest of his Majesty's forces were not come
up, fell upon his Majesty's quarters, but were beaten off, with the slaughter
of about 1000 of their men, whereof Major U^rey with some other of their prime
Commanders were part, with the loss of Sir Antho: St. Leager, and less then
100 others on his Majesty's side, who had the pillage of the field; here the
valiant Earl of Cleveland was casually taken prisoner, having his horse first
killed under him.

November 6 His Majesty had his rendezvous on Bullington green, betwixt
Wallingford and Oxford.

November 9. His Army came to Dennington castle, which since his Majesty's
marching thence, had been again besieged by the rebels, and raised the siege,
the rebels not daring to withstand his Army.

November 17. The King having some days expected the rebels, who it seems
were loath to hazard the last stake, advanced toward them to Hungerford, upon
whose approach the rebels left the field. Whereupon his Majesty sen^ Sir Henry
Gage with a party to supply the wants of Basing, that had been besieged all
this Summer by five Colonels and their Regiments, but the rebels had raised the
siege before his approach.

November 19. Monmouth that had lately been betrayed by Kirle, was bravely
regained by the Lord Herbert of Ragland, wherein was taken the rebels whole
Committee, 14 pieces of Ordnance, with store of Arms and Ammunition, 30
Officers and common soldiers proportionable, whereby South Wales is much
secured.

November 23. The King having thus victoriously defeated two of their Armies
and driven away the third, came to Oxford to entertain an overture of Peace,
(certain Propositions being the same day come thither from London) having
disposed of his Army to their winter Quarters.

November. 26. A Vote passed by the members of the House of Commons at
Westminster for the utter abolishing and taking away of the book of Common
Prayer, with intention to set up a new device to be called a Directory in its
room.

December. 13. His Majesty (out of his wonted desire of Peace) sent the Duke of
Richmond and Earl of Southampton to the Houses of Parliament at Westminster
for a Treaty, as the best expedient for Peace.

About the middle of this month Helmsley Castle in Yorkshire, (which had been
gallantly defended during 16 weeks siege by Captain Jordan Crosland, and some
others) was delivered up to the Rebels under command of the Lord Fairfax, upon
honorable conditions to march away, the Governor and Officers with their
horses and Arms, the rest without Arms. In this siege the Defendants (amongst
others) made one remarkable salley wherein they took Sergeant Major General
Forbs a Scot prisoner with diverse others, here did Sir T. Fairfax also receive
a shot in the shoulder from the Castle.

December. 22. Colonel Air with some horse from Newarke, took 2 Troops of horse
at Upton belonging to the Rebels of Nottingham, brought the men, colors,
horses, and Arms, all safe to Newarke.

December. 23. Sir Alex: Carew was beheaded on Tower Hill by Martial Law, for
intanding to deliver up the Island at Plymouth to His Majesty; he was observed
to be most violent against his Majesty in the beginning of this rebellion, but
it should seem he had of late some disposition to be a convert, which made his
fellow members think fit to dispatch him to another world.

December. 24. Sir Will: Vaughan Governor of Shrawarden castle for his Majesty,
fell on a party of rebels at Welsh Poole commanded by Sir John Price, killed
some, wounded others, took 47 prisoners, 64 horse and many Arms.

December. 28. A party of the Lord Gorings forces took Mr. Blakes house at
Pinnell near Calne in Wiltshire, and in it 59 rebels, but more Arms.

December 31. The Members at Westminster voted Sir Thomas Fairfax to be their
new General, cashiering the Earl of Essex, with whom they had formerly sworn
to live and dye.

Jan. 1. Young Hotham was beheaded on Tower Hill, and Sir John Hotham his
Father the morrow after, both by marshall Law. Here the Reader may take notice
of a special mark of Gods judgment, for (23 April 1642.) when old Hotham
denied his Majesty admittance into Hull, he held up his hands and prayed God
never to prosper him or his posterity if he were not his Majesty's Loyal
Subject: And now see both Father and Son adjudged by their fellow members,
and condemned by their own beloved marshall Law, for intending to deliver up
Hull to his Majesty.

The same first of Jan. the Lord Astley took Lypyate house in Gloucestershire,
and in it 45 prisoners with all their Arms, Victual and Ammunition.

Soon after this, Sir Marmaduke Langdale totally routed Colonel Ludlowes
Regiment of horse at Salisbury, took 5 rebell-Captaines prisoners, besides
Underofficers, and 80 common soldiers, 150 horse and Arms, with 3 colors,
Ludlow himself hardly escaping.

Jan. 10. the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury was beheaded on Tower Hill. It
would be too long here (where we aim at brevity) to set down the particulars
of his imprisonment, the preposterous proceedings against him in his Trial,
and his pious magnanimity at the time of his death, his Sermon on the Scaffold
(whereof here follows a true copy) will satisfy the world that he died
innocently, and (which is more) that his Majesty has been unjustly accused of
an inclination to Popery.

Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to preach, yet I shall begin with a text of
Scripture, Heb. 12. 2. Let us run with patience that race which is set before
us, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, who for the joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the author and
finisher of my Faith, He best knows: I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame; but the shame must be despised, or
no coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but I should despise the shame for Him, I am going apace (as you see)
toward the red Sea, and my feet are now upon the very brinke of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me into the Land of promise, for that
was the way through which he led his people: But before they came to it, He
instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with sour
Herbs, I shall obey, and labor to digest the sower Herbs, as well as the
Lamb. And I shall remember it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the
Herbs, nor be angry with the hand which gathers them; but look up only to him
who instituted that, and governes these; For men can have no more power over me
then what is given them from above. I am not in love with this passage, through
the Red Sea, for I have the weakness and infirmities of flesh and blood
plentifully in me; And I have prayed with my Savior, ut transir et Calix iste,
that this Cup of red wine might pass from me: But if not, Gods will (not mine)
be done; and I shall most willingly drink of this Cup as deep as he pleases,
and enter this Sea, yea and pass through it, in the way that be shall lead me.

But I would have it remembered (Good people) that when Gods Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them
(and did in a manner drive them into that Sea) were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them; I know my God whom I serve, is as able to
deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver the three children from
the Furnace, and (I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now,
as theirs was then; They would not worship the image the King had set up, nor
will I the imaginations which the people are setting up; nor will I forsake the
Temple and the truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calfe in Dan
and in Bethell. And as for this people, they are at this day miserably missed,
(God of his mercy open their Eyes that they may see the right way) for at this
day the blind lead the blind, and if they go on, both will certainly fall into
the ditch. For my self, I am (and acknowledge it in all humility) a most
grievous sinner many ways, by thought, word, and deed, and I cannot doubt, but
that God has mercy in store for me (a poor penitent) as well as for other
sinners, I have now upon this sad occasion, ransacked every corner of my Heart,
and yet (I thank God) I have not found (among the many) any one sin which
deserves death by any known Law of this Kingdom; And yet hereby I charge
nothing upon my Judges; for if they proceed upon proof (by valuable witnesses)
I or any other ^naocent, may be justly condemned; And (I thank God) though the
weight of the sentence lie heavy upon me, I am ^s quiet within, as ever I was
in my life. And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man
that ever dyed by an Ordinance of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have
gone this way, though not by this means; For Elphegus was hurried away and
lost his head by the Danes; and Simon Sudbury in the fury of Wat Tyler and his
fellows; Before these, Saint John Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd
woman; and Saint Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his head to a
persecuting sword. Many Examples (great and good) and they teach me patience;
for I hope my Cause in Heaven will look of another dye, then the color that is
put upon it here. And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of
these greatmen in their several generations, but also that my Charge (as foul
as it is made) looks like that of the Jews against Saint Paul, (Acts 25. 3.) For
he was accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion; And like that of
Saint Steven (Acts 6. 14.) for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e.
Law and Religion, the holy place and the Temple (verse. 13.) But you will say,
do I then compare my self with the integrity of Saint Paul and Steven? No,
far be that from me; I only raise a comfort to my self, that these great
Saints and servants of God were laid at in their times, as I am now. And it is
memorable, that Saint Paul who helped on this Accusation against Saint Steven,
did after fall under the very same himself. Yea, but here is agreat clamor
that I would have brought in Popery; I shall answer that more fully by and by;
In the mean time you know what the Pharisees said against Christ himself, If
we let him alone, all men will believe in him, Et venient Romani, and the
Romans will come, and take away both our place and the Nation. Here was a
causeless Cry against Christ that the Romans will come; And see how just the
judgment of God was; they crucified Christ for fear lest the Remans should
come, and his death was it which brought in the Romans upon them, God punishing
them with that which they most feared: and I pray God this clamor of Venient
Romani (of which I have given no cause) help not to bring them in; for the Pope
never had such a Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon
the Sects and Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time, by Honor and
dishonor, by good report and evil report, as a deceiver and yet true, am I
passing through this world, 2 Cor. 6. 8. -- Some particulars also I think it
not amiss to speak of.

And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our gracious Sovereign;
He has been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery; but on my Conscience
(of which I shall give God a very present account) I know Him to be as free
from this charge, as any man living; and I hold Him to be as sound a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this Kingdom; And
that he will venture His Life as far, and as freely for it; and I think I do,
or should know, both His affection to Religion, and His grounds for it, as
fully as any man in England.

The second particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God
bless) Here has been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then
go to the Great Court of this Kingdom, (the Parliament) and clamor for
Justice, as if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which
are unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their
appointment. Away, which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his blood
upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also: And this has been
lately practiced against my self; The Magistrates standing still, and suffering
them openly to proceed from parish to parish without check; God forgive the
setters of this (with all my heart I beg it) but many well meaning people are
caught by it. In Saint Stevens case, when nothing else would serve, they
stirred up the people against him; and Herod went the same way, when he had
killed Saint James, yet he would not venture upon Saint Peter, till he found
how the other pleased the people. But take heed of having your hands full of
blood, for there is a time (best known to himself) when God (above other
sins) makes Inquisition for blood, and when that Inquifition is on foot, the
Psalmist tells us, That God remembers (but that is not all) He remembers and
forgets not the complaint of the poor, that is, whose blood is shed by
oppression, verse 9. take heed of this, It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God, but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for
blood; And (with my prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to
remember the Prophecy that is expressed, Jer. 26. 14. 15. As for me, behold I
am in your hand: do with me as seems good and meet unto you. But know ye
for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring innocent blood
upon your selves, and upon this City, and upon the Inhabitants thereof, etc.

The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them. But, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether,
or how it shall get out; and (which is worse then a storm from without) it is
become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and
at every cleft profaneness and Irreligion is entering in, while as Prosper
speaks (in his second Book De vitae contemptu cap. 4.) Men that introduce
profaneness are cloaked over with the name Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary
Religion; for we have lost the Substance and dwell too much in Opinion, and
that Church which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruin, is fallen into
danger by her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self; I was
born and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law; in
that profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye; This is
no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matter of Religion; and
therefore I desire it may be remembered, I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion, established in England, and in that I now come to dye. What clamours
and slanders I have endured for laboring to keep an Unisormity in the
external service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this
Church, all men know, and I have abundantly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament: a crime which my soul
ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of these two parts, An
endeavor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and a like Endeavor to overthrow
the true Protestant Religion established by Law. Besides my Answers to the
several Charges, I protested my innocence in both Houses. It was said,
Prisoners protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I can bring no witness
of my heart and the intentions thereof; therefore I must come to my
Protestation, not at the Bar, but my Protestation at this hour and instant of
my death; in which I hope all men will be such charitable Christians, as not to
think I would dye and dissemble, being instantly to give God an account for the
truth of it: I do therefore here in the presence of God, and his holy Angels,
take it upon my death, That I never endeavored the subversion either of Law or
Religion; and I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine concerning mine
innocence, in these, and from all Treasons whatsoever. I have been accused
likewise as an enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand them and the benefit that
comes by them too well to be so; But I did mislike the misgovernments of some
Parliaments many ways, and I had good reason for it; for Corruption optimi est
pessima, there is no corruption in the world so bad, as that which is of the
best thing in it self; for the beeter the thing is in nature, the worse it is,
corrupted. And that being the highest Court, over which no other has
jurisdiction, when it is misinformed or mis-governed, the Subject is left
without all remedy. But I have done, I forgive all the world, all and every of
those bitter Enemies which have persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven
of God first, and then of every man, whether I have offended him or not, if he
do but conceive that I have. Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness
of him, And so I heartily desire you to join in Prayer with me.

O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fulness of all thy mercies look upon me; but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ: that so the
punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to
try me to the uttermost, I humbly beseech thee give me now in this great
instant, full patience, proportionable comfort, and a heart ready to dye for
thy honor, the King's happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal
to these (far from Arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailties
excepted* and all incidents thereto) which is yet known to me in this
particular, for which I now come to suffer; I say in this particular of
Treason; but otherwise my sins are many and great: Lord pardon them all, and
those especially (what ever they are) which have drawn down this present
judgment upon me: and when thou have given me strength to bear it, do with
me as seems best in thine own eyes: and carry me through death that I may look
upon it in what visage soever it shall appear to me, Amen. And that there may
be a stop of this issue of blood, in this more then miserable Kingdom, (I
shall desire that I may pray for the people too, as well as for my self) O
Lord, I beseech thee, give grace of repentance to all Bloodthirsty people; but
if they will not repent, O Lord confound all their devices, defeat and
frustrate all their designs and endeavors upon them, which are or shall be
contrary to the Glory of thy great Name, the truth and sincerity of Religion,
the establishment of the King and his posterity after him in their just rights
and Privileges, the honor and conservation of Parliaments in their just
power, the preservation of this poor Church in her truth, peace, and
patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted and distressed People under
their ancient Laws, and in their native Liberties. And when thou have done all
this in mere mercy for them, O Lord, fill their hearts with thankfulness,
and with religious dutiful obedience to thee and thy Commandments all their
days: So Amen, Lord Jesus Amen, and receive my Soul into thy Bosom Amen. Our
Father which art in heaven, etc.

Jan. 11. Sir Henry Gage Governor of Oxford marched thence with a party of
horse and foot toward Abingdon with intention to raise a Fort at Cullom
bridge, but Brown (having treacherous notice of the design) was prepared
accordingly, which begat a hot skirmish, wherein the Rebels lost Major
Bradbury, and at least 30 others slain, and on his Majesty's part not above 7.
common soldiers; but by great misfortune Sir Hen: Gage himself marching in
the front of his men did here receive a fatal shot, whereof within few hours
after he dyed. His Body was afterward interred at Oxford with funebrious
exequies and solemnities answerable to his merits; who having done His Majesty
special service, was (whilst living) generally beloved, and dead is still
universally lamented. His daily refreshed memory makes me trespass on the
Readers patience with this.

ELEGY Upon the never-enough lamented death of Sir HEN: GAGE, the most desired
Governor of Oxford.
SO Titus called was, The worlds delight,
And straightway died; The envious Sisters spite
Still the great favorite: The darling head
Unto the Fates is always forfeited.
Our Life's a Chase, where (though the whole Herd fly)
The goodlyest Dear is singled out to dye.
And as in beasts, the fattest ever bleeds:
So amongst men, he that does bravest deeds.
He might have lived, had but a coward fear
Kept him securely sculking in the rear:
Or like some sucking Colonel, whose edge
Durst not advance a foot from a thick hedge:
Or like the wary Skippon, had so sure
A suit of Arms, he might (besieged) endure:
Or like the politic Lords, of different skill,
Who thought a Saw-pit safer, or a hill;
Whose valor in two organs too did lie
Distinct; the ones in's ear, the others in his eye.
Puppets of War! Thy name shall be divine,
And happily augment the number Nine,
But that the Heroes, and the Muses strive
To own thee dead, who were them all, alive.
Such an exact composure was in thee,
Neither exceeded Mars, nor Mercury.
It Was just, though hard, thou should dye Governor
Of the Kings chief Fort of Learning, and of War.
Thy death was truly for thy Garrison,
Thou dy'dst projecting her Redemption.
What unto Basing twice (successful spirit)
Was done, thou have effected here in merit.
The Bridge was broken down: The Fort alone
GAGE was himself, the first and the last stone.
Go burn thy Faggots Brown; and grieve thy Rage
Lets thee out live the gentle grasp of GAGE.
And when thou read'st in thy Britanicus
The boasted story of his death, say thus:
The Valor I have shown in this, was Crime,
And GAGES Death will brand me to all Time.
In this month a fair new Ship called the John of London belonging to the
East India Merchants, was brought to Bristol (by the loyalty of Captain
Mucknell and the rest of the Officers and Mariners of the Ship) for His
Majesty's service, wherein were 26. Pieces of Ordnance mounted, 17000. l. in
money, besides some other good commodities. For which good service the said
Captain Mucknell had the honor to be the first Knight that ever the Prince of
Wales made.

And within a few days after another Ship called The Fame of London, (of
burden 450. Tons, with 28. Pieces of Ordnance mounted) was by Tempest forced
into Dartmouth, where she was seized on for His Majesty's service, as lawful
prize, being bound for Dover or London. This Ship had been abroad 4 years, and
was now returning homewards from the West Indies, laden with Bullion, Oil,
Couchaneille, and other rich commodities, to the value of 40000. l. at least.

Jan. 30. The Treaty began at Uxbridge, wherein the candor of His Majesty's
real intentions and desires of Peace was very perspicuous: For His Majesty did
not only arm his Commissioners or any ten of them with a very large and
powerful Commission to treat of, conclude and settle a firm Peace in all His
Dominions, but did also by Proclamation appoint a solemn Fast on the 5. day of
February then next for a blessing on that Treaty, with a Form of Common Prayer
set forth by His Majesty's special command to be used in all Churches and
Chapels within this Kingdom. One of which Prayers drawn by His Majesty's
special direction and dictate, I here afford the Reader.

THE PRAYER.
O Most merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we a People sorely
afflicted by the scourge of an unnatural War, do here earnestly beseech
Thee, to command a Blessing from Heaven upon this present Treaty, begun for the
establishment of an happy Peace. Soften the most obdurate hearts with a true
Christian desire of saving those men's blood, for whom Christ himself has shed
His. Or if the guilt of our great sins cause this Treaty to break off in
vain, Lord let the Truth clearly appear, who those men are, which under
pretense of the Public good do pursue their own private ends; that this
People may be no longer so blindly miserable, as not to see, at least in this
their Day, the things that belong unto their Peace. Grant this gracious God,
for his sake who is our Peace it self, even Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Feb. 9. Sir Walter Hastings Governor of Portland Castle for His Majesty, took
the great Fort at Weymouth, and within two days after Sir Lewis Dives took the
middle Fort and Town of Weymouth, and in a skirmish there slew Major Sydenham
(a forward Rebel) with some others. This Town and Forts were not many days
held by His Majesty's Forces, but were as unfortunately lost, as happily gained.

Feb. 15. Rowdon house near Chippenham in Willshire (after 9 days siege) was
taken by His Majesty's Forces, and in it 120 good Horse, above 200 Foot, with
their Arms and Provisions, Col: Stevens the Mock-Sheriffe of Gloucestershire,
6 Captains, and above 20 inferior Officers, all at mercy.

Feb. 20 The Lord Macguire, an Irish Baron, was executed by the common hangman
at Tyburne by command of the Members at Westminster. In the history of which
execution recorded in many of their own Pamphlets written then and upon that
subject, the Reader may observe two Questions asked by Master Gibbs, one of the
Sheriffs of London, and answered by that Lord the very instant before his
death; The first was, Whether he knew of any Commission the King had granted to
the Irish Rebels, for the commotion they had raised in their country? he
answered, That he never knew nor heard of any. The second was, Whether there
was not some agreement made by the Irish Commissioners, before the Rebellion
first brake out with the Recusants of England? he answered, That to his
knowledge, there was never an one in England, either Catholic or Protestant,
that knew of it, but one, and he was an Irishman, and a Protestant, and he
came to the knowledge of it but by chance, not as he was an actor in it.

Out of which, and out of that delivered by the Archbishop of Canterbury on
the Scaffold immediately before his death, the world may evidently see His
Majesty irrefragably cleared, by two acts of the Rebels own cruelty, from two
of the most scandalous aspersions, by which the malice of these forging Rebels
has from time to time endeavored to make His sacred Majesty odious to his
people. Salutem ex inimicis nostris, may the King well say, seeing his enemies
actions turned to his justification, quite contrary to their intendments. The
first was an imagined inclination in His Majesty to Popery; The second, a
pretended commissionating of the Irish Rebellion. In the first, the Archbishop
of Cant. In this, the Lord Macguire, both at their very dying hours, have
rendered His Majesty as innocent, as the Rebels intended him odious. I say
innocent, because we know the worst of Rebels cannot but credit those persons
especially testifying at such time when they were immediately after to give an
account of all their actions to the knower of all hearts. Nor can any one
believe, but the Archbishop of Canterbury (who was daily conversant with His
Majesty in matters of Religion) must needs know the very depth of his heart
therein; And the Lord Macguire (who was privy to the first motion of the Irish
Rebellion) must likewise of necessity have known of the Kings Commission, if
any such thing had been.

Feb. 22. The Treaty at Uxbridge, was broken up, though His Majesty sent a
particular message, and his Commissioners did earnestly desire that the same
might be continued. In this Treaty His Majesty's Commissioners condescended
much, but those of Westminster would abate nothing of the rigor of their first
unheard of Propositions, which was the cause the Treaty took no better effect.

Feb. 22. The Town of Shrewsbury was (by treachery in the night) delivered to
Col. Mitton the rebellious Governor of VVem. Here you may see the Rebels
masterpiece, in hatching this treacherous plot in the time of Treaty, wherein
they used the name of Peace, only as a masque for their designs, but intended
nothing less. In this Town the Rebels did most barbarously execute 13. of His
Majesty's soldiers, which his Highness Prince Rupert did soon after justly
requite, (lege talionis) by hanging up a like number of theirs, which he had
taken without Quarter given.

Feb. 25. Sir Marmaduke Langdale routed a great Body of Rebels consisting of at
least 1200 Horse and Dragoons, commanded by Col: Rossiter, a Scot, near Melton
Mowbray, in Leicest. shire, killed above 30 of them, took 46 Prisoners, with 4
Colors of horse, with the loss of Sir John Girlington a gallant Knight, Capt.
Gascoigne, and not above 6 or 7 common Soldiers on his Majesty's part.

Feb. 25. Colonel Roger Molineux with a party of Horse from Newarke took the
Rebels Committee at Wirksworth in Darbyshire, where they were gathering
contribution, viz. Master Wigfall, (Sir John Gells son in law) Master Edward
Charleton, Master Buxton, Major Molins, Captain Harstaffe, Lieutenant Boteler,
about 70 Troopers and Dragooners, with all their Horse and Arms, and 400. l.
in money. In this action some of the Rebels were killed, whereof Master
Sellors, a busy Sequestrator, was one, and on His Majesty's part only one man
lost.

Feb 26. Sir William and Sir Charles Compton (Brothers to the noble Earl of
Northampton) with 300 horse routed 400 of the Rebels horse of Northampton near
Daventry in that County, killed 13, wounded many, took 36 prisoners, with 50
Horse, and good store of Arms.

In the latter end of this month, a party of His Majesty's Forces from Hereford
took Castle-ditch, (a Garrison of the Rebels on the borders of that County) and
in it Colonel Hopton the Governor, (son to Sir Richard Hopton) his
Underofficers, above 60 Foot Soldiers, with their arms and provisions, and
some horse.

March 1. Pontfract Castle (that had been long besieged, not without much loss
to the Rebels, by frequent sallyes made by the Defendants and otherwise) was
relieved by Sir Marmaduke Langdale, who there utterly defeated the Lord Fairfax
whole Army, killed 300 on the place, besides many drowned, took above 700
Prisoners, whereof 44 Officers, 22 Colors of Foot, being all the Rebels had,
and 26 Standards of Horse, with 34 double barrels of Powder, and a
proportionable quantity of March and Bullet, and 2500 Foot Arms, besides Horse
Arms, and other spoil. In this action were slain many of the Rebels chief
Officers, as Colonel Armyn, Col: Thornton, Col: Malevery, with others; On His
Majesty's part no Officer slain, and but very few common Soldiers.

March 6. Sir Charles Compton with his Regiment of horse took 72 Pack-horses at
Hawford on the borders of Warwickshire, being richly laden with the rebels
wealth of Gloucester, and intended for London; with these Sir Charles also took
their Convoy of at least 100 Horse, and near 70 Prisoners, with a Lieutenant,
1 Cornet and his Colors, having first killed 12 Rebels on the place, without
loss of any one man, and but one hurt.

March 7. Major Abercromy a rebellious Scot was slain near Stratton Audley in
Buckinghamshire, and 17 of his men taken by a party from his Majesty's Garrison
of Borstall house.

March 14. Colonel Long the High Sheriff of Wiltshire with his own Regiment
of horse only, gallantly charged a great body of Wallers horse near the
Devizes, and did good execution on them; but being much overpowered by the
Rebels numbers, was at length taken Prisoner with some part of his Regiment;
which was within few days after sufficiently requited by the Lord Goring, who
took above 700 of Wallers horse in those parts.

March 15. A party of his Majesty's horse from Pontfract Castle fell on Colonel
Brandlings Quarters at Badsworth, four miles from Doncaster, took 67 rebels
Prisoners, whereof 13 Officers, 130 Horse, and 1000. l. in money.

March 18. The Earl of Northampton with his three young brothers, (in all whom
Gallantry is hereditary) routed a great Body of the rebels horse of Northampton
near Abthorp, killed near 30 rebels, whereof Captain Lidcote was one, and
hurt many more, took 26 Prisoners, and this with the loss of 5 Troopers only
on his Majesty's part.

The same 18. of March, Beeston castle in Cheshire (that had been bravely
defended for 17 weeks before by Capt. Valot, and as vainly besieged by Sir
William Brereton) was opportunely releeved by Prince Ruperts approach into
those parts.

March 24. The Lower Members at Westminster Vote the clause for preservation of
His Majesty's Person, to be left out in Sir Thomas Fairfax his Commission. Thus
do the Rebels 1. Swear to live and dye with their own General Essex, yet
upon second thoughts they disoblige themselves from that Oath, and casheire him
of his command. 2. Covenant to preserve His Majesty's Person and Authority, and
yet afterward authorize Sir Tho: Fairfax to kill him if he can. 3. They vow to
maintain the Protestant Religion, yet condemn and discountenance the
essential parts thereof, and introduce Irreligion and Profaneness.


Now tell me, Reader, what Tropologicall sense can save this juggling from flat
and literal Perjury? not all the addition of their Abrogative to their
Legislative power; For this is indeed to abrogate Christianity as well as
Loyalty out of the world: To give leave to kill the Kings Person in the field,
and yet to cheat men into a conceit of preserving His Majesty in William
Lenthalls chair: To make the world believe they are Protestants, when they
permit and authorize an illiterate Assembly of Non-Divines to discountenance
the 39 Articles, dispute about expunging the fifth Article of the Apostles
Creed: To antiquate the Lords Prayer out of the Church Service, and turn out
the long-setled Service of Common Prayer out of the Church, to give way to a
long-winded extemporary nonsense in the room thereof.

O tempora! O mores! Are not these sine Lawmakers, who violate the Laws of
God and holy Church, as well as those themselves were borne unto, to make way
for their own Chymeraes? Would not any true Zelot pawn his soul upon these
men's consciences, who make no conscience of breaking their own oaths? Would
not any wise man melt his Fortunes to maintain these men's Cause, who have no
cause for what they do? Yes, he that could be made to believe Perjury were
Fidelity; Treason, Loyalty; Blasphemy, Sanctity; Atheism, Religion; the
Speakers Cushion, the Kings Majesty; may likewise possibly believe that these
Rebels intend the Churches, Kings, and Commonwealths good.

Post-monita.
THe Reader may take notice of two omissions; The first in Feb. 1642. about
which time His Majesty's Forces from Hereford, commmanded by Sir Rich: Lawdy,
encountered the rebels of Gloucester at Cover on the borders of that County,
routed their whole Body, killed and took most of the Rebels Commanders, and
many common Soldiers, with 4 Drakes; yet this Victory came not off without some
loss, for Sir Rich: Lawdy himself was here slain by a shot out of a window in
Cover Town, with 5 common Soldiers only on his Majesty's part.

The other in the beginning of July, 1643. about which time Colonel (now Lord)
Jermyn with those Forces that guarded her Majesty out of the North, assisted by
Colonel Hastings, now Lo: Lowghborough, took Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire
by assault, wherein there was taken Col: Houghton the Governor, with all the
inferior Officers, above 400 common Soldiers, 8 Pieces of Ordnance, and good
store of Ammunition, and this done without any considerable loss.

The End.

