BE Variolis and Morbillis: OF THE SMALL POX AND MEASLES: With their
Definitions, Distinctions Causes, Differences, Signs, Prognostics, and Cur^s,
with Cautions in Air and Diet to prevent them.

Also Cordial Remedies, by which we may preserve our Bodies from them, with
local Medicines of excellent virtues to be applied outwardly or carried in the
hand, to repel the venomous and pestiferous air from entering into the body.

By Anthony Westwood, Practitioner in Physic and Surgery at Arundel in
Sussex.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for H. Seyle, at the Black Boy over against S.
Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet 1656.

To the Honorable and singularly virtuous, Mrs. Margaret Morley of Glyn in
Sussex. The Author consecrateth these his Labors.
Honorable Mrs.
THe principal motive which impelled me to consecrate the subsequent Treatise
unto your Name, is the same which at the first invited me to pen it, and that
was to publish it to the benefit of the Town and Country wherein I live, that
every one that would but take the pains to peruse this little Tract, and make
trial of the receipts of Physic and Surgery at large declared therein,
might much benefit themselves, and do much good to their acquaintance and
friends.

Honored Mistress, nothing has more afflicted me than the death of him who
truly honored you in his life, and was truly beloved by you to his death, your
dear Brother, my best Friend, William Morley Esquire, who died of this
contagious disease, the Small Pox. I shall ever admire and proclaim his virtues
and goodness, who of his innate and noble disposition, loved all his followers
in general, as his fellow soldiers. I wept for him at his death, as for a
Brother, and after death saw him honorably buried, as a Soldier; but I Will
lament no more his death, who is translated into a better life, nor weep for
him that is in joy, nor put on mourning clothes for him that is clothed with
Immortality; whom death has parted, I hope blessed eternity shall at length
bring together again. So I leave him and return to you; I have strived to
shape my subject to the affection of so honorable a Patroness as your self, to
whom I dedicate this rude piece, which I could have wished might have been
undertaken by a more able workman: vouchsafe therefore to shroud under your
protection this unpolished work which I offer not as a Present, but as a
Homage I owe you. And therefore the mark I chiefly aimed at, was not at any
vain hope of praise to my self (which how little I hereby deserve I am not so
weak but to perceive) but to leave a testimony to my Country, how much I
desire her benefit, and to your self, how much I am bound to remain,

Mistress, Yours in all dutisull observance, A. Westwood.

The PREFACE TO The Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe chiefest thing that induced me to publish these Collections, was a
principal aim at the good of these in the town wherein I live, which has been
much visited with these (...), Variolae, or Small Pox. And therefore I have
adventured to divulge many receipts of my Fathers, who lived an able Physician,
and in great practice above fifty years in this Town of Arundell. I have also
set down many receipts by me daily practiced (and therefore need no probatum to
be annexed) with diverse varieties not published by any heretofore, which I hope
will be to the great benefit of all such as shall have occasion to practice any
thing herein contained; where I strive not to set forth an eloquent style (as
if it were some fancy-delighting History) but a plain way to help the poorer
sort: I here produce a thing serious, and for the general good, especially of
those whom it shall please God to visit with this disease. Some perhaps will
think that those who knowing such things, would be loath to publish them, and
make their Science common; but I am rather of the minds of those who once a
year writ in the temple of AEsculapius all the cures they had performed, and
by what remedies; and I think with Aristotle, that a good thing is the better
the more common it is: and as Cicero says, we are not born to our selves; if
any thing in this small Tract may bring glory to God, any good to his People, I
have my desire and aim: I will not stand to amplify any further, because all
that I seek in this book is to eschew prolixity; for I know there are a sort of
Critics, that will rather carp at a fault, than amend it. But Reader I end,
craving thy faveurable acceptance; which will encourage me to publish a very
necessary Tract of the Diseases of Women and Children, entitled De Morbis
mulierum and infantium. Thus much I thought good to acquaint thee with, wishing
thee all happiness.

Thy well-wishing Friend Anth. Westwood.

Upon the death of my very good friend Dr. JOHN WESTWOOD.
GReat Westwood' s fallen; let my lamenting Verse
Do its last duty to thy mourning Hearse.
All we can do is but to let men see
How much we owe unto thy memory.
Great soul, discharged of thy base mould, whose All
And every part we justly Spirit call.
Though here, he lived not here; his free desires
Were always quickened with celestial fires.
Thy high born soul towered to its proper place;
Restless, unwearied, till't bad run its race.
It Is true, thy body made us think thee Clay;
But thy refined self did more display
Unto our second thoughts, whilst we could spy
Thy Virtues speak so much Divinity:
Through that darkesome veyle who could not see
Thy Lynce ^y'd soul peep at Eternity?
This world was but the trouble of thy mind.
Which now by separation is resin'd,
And like it self; thy now sublimed Sprite
(The veyl being drawn) enjoyes its Eagle sight.
What once in contemplation thou did see,
By death thou have a full discovery.
Enjoy thy Trophies Death; what thoss bast done
Is but to make the blind enjoy the Sun.
Instead of hurting thoss have set him free,
Lately a Prisoner, now at liberty.
Triumph then in thy Conquest, who will deny
To lose this life to catch Eternity?
But now I Have found thy plot; great Westwood' s Art
Hindered thy Spoils, locked up thy rusty dart;
His skill, like a strong Bulwark, did withstand
The fatal strokes of thy destroying hand:
When thou had past thy Sentence, he could give
Beyond all hope a wonderful Reprieve.
Nay thou had missed him, had not feeble Age
Made him the object of thy cruel rage;
Then to encounter him, when 'twas too late
(Nature succumbing) to divert his fate.
'Twas well advised, to strike when the last sand
Was run; Stout Champion! bid a bound man stand.
This is thy Trophy, thus you are magnified;
Naturs consumed, Oil spent, Sand out, he died.
F. Haddon, Doctor of Physic.

DEVARIOLIS ET Morbillis: Of the Small Pox and Measles.
THe Small Pox is Variolae quid.
called in Latin Variolae.

Those little Aspetities of the Sk^n, like St. Anthony's Fi^e, which are
discussed within five or seven days without suppuration, are called in Latin
Morbilli, in English Measles.

(...), Papulae. Sunt Goreus.
eruptiones leves humorum percutem.

Variolae. Sunt pustnlae in summa cute.

(...). Morbilli vero Seunertus.
sunt maculae aut tubercula parva: Subjectum est cutis quae Morbilli quid.
'(...) dicitur.

The Small Pox are Pustles, and the Measles Spots, which arise in the top of
the skin, by What the Small Pox and Measles are.
reason of the impurity of the corrupt blood sent, thither by the force of
Nature.

This Impurity is the relics of the menstruous blood remaining in the body of
the Their matter.
Infant, being of that matter from whence it drew nourishment in the womb.

It is stirred up at the first opportunity of a hotter summer, or a hidden
malignity in the air, and boiling up, or working with the whole mass of the
blood, spread or show themselves upon the whole surface of the body.

There is as much difference between the Small Pox and the Measles, as there is
between a Carbuncle and a pestilent Bubo; for a Bubo and Carbuncle are tumors
of a near effinity, so that the one does scarce come without the other,
consisting of one kind of matter, unless that which makes the Bubo is more
gross and clammy, and that which causes the Carbuncle more sharp, burning and
raging, by reason of its greater subtilty.

These Carbuncles and Buboes do rise in diverse parts of the body, but
especially where the Glandules are; because the expulsive faculty being
provoked by a malignant quality, does expel the pernicious matter from the
internal parts especially, the more noble ones to the external; so that from
the Brain she sends it to the Glandules or Kernels behind the Ears, from the
Heart to the A mpits, from the L^ver to the Groyns; whence swellings under the
E^res called Parotides, ^^d those in the G^^yn called Bubones, do arise.

For the Small Pox arise of a more grosle and viscous matter, but the Measles
of a more subt^l and hot.

The Measles yield no marks, but certain small spots without any tumor, and
they either red, purple, or black.

There is another kind of Pustles common to children, called the Chrystals,
they are white, and as it were bladders full of a wheyish humor; these cause
no danger: within three days they break and dry up.

The Small Pox are extuberating Pustles, white in the midst, but red in the
circumserence, yet they are scarce known on the first or second day they
appear; but on the third and fourth day they bunch and rise into a tumor, and
are white before they scab, but the Measles remain still the same.

The Small Pox prick like needles, by reason of a certain acrimony, and cause
an itching; the Measles do neither, because the matter is not so acrid and
biting.

That Fever which is commonly attended by the Small Pox and Measles, may
justly be reckoned among malignant and p^stilential Fevers, because it is
epidemicall and contagious, and kills very many.

Of the cause of the Small Pox and Measles.
Sennertus in his Tomus secundus, De cause variolarum and morbillorum.
fol. 191. has these words concerning the cause of the Small Pox and Measles.

Causam pr^x^mam and continentem variolarum and morbilloru^ referunt in
immu^ditiem ^ primo ortu in sanguine relictam, ex sanguine materno, quem
monstruum vocart quo ^oe^us in utero matr is alitur, etc.

Riverius says thus, Songuinem vero maternum esse veram causam variolarum and
morbillorum, inde praecipue colligitur, quod ex bominum millibus vix unum
reperire lice it, qui semel saltem in vita hos affectus non patiatur. At morbus
omnibus hominibus co^^unis a causa aliqua com ouni necessario dependet; qualia
sunt generationis principia, semen nimirum and sanguis maternus.

But that the Seed cannot be the cause, he goes farther, and gives this reason.

At semen non potest esse causa variolarum and morbillorum, cum ab to morbi
haereditarii and tota vita perdurantes oriantur, etc.

The meaning of these two learned and judicious Authors, is this, That the
mothers blood is the true cause of the Small Pox and Measles, and that it is
hence chiefly gathered, because among many thousands of men it is hard to find
one, who once in his life has not had these diseases. But a disease common to
all men, must needs depend upon some common cause; such as are the principles
of Generation, viz. the Seed and Mothers Blood.

But the Seed cannot be the cause of the Small Pox and Measles, because from it
come hereditary diseases, such as last a man's lifetime, as some Gouts, which
are affirmed by the most judicious Authors, to be engrafted and here ditary
from the parents; yet they do not deny but that there are some Gouts which are
adventitious, caused by external causes, and errors in Diet. It remains
therefore that the Small Pox and Measles spring from the Mothers Blood, with
which the child is nourished in the womb; for therein, be it never so pure,
some impurities are found, which communicate their pollution to the parts of
the child; and that pollution of the parts does defile the mass of blood; and
being provoked by some occasion, does make the same to boil, by help whereof
the blood ferments and is purified, both it and the parts aforesaid.

Riverius says farther, that the Arabians do manifest this by a clear example
of Wine, which being poured whiles it is new into a musty or il-qualited
vessel, receives that ill quality from the vessel, but when it begins to work
and purify, it cleanses both it self and the vessel.

It is not to be wondered at, that the breaking out of the Small Pox and
Measles, is sometimes so long deferred, as that some have them at man's estate:
for those impurities do not substantially remain in the body, as many
imagine; for they would be corrupted by long stay, and acquire a most grievous
putrefaction. But only an evil quality is by them imprinted upon the parts of
the child, which in process of time infecting some part of the humors,
becomes offensive to Nature; which then rouzing her self, does drive those
infected portions of the humors into the skin.

And although the Small Pox are wont to break forth in the whole body, yet they
appear in greatest quantity in the face, feet, and hands, which are the
Emunctories of the Liver: whence it comes, that such as have hot Livers, have
red and rubied Faces, and feel^ intense heat in the palms of their hands and
soles of their feet; it follows, that the Small Pox and Measies must come out
there more than any where else.

The Expulsion therefore of Small Pox and Measles is caused by an Ebullition of
the the blood; which Ebullition, says Avicen, Duplex est, una perfectiva,
altera ver o corruptiva; perfectiv a seu depurativa ea est, in qua parts
tantu^m impuriores and excrementitiae sanguinis putrescunt, and a natura
expurgantur, ut tota massa pura postmodum relinquatur.

Corruptiva vero est, in qu^ non solum parts sanguinis excrementitiae, sed
etiam sanguis ipse sincerus computrescit. Vnde periculosae and lethales
variolae oriuntur, etc.

This Ebullition of the blood is two-sold, the one Perfective, the other
Corruptive. The Perfective or Depurative, is that in which only the impurer
and excrementitious parts of the blood are by nature purged forth, that the
whole mass may afterward remain pure.

But the Corruptive is, wherein not only the excrementitious parts of the
blood but the sincere blood it self is putrefied, whence arise dangerous and
deadly Pox. This corruptive Ebullition does chiefly happen when those diseases
are epidemicall, being occasioned by a malignant constitution of the air, by
which an Ebullition of the humors, and a malignant putrefaction is caused.

Pox and Measles are reckoned among acute diseases, because ordinarily they are
terminated within the space of fourteen days. Some do observe a double order
of times in this disease, viz. the time of ebullition, and the time of
cruption; the time of ebullition is commonly terminated in four days, so that
the 1st. day is counted the beginning, the second the augment, the third the
state, and the fourth, the declination: for then the fever and other symptoms
are wont to remit.

But the beginning of the cruption of the Pox is the fourth day it self, the
augment reaches to the seventh, the sta^e until the eleventh, the declination
unto the fourteenth, at which time the Pox are dried; yet often times they are
not dry until the twentieth day.

Of the external causes of the Small Pox and Measles.
The general and natural causes are two, that is, the Causa procatarctica.
infection of corrupt Air, and a preparation and fitness of corrupt Humors to
take that infection.

The Air becomes vicious and burtfull to men for the most part, by a
threefold means.

First, if it be not blown thorough with wholesome winds.

Secondly, if it b^ polluted with the infection of putrid and stinking
exha^ations.

Thirdly, if by an excess or preposterous condition of the first qualities, it
does so alter men, that thereby evil and malignant putrefactions of the
humors be ingendered.

For those qualities when they are increased above their natural condition,
they are the principles of purtrefactions.

Of the difference of Small Pox and Measles.
The difference of Small Differentiae variolarum and morbillorum.
Pox and Measles are taken either from the substance, in regard of which, some
are more or less phlegmatic; or from the quantity, in which regard they are
more or less in number, greater or less, profound or superficial; or from
the quality, in which respect some are red, others white, yellowish,
violet-colour'd, livid, black, according to the diversity of humors, of which
they are compounded.

Of the signs of the Small Pox and Measles. De figuis variolarum and
morbillorum. Actiones laesae.

These following signs declare them to be at hand.

Pain in the head, with pulsation in the forehead and temples great
sleepiness, terrors in sleep, sometimes ravings, trembling, and convulsions,
sneezings, frequent yawning, hoarsenesse, cough, Qualitares corporis muta^^.
difficulty in breathing, heat, redness, and sense of pricking over the whole
body, pains in their backs, a nauseous disposition and vomiting, their eyes
are fiery and swollen, their urine-red and troubled. All which are caused either
by many and thick vapors, sent up by the boiling of the blood into the head,
Diaphragma, and other parts; or from the nature of the Pox themselves, now
beginning to invade the parts.

Of the Prognostics.
For the Prognostics, we Prognest:
may truly say, that the matter whence this effect takes its original,
partakes of so melign, pestilent, and contagious a quality, that not content to
mangle and spoil the fleshy parts; it also eats and corrupts the bones, like
the lues venerea (as has been observed by diverse, in many killed by the
malignity of this disease, and dissected) that it causes such impression of
corruption in the principal parts, as brings the Dropsy, P^hisick, a
Hoarsnesse, Asthma, bloody Flux ulcerating the Guts, and at length bringing
death; Nam si non solum in cute, sed and in partibus internis, ventre,
intestinis, pulmone erumpant, etc. Dan, Sennerti Tom. 2. l. 4. c. 12. They do
not only molest the external parts, by leaving the impressions and scarres of
the Pustles and Ulcers, rooting themselves deep in the flesh, but also often
times they take away the faculty of motion, eating asunder, and weakening the
joints of the elbow, wrist, knee, and ankle. Moreover, sundry have been
deprived of their sight by them, others have lost their hearing, and othersome
their smelling; a fleshy exerescence growing in the passages of the nose and
ears.

But if any relics of the disease remain, and that the whole matter thereof
be not expelled by the strength of nature, then symptoms afterward arise,
which savor of the malignity of the humor, yea and equal the harm of the
symptoms of the lues venerta.

It is of great moment to fore see the Small Pox, but much more to foretell
their event, which th^se following prognostic signs will declare.

Those Small Pox are void of danger, which come out soon and easily, and do
quickly ripen, in which the Fever is moderate, without great symptoms, which
ceases after they are come out, in which the voice is free, and breathing easy.

Small Pox, which at first are red and white, soft, distinct, few, round,
pointed, coming only in the skin, and not inwardly, are wont to be safe.

All the signs aforesaid do signify the paucity of the morbifick Matter, its
obsequiousness, benignity and strength of nature lustily expelling.

Contrariwise, dangerous and deadly Pox are known by a great Fever, which
lessens not after they are broke forth; for it signifies the malignant and
venomous humors are not sufficiently expelled unto the skin, but that the
greatest part of them remains yet in the veins.

Great anxiety and un quietness, which comes from the same humors boiling in
the veins.

Difficulty of breathing, which signifies either Pustles or Imposthumes in the
Lungs, or a Squinansie, or great decay of strength.

Great thirst, which declares the inward burning; and if with the thirst,
shortness of breath be increased, death is at hand.

A Looseness, or Bloody flux, which shows the malignant humors have their
recourse inward, which is a course quite contrary to that of Nature, and
therefore deadly; so that few of those which after the Pox coming out, are
taken with such a looseness, do escape.

A bloody Urine is a most deadly sign, and likewise if by stool pure and
sincere blood be voided.

Sometimes also by the Nostrills, Gums, and other parts of the boby, blood is
voided, which are commonly deadly signs; for they signify the extreme
acrimony and malignity of the blood.

Also Pox long a coming out are very bad, which signify the contumacy of the
matter, or the weakness of nature.

Many, great, double, and united Pox do show an overabundant quantity of
Morbifick matter, and are bad; so are hard ones, which show the thickness and
incoctibility of the matter.

Flat Pox show the weakness of the expulsive faculty, and they are worse, if
they have a black spot in the middle of them, which argues extraordinary
malignity.

They are worst of all, which when they are come forth do presently vanish, and
the tumor of the parts falls; for they signify the retirement of the humor
inwards, and none of those escape who have the Pox on this manner going in
again, but they dye commonly within twenty four hours.

They are also dangerous, when spots, like those of the purple or spotted
Fever, are mingled among the Pox, especially if those spots be livid or black,
for they signify not only the same light putrefaction, which is wont to
happen in the Small pox by means of the Ebullition of blood, but also that
intense and profound malignity is peccant; from which greater danger is
threatened to the patient.

Dung or urines in this disease livid or black, do portend great danger; for
they signify that Melancholy abounds in the veins, and infects the whole mass
of blood.

Of the cure of the Small Pox and Measles.
River. in his Prax. med. fol. 156. has these four Iodications. Curatio
variolarum and morbillorum quatuor indicationsbus perficitur; quarum prima
virsatur in humorum quantitate peccantium evacuations.

Secunda^ in motu naturae, seuvariolarum expulsione adjuvarda.

Tertia, in malignae and venenatae qualitatis oppugnatione.

Quarta dei^que, insymptomat^m correctione.

Q^ae omnia ut commode perfic antur, primum idonea victus ratio insti^nenda est
etc.

That is, That the cure of the Small pox and Measles is performed in the
satisfection of four Indications; whereof the first consists in the evacuation
of the peccant humors.

The second, in assisting the motion of nature, or helping to expel the pox.

The third, in the opposition of the malignant and venomous quality.

The fourth, in Correction of Symptoms.

All which that they may be conveniently effected, first a convenient diet must
be appointed.

As for point of nourishmen, the Ancients were so severely diligent, as to
place the greatest part of the cure in orderering the diet.

Because, say they, there are no kinds of sicknesses that so weakens the
strength, as contagious diseases, it is always necessary, but yet sparingly
and often to feed the patient, still having respect unto his custom, age, the
region, and the time; for through emptiness there is great danger, left that
the venomous matter that is driven out to the fuperficiall parts of the body,
should be called back into the inward parts by an hungry stomach, and the
stomach it self should be filled with choleric, hot, thin, and sharp
exerementall humors, whereof comes biting of the stomach, and gripings in the
guts.

Sweet, groste, moist, and clammy meats, and those which are of subtle parts,
are to be avoided; for the sweet do soon enslame, the moift will putrify, the
gross and clammy obstruct, and therefore eng^nder putrefactions.

Therefore let this be their Diaeta.
order of diet; let their bread be of Wheat or Barley, well wrought, neither
too new, nor too stale; let them be fed with such meat as may be easily
concocted and digested, and may engender laudable juice, and very little
excremental, as are the flesh of Lambs, Kids, Partridges, Thrushes, Larks,
Pheasants, and such like, avoiding Water-fowls, Let the flesh be moistened in
the juice of garden and wild Sorrel: for sower things are very wholesome in
this kind of disease, for they do stir up the appetite, resist the venomous
quality and putrefaction of the humors, restrain the heat of the Fever, and
prohibit the corruption of the meats in the stomach. But those that have a
more weak stomach, and are subject to the cough, and diseases of the lungs,
must not use these, unless they be mixed with Sugar and Cinnamon.

If the Patient at any time be fed with sodden meats, let the broths be made
with Lettuce, Borage, Sorrel, and Marigolds, the Coaling seeds, French barley,
and Oatmeale, with a little Saffron, for Saffron does engender many spirits,
and resists poison, To these, if need require, the opening roots may be added
to avoid obstructions.

Fishes are altogether to be avoided, because they soon corrupt in the
stomach; but if the Patient be delighted with them, those that live in pure and
sandy water, and about rocks and stones, as are Trouts, Pearches, Gudgeons,
Pikes, and Cravises boiled in milk.

Eggs potched, and eaten with the juice of Sorrel are very good.

But after the spots appear, then the chief diet must be Ponadoes, Almond
creames, gellies, eullasses, and such like, until the Fever be past.

For Drink, a decoction of Barley or Hearts horn is profitably used, in the
beginning of the disease especially, and when the Fever is vehement.

But if the Fever be not very violent a decoction of Barley, Figs, and Hearts
horn, will be very profitable.

A decoction of French prunes is very pleasing to the taste?

Also the syrup of dried Red Roses, with Barley-water, or small Beer.

Foreslus does much commend a decoction of Barley and figs to be very
profitable, to drive the humors to the skin.

In the whole course of the disease sleep ought to be moderate, for too sound
sleep draws back the matter to the center.

Now that the aforesaid Indications may be fulfiled, the cure must be begun by
bloodletting; but we must consider the Small pox ante eruptionem before any
spots appear, and post eruptionem, after the spots appear; before any spots
appear, especially in a full body, Phlebotomy may safely be done.

Incipiente morbo, ubi adist sanguinis redundantia, si vires and ^ae^as
permittant, nil melius putatur, quam a venae sectione initium facere: In the
beginning of the Small pox, where blood does much abound, if strength and age
p^rmit, no remedy so safe as letting blood.

Hollerius says thus, Primo Holler. demorbis internis.
aut secundo die sanguis detrahendus est; on the first or second day blood is
to drawn away; and his reason is this, Sic enim melius transpirat corpus,
putredinis causa intercipitur, levatur natura, and si quid vitii reliquum est,
celerius in superficiem corporis repurgatur, etc. For by letting blood,
respiration is much helped, and the cause of putrefaction is intercepted,
nature is eased, and the corrupt humors are more speedily sent from the center
to the circumference.

Fuchsius has these words, Si Fuchsius.
adulti corripiuntur exanthematis, initio curationis, si corpus plenu^ fuerit,
sanguis mittendus; idque faciendu^ antequam appareant exanthemata; If adult or
grown persons be taken with the Small pox, in the beginning, if they have full
bodies, blood is to be taken away; but let it be done before the spots appear:
and of this opinion are most of the learned Physicians.

In ebullitione were perfectiva seu depurativa, sanguis detrahendus non est; in
corruptiva vero venae sectio maxim necissaria, etc. When there is an
ebullition perfective merely and depurative, blood is not to be taken away;
but in a corruptive, blood-letting is very necessary: so necessary is
blood-letting in dangerous Pox, in which the corruptive ebullition is wont to
happen, that the tender age of infants must not hinder it. Amatus Lucitanus
Venae sectio in infantibus.
let a child blood of five years old that had the Small pox, and took away four
ounces of blood, who soon recovered.

And he let another blood Sennertus tomus secundus, 196.
of seven years old, and took away six ounces of blood. And Avenzoar let his
son blood at three years old, who oon after recovered.

Some give counsel to let blood though the spots appear in full bodies, where
the Fever is violent.

Good tendance is a maine and principal help in this disease, for experience
does manifest, that if they be kept too hot or too cold, or take cold beer or
broth, how dangerous it is.

You must neither purge nor draw blood, the disease increasing or being at the
hight, unless there be a great plenitude, or else the disease complicate with
other, as with a Plurisie or Squinancy, which require it; for purging causes a
motion from the circumse. rence to the center; and to whomsoever having pox, a
looseness happening, the pox commonly strike in, and the party dies.

But when the height of the disease is over, and in the deelination thereof,
you may with Cassia, Manna, Tamarinds, and syrup of Roses, or some stronger
medicine, evacu^te the relics of the disease.

But if the belly be hard and bound, it may gently be removed, Purgatio;
but not provoked; and that by a suppository of Honey alone without Salt, or
with a Clyster of Milk, or a decoction of French barley, Raisons and Licoris,
with Sugar and yolks of Eggs.

The next Indication is in the assisting the motion of nature, or helping to
expel the Pox, which must be helped forward with Diaphoreticks and
Alexipharmicks; that is, with such things as cause sweat, and resist the venom
of the disease.

When you perceive the pox coming out either on the Patients breast or face,
make this Posset; Take of Ale or Beer, which the Patient likes best, make a
posset with new Milk and take off the curd, and boil in a pint of the
posserdrink, of rasp'd Hearts horn and Marigold flowers, of each one spoonful,
six or eight leaves of Sorrel, a little Licorish sl^ced, a few Figs cut in
pieces; take this bloodwarm, and drink no other drink for two or three days,
until they come out.

Some commend this following A Sudorisick decoction.
decoction; of Figs, husked Lentils, Citron seeds, the seeds of Fennel,
Parsley, Smallage, roots of Dog-grasse, Raisons, and Dates; for such a
decoction certainly if it have power to cause sweat, has also a faculty to
send forth unto the skin the morbifick humor.

Riverius says this following Medicine is much commended by Rhasis, Avicen,
and the Arabian Physicians, and much used by our later Physicians to drive our
the Pox.

Take fat Figs seven ounces, L^ntills shaled three dramms, Lack two drammes and
a half, Gum, Tragacanth, and Fennel seed, of each two drammes, Saffron
fifteen grains, Raisous five drammes; boil all in a pint and half of
Fountain Water to the third part, let the Patient drink thereof. The Saffron
opens and corroborates, the Raisons do strengthen the Liver: and Tragaganth,
although it do incrassat and astringe, that is thicken and bind, yet it is
therefore mingled with the rest, that it may prohibit the overgreat ebullition
of the blood.

But if the malignity be very great, you must chiefly use Antidotes: The best
that I know I here give you, and I believe there is not a better.

Take of oriental Pearls, of Crabs eyes, of red Coral, of Hearts horn, of
white Amber, of the roots of Scorzonera, by some called Viperaria, or Vipers
grass, of the roots of Contra-yerna, of each a like quantity, of the black
tips of Crabs claws, being wiped very clean, so much as of all the rest: Beat
all in a clean mortar, into very fine powder, and search them through a fine
Lawn searce, make all these into a mass with jelly of Hearts horn, wherein you
must infuse some store of Saffron; make it like past with continual beating of
it, then make it into balk, rolling them smooth in the palms of your hands,
and when they are dry keep them in a box wrapped up several in papers for your
use; if they be kept dry it is the better, they will last long without
decaying; when you have use for this powder, take one of the balls cut, or
scrape some of it, and after make it very fine by brusing it with a knife, or
otherwise; it is to be taken in a spoonful of good distilled water, as of
Carduus, Scabious, but the best is Marigold-water, take a spoonful without
powder after it, to wash it down: you may give of this powder at one time
twelve or eighteen grains, and in the highest extremity twenty grains, and
that every tweive hours; you may give to a child eight grains, or as you shall
see cause.

This powder is most excellent against all infectious diseases, for the Plague,
being taken at first being infected; it is good also for Agues and Fevers, for
pains of the heart, for trembling of the heart, it does restore those that be
falling into Consumptions, adding a little syrup of Gilliflowers, it drives
forth the Small pox and Measles; given in a little conserve of red Roses, it
stays Fluxes; and being taken in time, it preserves from all infections; it
provokes neither stool nor vomit, nor gives offense to the taste, smell, or
stomach; it works insensibly and without violence to nature, and is of such
virtue, that neith^r Unicorn's horn nor Beazar stone can equal it, though taken
in a double quantity: I have used of it this twenty years, and have always a
good quantity of it by me: I wish all that are able, to have some of it in a
readiness by them. I remember my Father did use to call it his Antidotus
Contrayerva, his Antidote against poison. Gerhard says, the powder of the root
Contra-yerva taken in Whitewine, is a most present remedy against poison,
Monardus.
of what nature soever it be (only sublimate excepted, whose malignity is
only extinguished by drinking of Milk.)

The root Scorzonera by most called Viperaria, or Viperina, or Serpentaria,
because it is of force and efficacy against poisons of Vipers and Serpents; the
virtues of this root are many.

1. It is most excellent against the infect^ons of the Plague, and all poisons
of venomous Beasts, being made into fine powder and taken in Treaklewater.

2. It is good in all pestilent Diseases, taken in possetdrink with Saffron.

3. It helps the infirmities of the Heart, and such as use to swoun, given in
Sack and Borage-water.

4. It does help Convulsions in children, given in Sage or Lavender-water.

5. It does cure the biting of a mad Dog, drunk in Rosevinegar.

6. It causes a speedy Delivery, given in burnt Wine with a few Cloves and a
little Mace.

7. It is a good Cordial in all fits of the Mother, given in Rue, Sage, or
Lavenderwater.

8. It cures also them that have the Falling Sickness, and such as are
troubled with giddiness in the head, taken in Conserve of Rosemary flowers.

The root condited with Sugar, as are the roots of Eringus, and such like, work
the like effects, and so does the roots of Contra-yerva.

The Confection of Hyacinth Confectio de Hyacintho.
is a great Cordial, exceeding good in acute Fevers, and contagious Diseases;
it does much strengthen and cherish the heart, half a dram is given at a time.

There is a Treacle-water which is exceeding good to expel the Pox and
Measl^s, it is much used in Fevers, especially pestilentiall; it strengthens
the heart and vitals, it is an admirable Counter-poyson; the Composition is as
follows.

Take of the juice of green Walnuts four pound, the juice of green Rue three
pound, juice of Carduus Benedictus, Aqua Theri^calis.
Marigolds, Bawm, of each two pound, the roots of Petasites, or Butter-burres,
fresh and green, a pound and a half, the roots of Burres one pound, roots of
Angelica and Master-wort, green, of each six ounces, Scordion four handfulls,
old Venice-treacle and Mithridate of each eight ounces, Canary wine twelve
pints, White-wite Vinegar six pints, juice of Lemmons a quart; digest them two
days in a bath, let the vessel be well stopped, then distill it in send for
your use.

Gascons powder made with Oriental Beazor, is very good against all malignant
and pestilent Diseases, Small pox, Measles, Plague, malignant or scarlet
Fevers; the Dose is ten or twelve grains in Carduus or Dragon-water.

Conserve of red Roses and Mithridate in Marigold-water I have found very good;
and recovered many with it, especially when there has been great Fluxes; for
the Conserve does give an effectual binding and certain strengthening
quality; and the Mithridate does expel and keep out the Pox.

East India Bezoar powdered small in posset drink, is very effectual; the Dose
is from three to eight grains, according to the strength and age of the Patient.

Sennertus commends Bezoar, Pulvis ex. pulsivus.
with the solution of Pearls; half a scruple in the waters of Sorrel,
Scabious, Carduus, and Marigold-flowers.

Also these following Potitions are much commended by the same Author.

Take Figs seven drammes, Lentills shalled three drams, Gum traganth and
Fennellseed, of each two drammes; boil all in a pint and half of
Fountain Water, to the third part, give the Patient drink thereof.

Or this: Lentills shalled Potio ad Morbillos.
four ounces, Figs sliced ten, Raisons of the Sun stoned 2 ounces, Fennel seeds
bruised three drammes, Saffron one scruple, Gum-lacc one dram and a half; boil
all in three pints of water to a pint, give of the strained liquor four or five
ounces for a Dose to drink.

Or this: Take fat Figs, in number thirty, Lentills three handfuls, Turnep seed
seven drammes, Barley cleansed from the husks ten ounces, Fennel seed ten
drammes; cut and bruise all, and put into five pints of water, let it stand and
infuse a day on a very gentle fire, close covered, afterward distill it for
your use.

Or this, Take Turnepseed one dram, Annis, and Fennel seeds each two drams,
cleansed Barley and Lentills each half an ounce, four Figgs sliced; boil all
in Carduus water in a close-covered vessel; give of the strained liquor two or
three spoonfulls at a time.

I have often given Mithridate half a dram at a time, with syrup of
Gilliflowers in Carduus or Marigold-water; and so I have Venice-treacle,
London-treacle, and Diascordium, in like manner, with good success.

For Mithridate is an excellent Antidote, and good against pestilent and
contagious Diseases, it is good against Poison, and such as have done
themselves wrong by taking filthy Medicines; it provokes Sweat, and helps
weakness of the Limbs, and Diseases coming of cold.

Venice-treacle is a good remedy in pestilentiall Fevers; it resists Poison,
and the bitings of venomous Beasts; it is good against the Fallingsicknesse,
Apoplexies, the Cholick, and Illiack passion, etc.

London-treacle is a good Antidote in pestilential times; it resists Poison,
strengthens cold Stomachs, helps digestion and crudities of the stomach.

Diascordium mightily strengthens the Heart and Stomach; it provokes Sleep,
and is used in Fevers for that purpose.

What parts must be armed against, aad preserved from the Pox.
The Eyes, Nose, Throat, Lungs and inward parts, ought to be kept freer from
the eiuption of Pustles than the other parts.

You must defend the eyes when you first begin to suspect the disease, with the
eyelids also, moistening them with Rose Water, a little Camphire and Saffron,
with two or three drops of Vinegar.

Or with Plantine and Rosewaters, in which a little Saffron is dissolved.

Also Woman's milk mixed with Rose Water, and often renewed.

But if the eyes be much swollen and red, you must strengthen the sight with
Fennel or Eyebright-water.

White Rose and Eye brightwaters, with a little Camphire, and with a feather
dress them often in a day.

To preserve the Face, that the Pox leave not behind them pits and scarres,
which does often deform the countenance: when they are ripe, and are high and
white in the middle, then mingle Spermaceti and oil of sweet Almonds together
to an ointment, and with a feather anoint the face therewith, being a little
warmed: this will cause them to scale.

Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, without fire, is excellent for the same
purpose; and so is oil of Nute new drawn without fire, and mixed well with a
like quantity of Rose Water, till they come to the form of a liniment, then
anoint with a feather twice a day.

This following Liniment is much used.

Take of fat Bacon one pound, cut it in thin slices, and hang it in a string
before the fire, that it may melt, and let it drop it into half a pint of Rose
and Plantine-water, and when it is all melted, let it roole, and then bear it
out of the water with a clean Spatula, then wash it in three ^^ four several
waters more* then (...) out the water, and mix the fat with a dram of
Spermacete, and anoint the face with a feather.

Oil of bitter Almonds two ounces, with Spermacete half an ounce, is very good
to anoint the face after the pox are dried, to cause them to fall off. without
leaving any marks,

The oil of yolks of Eggs is very good to clear the skin, and restore hair,
and to cure the Malign ulcers, which many times happens after the Pox: it is
thus made.

Take of new-laid Eggs one hundred, boil them until they be hard, and take
out the yolke and cut them in pieces, and put them into a fryingpan until they
turn reddish, and yield a faity moisture, then take them and put them hot into
a hair bag, and press out the oil.

It is the practice of many that when the Pox be ripe, to bore them thorough
with a golden or silver needle, lest the quittor tarrying long in them, should
leave holes in the part: But experience has taught, that, the Pox being bored
are longer in healing, and does longer hold their cruft, because of the
weakness of natural heat, caused in the part by boring whereby more deformed
scarres are left behind.

The internal parts may be preserved with a decoction of Lentils and
Tragaganth, described before.

Such Pox as arise in the Os and faxe.
mouth, palate, and throat, with hoursenesse and difficulty of swallowing, may
be helped by Gargarismes made with Barley-water, Plantinewater, with some syrup
of red Roses and Mulberries dissolved therein.

The Lungs are preserved by Pulmo.
syrup of Jujubes, deyed Roses, white Poppies, Myrtils, Pomgranates,
Water Lillies and the like.

Sometimes tedious itchings solicit the Patient to scratch, especially in the
palms of the hands and soles of the feet, because the thickness of the skin in
those parts hinders the eruption of the Pox, which you shall help, if you cause
those parts to be fomented pretty hot with a decoction of Marshmallowes,
Barley, and Lupines; or with a decoction of Pellitory of the Wall one handful,
flowers of Cammomel, and Melilote, of each half a pugill; boil them in a pint
of Scabious-water, with this liquor hot, often let the itching pox be moistened.

The Excoriations and Ulcers, which arise from deep and malignant Pox, are to
be cured with Vnguentum Album well camphorated.

When the Fever is past, and the Pox begin to fall, let them eat Bread and
Butter, or a potched Egg; let their Beer be warmed with a Toste, and sweetened
with a little Sugar, and when they have drunk, let them eat the Toste to
cleanse their mouth and throat.

As for sucking Children, such things shall be given to the Nurse, as may
infringe and overcome the strength of the malignity; she shall take broths with
Purslain, Lettuce, Sorrel, Succory, Borage, and French Barley.

She shall shun all salt, spiced; and baked meats; she shall drink decoctions
of Licorish, Raisons, and Sorrel roots.

She shall also take purging Medicines, as if she were sick of the same
disease, that so her milk may become medicinable.

Cautions in Air and Diet, to prevent the Small Pox and Measles.
No prevention seemed more certain to the Anoients, than most speedily to
remove into places far distant from the infected place and to be slow in their
return thither again.

But those, who by reason of their employments, cannot change their habitation,
must principally have care of two things.

The first is that they strengthen their bodies, and the principal part
thereof against the daily imminent invasions of the pestiferous and venerate
air.

The second is, that they amend and purge the corruptions of the venenate
malignity, by smells and perfumes resisting the poison thereof.

Let moderate exercise precede your Meals.

Let the belly have due evacuation either by Nature or Art.

Let the heart, the seat of life, and the rest of the bowels be strengthened
with Cordialls and Antidotes.

Make choice of a pure Air, and far remote from stinking places; for a cloudy
or mifty air, and such as is infected with gross and stinking vapors, duls
the spirits, dejects the appetite, makes the body faint and ill-coloured,
oppresses the heart, and is the breeder of many diseases.

Kindle a clear fire in all the lodging chambers of the house, and perfume the
whole house with Aromatic things, as Fankinsence, Myrrh, Benzoin, Landanum,
Styrax, Lavender, Rosemary, Marjoram, Cloves, pieces of Fur, Juniper, and let
your clothes be aired in the same.

Excess in diet is to be shunned, for thence proceeds obstruction, and
preparation of the body to putrefaction.

Women must be very careful that they have their courses duly, for stopping
besides the custom, they easily acquire corruption, and draw by contagion the
rest of the humors into their society.

Of the Cordial remedies to preserve our bodies from the Small Pox and Measles.
The roots of Angelica is a singular remedy against all infections taken by
evil and corrupt air, if you hold a piece of it in your mouth, or chew the
same between your teeth, it does most certainly dr^ve away the pestilentiall
air.

Zedoary is an excellent root held or chewed in the mouth; so are the roots of
Scoizonera, and Contra-ye^va, condited.

Treacle-water. two ounces, with the like quantity of Sack, is much commended,
being drunk, and rubbing the nostrils, mouth and ears with the same,

The Electuary following is very effectual.

Take of the best Treacle three ounces, Juniper Berries and Carduus-seeds, of
each one dram and a half, of Bolearmoniack prepared half an ounce, of
Damargariton Frigidum, the powder of Hartshorn and red Cor^ll, of each one
dram; mix them with the syrup of Citions, as much as will make all into a I
quid Electuary; take every morning the quantity of a Filberd in two spoonfuls
of Scabious-water.

These following Tablets are also very profitable.

Take the roots of Angelica, Ga^tian, Zedoarie, Elecampane, of each half an
ounce; of Citron and Sorrelseeds, of each a dram, of the dried rinds of
Citrons, Cinnamon, Bay and Juniper Berries, and Saffron, of each two scruples;
of Conserve of Roses and Bugloss, of each two ounces, and fine hard Sugar as
much as is sufficient; make thereof Tablets of the weight of half a dram; take
one of them in a morning, and before meat two hours, one at a time.

Mithridate, and London or Venice-Treacle, are commended above all Cordialls,
adding for every half ounce of each of them, one ounce and a half of Conserves
of Roses, or of Bugloss, and two or three drammes of Bole-Armoniack prepared:
Of these being incorporated make a Conserve: it is to be taken in the morning
the quantity of a Filberd.

Take of preserved Citron and Orange pills, of each two drammes; of Conserve of
Roses and the roots of Buglosse, of each six drammes, of Citron seeds one
ounce, of Anis and Fennel-seeds, of each two drammes, of Angelica-roots three
drammes, sugar of Roses as much as suffices: make it into a body of a
Conserve, and take a little of it before you go abroad every morning.

The pills of Ruffus are accounted most effectual preservatives, so that
Ruffus himself says, that he never knew any to be infected that used them: the
composition of them is thus,

Take of the best Alloes half a dram, of Gum-Amoniacum two drammes, of Myrrh
two drammes and a half, of Mastick two drammes, of Saffron seven grains: make
them all into fine powder, and incorporate them with the juice of Citrons, or
the syrup of Lemmons, and make thereof a Miss, and take the weight of half a
dram every morning two or three hours before meat, and drink the water of
Sorrel after it.

The Alloes does cleanse and purge, Myrrh resists putrefaction, Mastick
strengthens, Saffron exhilerates and makes lively the spirits.

Of Local Medicines.
All aromatical, astringent, or spirituous things, have proper virtues against
ill and infectious aires, and to strengthen the heart and the brain. Of this
kind are Rue, Balm, Rosemary, Scordium, Sage, Wormwood, Nutmeg, Cloves
Saffron, the roots of Angelics, and Lovage, and such like, which must be
macerated one night in sharp Vinegar and Aqua vitae, and then tied in a knot as
big as an egg, or rather let it be carried in a sponge soked in the said
infusion.

Take Cinnamon and Cloves beaten together, with a little Saffron, in equal
parts, of vinegar of Roses, and Rosewater, into which you must dip a sponge,
which rolled in a fair linen cloth, you may carry it in your hand, and often
smell to.

Or take of Wormwood half a handful, ten Cloves, of the roots of Gentian and
Angelica, of each two drammes, of Vinegar and Rose Water, of each two ounces,
of Treacle and Mithridate of each one dram; beat and mix them all well
together, and let a sponge be dipped therein, and used as abovesaid.

Or you may make Pomanders, the form of which is thus: Take of yellow Sanders,
Mace, Citron pills. Roseleaves, of each two drammes; of Banzoin, Ladanum,
Storax, of each half a dram; of Cinnamon and Saffron, of each two scruples; of
Camphire and Ambergreece, of each one scruple; of Musk three grains: let them
all be made into powder, and with Tragaganth dissolved into Rosewater, make a
Pomander.

And for the same purpose you may carry about with you sweet powders, made of
Ambergreece, Storax, Orris, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace, Saffron, Benzoin, Musk,
Camphire, Roses, Violets, Marjoram, and such like; of which being mixed
together, powders may be compounded and made.

Many more Receipts I could set down, both for the intentions curative and
preservative, but I hope these flowers of the most learned and experienced,
Sennertus, Riverius, Bartholomeus, per Dulcis, Hollerius, Fuchsius, Parius, and
diverse other Authors, with the known experience of my Father's and my own, may
suffice until the next oppertunity.

FINIS

