A Discovery, and Confutation OF THE OPINIONS, AND PRACTICES Of some false
Brethren, betwixt Bridge, and Lincoln: Showing how they agree in their
Opinions, with Pelagians; Papists; Arminians; in their Practices, with
Anabaptists.

Wherein Universal Redemption is confuted; and Gods Absolute Decree confirmed.

Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses: so do these also resist the Truth:
Men of corrupt Minds; reprobate concerning the Faith: But they shall proceed no
further; for their Folly shall be manifest unto all men; as theirs also was. 2.
Tim. 3. 8. 9.

BY JOHN WETHERALL, Minister of Spridlington, near Lincoln.

March 22. 1651. Imprimatur. John Downame.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for William Wells, at the Princes Arms in
Little Britain. 1652.

To the Christian Reader.
I Did not think to have come forth in public; My hearts desire was, to hide
my self in our little Hamlet: But God has reserved us to live; till all the
Errors, that other Ages did but imagine, are Preached; yea and Printed in
ours. Sectaries are waxen insolent, like unto Serpents in Summer, that take
courage to step forth, and bite even the heels of Horses, that their Riders may
fall; They spare not, both in word and writing, to reproach our Religion, as a
thing not countenanced by Antiquity; and our Ministry, as altogether void of
Authority. Who will not now step forth, as Aphraates, who lived in the
Wilderness all his life: yet once he was found in the streets of Antioch, in
the days of the Emperor Valens, when Arrianisme, a spark at first, but being
not timely quenched had kindled a fire, that burnt almost over all the World?
He excused the change of his former course, by the similitude of a modest
Virgin, who lurked in the secret corners of her Fathers House, till it was set
on fire; but then necessity compelled her to run into the open Streets, to cry
out for help to quench the Fire.

We see, by sad experience, how fast they faint, and fall from the truth; even
stars fall from Heaven; the Sun, as if ashamed, is even now about to be turned
into darkness; and the Moon into blood, (both in one Month) as if there were
sorrow in Heaven, for these sadder Eclipses of the Truth on Earth; or, as if
the last times, that Christ foretold, had overtaken us.

The Christian Church, (supposed to be of two thousand years continuance) may
be compared to two Days; the first Day began at the first rising of the Son of
Righteousness; and had for its Morning, the three first Centuries, till
Constantine: the Noontide, the next; and it continued the three following
Centuries; and there never shined more glorious Lights in the House of God; the
Sun of Learning and Religion, being then in the Zenith: but this lasted not
long till it declined to an Evening; to which are allotted the 2. next
Centuries; The Beams grew low, the Light obscure, and at last the World was
benighted. This first Days night had a more then Cymmeria^ darkness of
Ignorance and Superstition: even Bellarmine calls it, Saeculum infoelix; in quo
Scriptores illustres nulli; nulla Concilia; it continued till the Year 1050.
The Writers from 850. to 1050. shining as a few smaller Stars: but this Night
once past; the second Day began to dawn; and after a struggling twixt light and
darkness (which continued two, or three hundred years) the Light of Learning got
the better; and then the second Day had its Noon: soon after the Year 1500. as
fair a Sunshine of the Gospel, as ever the Earth saw, since Christ: how long
that Noon continued, I cannot tell: but sure I am, this second Day is declining
toward an Evening; the shadow of Mount Athos reaches to the Isle, Lemnos; a
sure fore-running toke^ of the going down of the Sun: Woe be to us; For the Day
goes away; for the shadows of the Evening are stretched out, Jer. 6. 4. and
hundreds of deeds of Darkness, Errors, Schisms, Heresies, swarm together, to
usher in the Worlds last Night: and saving that God, of his goodness, has
promised to cut short this second Day, I think this second Deluge of Sin, and
Schisms, would save as few from drowning, as the first Deluge did.

Courteous Reader; If thou can not tell this is truth by thy Experience: then
I give God thanks; that there are some Parts of the Land, not yet infected with
this Plague. My Parish also was a Virgin, not invaded, till about a
twelvemonth since; we had such happiness as we desired; and, it seems, more
then we deserved; when the Grounds about us were wet with showers of Schisms:
yet we were dry, with Gideons Fleece; But because we gave not God thanks, he
suffered Satan to seduce two Brethren, by nature, and in iniquity, who began
first to loath the Manna, that raind down from Heaven, every Sabbath day, and
lusted after Quails; strange Doctrines, that were taught in the Towns about
us: At length they brought Mr. Thomson, now my Antagonist (Father of those
Children, that he brings up to pick out their spiritual Parents Eyes) who
Preached privately to such of my Parish, as they could persuade to come and
hear him: Which being without my Consent, and against my Conscience, I showed
some dislike; rather by not approving, then openly disproving any of their
Opinions; or their Practices: I durst not be too bold; their Multitudes were
such; and many of them so audacious, in affronting Ministers: yet such offense
they took (for I gave none) that one of the Brethren (the younger, but elder in
wickedness) went from house to house, to persuade my Neighbors not to pay me
Tithes: but first he used all means to get into my debt; hoping to deceive me:
and when he had, so far, that he had no further hopes, then (to get a Bond,
which, God knows, was none of mine, though taken in my name, and he knew it
too) he swore, and offered to swear so fearfully, as would have affrighted any,
whose conscience was not cauterized: for he thought I would give, or forgive
any thing, rather then oppose, or be opposed by Mr. Thomson. All the Week he
labored to draw others from hearing me on the Sabbath: they threatened to pull
me out of the Pulpit; the loss of my Living; my Estate; nay, little less then
my Life was threatened; so that I durst scarce go out of my own doors; they
slandred all the Sermons I Preached; and when I writ almost every word, that I
might be sure nothing slipped from me, they did no less detract, and defame me,
then before: If I used the name of a Schismatic, or Sectary; it was them I
meant; nay, I durst scarce speak against the Devil; if I did; my words were
wrested oftentimes, or always, to that I never thought. I said once, that
Christ gave the Devils leave to enter into a heard of Swine; and they applied
that to themselves: If I spoke of any, that were like to go to the Devil; it
was reported, that I meant it of them: as if none, but our Universalists, were
like to go to the Devil: Thus every day they wrested my words; all their
thoughts were against me for evil, Psalm. 56. 5.

They set their Children, and Servants to disturb me in praying, and Preaching,
and to trouble the Assembly; that either they might not hear, or I might not
speak: One of these two Brethren stayed to hear me in the Morning; and gave
information to the other Brethren in the Afternoon: Sometimes he came to my
house, and called me Master, as if he meant to kiss me; when the Judas had an
intent to betray me; and to be the utter ruin of me, and mine.

When they waxed worse, and wickeder still: I moved a Discourse with Mr. T. in
private; publicly I durst not meet: But that being denied, I sent a Letter to
a Worthy Gentleman, Justice of Peace, entreating him to tell Mr. T. I desired a
friendly Discourse with him in writing: but for this boldness they gave out such
fearful words against me, as have been seldom heard: The Brethren met about
it, and after some sober co^stultatio^, (I judge charitably) they drew up a
Charge of high Treason, committed by Mr. Wetherall, against the Crown, Royalty,
Love, Goodness, and Sovereignty of the Son of God; for that I denied Universal
Redemption, Free Will, and other false Opinions; which they called Truth: To
prove this Charge, they empanell a Jury of 12. Places in Scripture; but the
Verdict is ungiven up; for they applied not one Place, to prove any thing; but
desiring simply to believe, left it to the consideration of Rational men: And
after many shameless slanders, (as their manner is) and threatenings, what they
meant to do against me, this Charge was signed by Mr. Thomson, and sent abroad
among the Brethren; walking without a pass, till it was weary, fainted, and
could travel no further; for it began to be torn all in pieces, even covered
with grease and dirt: and then 4 unruly Fellows came with it into our Church,
December. 28. a Smith, a Miller, a Thatcher, a Thrasher; For their Country, they
came from the 4 Winds; 4 several Towns, far asunder; But for their Manners,
sure more barbarous, then He that sent them: Four Beasts would have been more
civil, than they, in Sermon time; immediately after Sermon they brought forth
their Charge; the Smith discharged it; and they all charged me, with preaching
false Doctrine that Day; they forgot what I had said, and remembered only what
they were sent to say.

I thought it not fit to tempt God in trusting my self among such: so I left
them, without answering either to their Words, or their beastly Behavior; but
my Neighbors were amazed: They spoke, and did on such a manner, that Children
will remember, when they are old; and Old men would never have forgot, had they
seen the like, since they were Children.

But when they saw my Neighbors were not pleased; nay, heartily displeased at
their Behaviors; They went instantly and informed the other Brethren, who came
together, about, or above 30. before Night; and concluded a general Meeting at
our Town, on Thursday after; they menaced, as if they meant a War against me,
and my Neighbors; gave out Mr. T. should teach at my Door; Their Words were so
high, that I might well fear the pulling down of my House, or the pulling out
of my House: but it came only to a Chair, or a Chimney Business; and so the
Town Clerk dismissed the Assembly, Acts 19. 41.

Therefore, when I saw the danger I lived in every day; and how they went from
evil, to worse; I resolved upon a Discourse against some of their Opinions,
and their Practices, for better satisfaction of my own People, over whom God
had given me the Charge: If peradventure I might show it to some few of my
Friends, was the top of my intent. I began Jan. 1. and ended before Jan. the
last: but when I showed it to my Neighbors, next Sabbath after I had made an
end, never furious Lions were more fierce, then the Brethren, and Sisters,
because I durst be so bold beyond their expectation: their words were
intolerable; their writings incredible, but that I have them by me, sent to my
house to incense me; and showed to any that would see them, to shame me, by
John Hatfield, one of the two Brothers I spoke of before; a man whom malice
has made to ride, and go many miles, to do me mischiefs: They cried not out
against Paul at Ephesus, Acts 19. more, then these men did against me; as if I
were unworthy to live, for writing that which (Christian Reader) I here present
to public view; being compelled to take this course, partly out of pity
toward the poor seduced people: and in part to recover my own Credit: their
Words may leave a skar, if the wound be cured: Silence in such Accusations is a
crying sin: Every man, but most of all Ministers, are bound to discharge
themselves from all imputations; especially of false Doctrine, and Heresy;
wherewith I have been charged openly: a Crime which Water cannot wash away; it
has been usually burnt out with Fire: It leaves such a spot in the
Conscience, that Cyprian conceives the blood of Martyrdom can not fetch it
out: I hope I have made it appear plainly, whether our Protestant Profession,
or their Pelagianisme be false Doctrine, and Heresy: Here is a Salve to cure
the biting of these Serpents.

Solinus writes that in Sardinia, where there is a venomous Serpent, called
Solifuga, whose bitting is present death; yet there is also at hand a
Fountain, in which they who wash themselves are instantly cured: and so if any
of my Neighbors be now bitten by these Solifuga's, these Serpents, here is a
remedy at hand; the Antidote may be there ready, where the Infection first
breaks out.

We run to the Physician to cure the Diseases of our bodies: but the Diseases
of our souls are far more dangerous, we ought to have a greater care to cure
them: even the brute Beasts, that have no understanding, will teach us so much
providence. The Hearts of Creete, or Candy, as we now call it, being wounded
with an arrow, will run to seek some Dictamnie, which (they say) does pull the
arrow out, and heal the wound. The Swallows, to cure the blindness of their
young ones Eyes, fly to fetch Celandine, which restores their sight: The Dog,
when he is sick, hasts to his Grass, to give himself a Vomit: The Toade,
fighting with the Spider, as soon as she feels her self begin to swell,
crawleth to her Plantaine, and so is recovered: even the Stork in the Heaven
knows her time; the Turtle, and the Crane, Jer. 8. 7. and they make use of
their time: but we poor miserable men; more unreasonable then bruit Beasts, are
wounded spiritually every day, many times deadly; and yet seldom seek for
medicines to cure the maladies of our souls. I know, the Means I offer unto
thee, gentle Reader, is very simple; so they must be, my self being even a
Child in understanding; but being in the dark, a Child with a Lanthorn and
Candle lighted, is better then a Man that has a Torch, if it be unlighted: now
in all these 4. or 5. years, that they have roved in our corner of the Country,
I heard of none that made day resistance, or did, or durst say, Sir, Why do
you so? The fear of Captain T. and his Troops did shake some Ministers, and
many other men besides, like a Fever, or as the Trees of the Forest are shaken
with the Wind: Therefore rather then Gods Cause should sustain such damage, as
I saw it did, by a general silence, I stepped forth, like the Lacedemonian
Soldiour, impotent of his legs, and neither meet to fight, nor to fly; yet had
he this hope, that he might blunt the edge of his Enemies swords; and set on,
or make others ashamed, that were more able to fight: Silver and Gold have I
none, but Goats hair, or Rams skins, or such as I have, I give, to cover the
Tabernacle of my God: It pitied me, to see the Sheep of Christ, like Wolves,
swallow down whole whatsoever was put into their mouths by such Carvers: and
if I gain, or beget but one Soul, it will be some comfort to me; That one, in
time, may beget another; and that other, another; and so I may be a means to
beget many Souls to God. I shall pray (as it is my part) that my poor pains
may profit thee, Reader, and prevail to the beating down of Sins, and
Schisms; which God grant, for Christ Jesus his sake, our only Lord and
Savior; It shall be in the daily devotions of

Thy Brother in Christ, JOHN WETHERALL

In page 4. line 17. for Earth, read Church.

A Discovery, and Confutation of the Opinions, and Practices of some false
Brethren, etc.
SUch as are Adversaries to the Truth, slander our Doctrine touching
Predestination and Free Will; as if thereby we led men to be careless in
their lives; because (as they urge it) God having Predestined all things,
man's Free Will is lost thereby; so that he can not do otherwise then he does,
but God himself (by our Doctrine) must be the Author of sin: Wherein they
show their unsatiable desire of conte^tion, and that besides the Grave, the
barren Womb, the Earth, and the Fire, which are never satisfied, Pro. 30. 15.
There is yet a fifth thing, as unsatiable as they; that is, the Contentious
Spirit of an Adversary, never satisfied with lying and contradiction. For, let
them say directly what they mislike, Is it our Doctrine of Predestination? Yea,
(besides that, it is the Profession of all the Protestant Churches) you shall
see it presently proved by one, who is able to say the least of ten thousand.
Is it because we deny Free Will? Yea, they belly their own knowledge, they know
we deny it but in part; In statu integro, it was Free, in statu laeso, it is
Free from constraint. Is it because we teach God is the Author of sin? Even
the Jesuits excuse us; the Protestants know well (says Suarez) that God
intends not that Opuse lib. 2. cap. 2.
which is formal in sin, nor inclines the Will of man, that he should
intend it. Or is it finally, because we hold some fatal necessity,
constraining the Will of man, that he cannot do otherwise then he does? That
so all care and consultation should be to no purpose: Indeed some of the old
Philosophers, and new Mahumetans tell such Tales, but we teach the contrary.

These, and the like, being malicious and base imputations, devised by men in
their fury, and desperate adventures against us, to seduce the ignorant, and
make our Cause odious, which even their own people would embrace, if they knew
it. And my self being threatened (by many ignorant men of mean condition) set
on by others, not only with the loss of my Living, but (I may almost say) of
my life; besides the slanders cast upon me by such as can do nothing else: I
am forced therefore to this Defense, for my self, the Church of England, and
other Reformed Protestant Churches; against Pelagians, Papists, Arminians,
Universalists.

I have read of a studious Father, who meditating very much upon the Mystery of
the Trinity, there appeared unto him a Child, that with a Shell, was lading
the Sea into a little hole; he demanded of the Child what he was about to do,
I intend (said the Child) to empty all the Ocean into this Pit; it is
impossible for thee (said the Father) as possible (the Child replied) as for
thee to comprehend this profound Mystery in thy shallow capacity: De me nunc
narratur fabula, and this is the Case of the most able men in these deep
Divine Mysteries.

Simonides being asked by Hiero King of Sicily, what God was? he desired a day
to deliberate, and then being asked again, he desired two days, and being
asked again, he desired four days; and ever as he was asked, he gave no other
answer, but desired to have the days doubled: but double and triple days and
years, yet that time is no time for such an undertaking.

For the men of this World to undertake to tell what God did, even before there
was one man or a world, is but a desperate adventure, even beyond the Giants of
old: but it is able to make any man's heart ache, and his hair stand upright, to
hear how our ignorant people prate as boldly, as if they had been by, and say
-- what they say, concerning the secret, unsearchable Decree of our Great God
Almighty, if any man list to hear, he may, for they will speak that which I
may not write. For my own part, in this mysterious point of Predestination, I
could have chosen rather to ascend by Repentance, New Obedience, Good Works,
etc. Then descend, diving into, or determining Gods Decree: For I know that in
the true Doctrine of Predestination, we should reason rather ascendendo, then
descendendo: thus I live in obedience to God, in love with my Neighbor; I
follow my Vocation honestly, and therefore I trust that God has Elected and
Predestined me to salvation; not thus (which is the usual course of
Argument) God has Predestined and chosen me to life, therefore though I
sin never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned: For whom he once loveeth,
he loves to the end. I say that this is the right manner of reasoning, in the
point of Predestination: But unless we will suffer our people to be led (I
verily believe they will be loath to let me tell the manner how they are led) I
must declare my conscience, to clear my self, that it is none of my fault, if
any persevere, and perish in this rent, now new made in the Earth, through
which they may as easily fall into Hell, as Korah, and his Company, did through
that rent in the Earth: therefore with as great a care as I can to avoid
Presumption, I proceed.

First, touching Predestination, we hold, according Romans 9. Ephesians. 1. 4 5. 1.
These 5. Acts 2. 23. 2. Tim. 2. 20.
to the Scriptures, that God from all Eternity, before the world was made, has
not only foreseen all things, that could be, or should be by his appointment
or permission; but also by an unchangeable Decree, has foreordained all things
and persons, to certain determinate ends, for his own Glory; and that neither
the Saints were elected in Christ to infallible and persevering Grace, and
eternal Glory for their foreseen righteousness; nor the Reprobates refused,
or non-elected for their foreseen wickedness; but both the one and the other
were Predestined to those their several Estates, according to the Council of
Gods own Will, which was not moved by any thing he foresaw in the parties,
but he most freely Decreed according to his own pleasure, and absolute
dominion that he has over the Creature. And this Decree of Gods Will is the
first mover of all other wills, and things in the creatures; whereupon the
smallest, and most contingent, or casual things that fall out, depend as upon
their Universal Cause; whose influence into the second causes, directs,
produces, inclines, and ordinateth them to their effects; not by enforcing
them by any constraint, but by enclining them to work according to their own
condition, so as the said effects proceed out of them, according to their own
natures, a contingent effect of a contingent cause, and a free effect out of a
voluntary and free cause.

This is the sum of that Doctrine, which the Reformed Protestant Churches hold,
touching Predestination: They place the Decree of God to order all things, for
his own glory, as it is, Pro. 16. 4. which is the end, before the means, that
is, before Creation, the Fall, Redemption, etc. but the Pelagians, Papists,
Arminians, Universalists, place the means before the end; as for example; these
say, Mediatio Christi est Causa (...), or externe movens, respectu volitionis
divinae in Electionis actu; that is, the mediation of Christ is the external
cause moving the will of God in the act of Election; whereas the Reformed
Churches say, that the will of God is the sole cause of the mediation of
Christ: Christ is not subordinate to the very Decree it self of Election, he
is to the Execution thereof, as it appears, 1 Pet. 1. 20.

Thus in the distribution of the causes of Salvation and Damnation, our
Adversaries turn them upside down; for they feigue a general decree in God,

1. To create man. 2. To give a Law to his Creature, with condition of life and
death. 3. To permit the fall. 4. To redeem all mankind in Christ, hence
Universal Election. 5. To call all mankind so redeemed, hence Universal
Vocation. 6. Upon their Faith or Infidelity he fixes his Decree.
First, say they, God propounded equally to himself Jacob and Esau, and loved
the one no more then the other; secondly, he purposed to save him of the two
that should do well, and damn him of the two that should do ill; thirdly, he
Decreed to give them both sufficient means of salvation, whereby Esau may as
well be saved as Jacob: fourthly, he Decreed to leave them both to the liberty
of their own Free Will, to use, or not to use the means: fifthly, he foresaw
Jacob would, Esau would not use the means: sixthly, hereupon he pronounced the
Decree of Election to Jacob, and of Reprobation to Esau: thus Pelagians,
Papists, Arminians, Universalists.

These two last, Remonstrants (so the Germans call them, and the name offends
them not) for this Sect pestered them parts first, and gave occasion to the
States of the United Provinces to assemble that Synod at Dort; whither (at
their instance) came religious and learned men from other Reformed Churches; as
out of England, Bishop Carleton, Doctor Davenant, Doctor Ward, Doctor Goade,
Doctor Belcanquell, etc. I say, these Remonstrants that oppose our Doctrine of
Predestination (being of the same mind with them that defend Universal
Redemption:) they say thus: I Will use their own words: Deum Amesius de Elect.
page 11.
aeterno and immutabili decreto, in Jesu Christo filio suo, ante jactum mundi
fundamentum, statuisse, ex lapso and peccatis obnoxio humano genere; ill^s in
Christo, propter Christum, and per Christum servare, qui Spiritus Sancti
gratia, in eundem Filium ejus credunt; and in ea fide, fideique obedientia, per
eandem gratiam, usque ad finem perseverant: that is, God in his eternal, and
immutable Decree, in Jesus Christ his Son, before the foundation of the world,
did determine, out of lapsed mankind, to save those in Christ, for Christ, and
by Christ, who by the spirit did believe in that his Son, and persevere in
that faith, and obedience of faith, by grace, unto their lives end.

Now in this Thesis of theirs, are these five things. 1. The Act, or Decree it
self: 2. the Object: 3. the End: 4. the Condition: 5. the Foundation. First,
the Act or Decree it self, and that, they say, is two fold: 1. General, by
which God Decreed to save all that would believe and persevere: the 2.
Particular, by which he did Decree to save certain persons, whom he foresaw
would certainly believe, and persevere unto the end: some of them call these
two, Gods Antecedent, and Consequent Will; or generale and particulare
pronuntiatum: Thus they make, you may see, two Wills in God, against the Spirit
of God, which says, God is in one mind, Job. 23. 23. The second thing
considerable in their Thesis, is the Object of this Decree, which (they are
forced to confess) all the members of Christ are not; they cannot tell how to
include Infants, because they want faith, and perseverance; nay, they include
in the Object of this Decree, only such as have lived, and persevered, all
other are excluded that are yet alive, until they persevere to the end; so
that by this Opinion, they must first have Faith and Perseverance, before God
can fix his Decree; which is a fearful thing to affirm, for so they are not
Pre-destinated, but Post-destinated, they are forced therefore to a further
absurdity; that is, to distinguish betwixt an incomplete, which (they say) is
common to all the faithful, and a complete Election, which is proper only to
such as persevere. The third thing to be considered in their Thesis, is the End
of this Decree, and that (they say) is salvation and glory; contrary to the
express words of Scripture, which says not we are Predestined to Glory
only, but also to Holiness, or a godly life, and to the Grace of Adoption,
before we can attain to Glory; as it is plain, Ephesians. 1. 4. 5. He has chosen us
in him before the Foundation of the World, that we should be Holy, etc. In the
Decree of Predestination, there is first What, 2. by What, 3. to What: the
first, Man, the 2. Grace, the 3. a Godly Life, and after it is ended, Eternal
Glory. The 4. thing is the Condition required in this Decree of theirs; we say
it is the Good Pleasure, or the Will of God, without any Condition; we are
Predestined according to the Good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1. 5. But the
Condition in their Predestination is foreseen Faith and Works: Tenendum ex
Scripturis veram Conversionem, praestationemque bonorum operum esse conditiones
praerequisitas ante Justificationem: That is, we hold true Conversion, and Good
Works, to be Conditions required before Justification: so says Arminius in
that Epistle before his Discourse on Romans 7. And Nic. Grevincho. is of the same
mind; he seeks to prove it out of the words of S. Paul, I have fought a good
fight, etc. But if Good works be Conditions required before Justification, then
it follows, they are required before Election; there is one and the same Cause
of both: Thus they even out God Almighty from having any hand in his own
Decree, and put all into the power of foreseen Faith and Works, whereas the
Scriptures say, that we are not Predestined for Faith, but to Faith, and Good
Works, as I shall prove afterward. The fifth thing in this Decree of theirs,
is the Foundation, that, they say, is Christ, and so do we; but in this we
differ: they call Christ the external Cause moving God to make this Decree of
Election; whereas we say, the Will of God only, was the Cause why Christ
became our Mediator, and Redeemer; the Mediation or Redemption of Christ was
not the Cause of the Will of God. Thus the Controtroversie betwixt the
Remonstrants, or Universallists, and the Reformed Protestant Churches about
Election, was stated at the Synod of Dort.

The second Thesis of the Remonstrants, or such as hold Universal Redemption,
at the same time (which they would have defended against the Reformed) was
this: Proinde Jesus Christus pro omnibus and singulis mort^us est, atque id ita
quidem, ut omnibus per mortem crucis, reconciliationem, and peccatorum
remissionem impetravit, ea tamen condition, ut nemo illa peccatorum remissione
fruatur, praeter hominem fidelem. Ames. de Redemp. page 116. That is, the
Remonstrants or Universalists furthermore affirm, that Jesus Christ died for
all, and every one, and that so as he obtained Reconciliation, and Remission of
Sins for all, but on this Condition, that none obtain this Remission, or
Reconciliation, but the Faithful.

I might open this Thesis of Redemption, as I did that other of Election, but
it is so plain I need not: the Sum of the Controversy betwixt the Protestant
Churches, and Remonstrants, or (as we call them) Universalists, came to this,
or to these three Heads: 1. whether by the Death of Christ there was an
Impetration, which had no Application: 2. whether this Impetration did equally
belong to All: 3. that none had this Impetration of Christ certainly applied,
or to be applied to them in the Eternal Counsel of God; but God had
Destinated his Son to death, before he had Destinated any to be saved by his
Death: and this Grace of Christ's Redemption, was (as it were) spread abroad in
the air, indetermined to any, every man might catch it that could by Faith.
These men seem to feign to themselves a Grace, as it were some garment hanging
in the air, which every man may put on that will; but these be the devices of
man's wisdom: the holy Scriptures speak otherwise, Pet. Mart. part. 3. page
51. as translated by Ant. Marten. These things the Remonstrants or
Universalists affirmed; and all these the Reformed Protestant party denied.

Now from these Opinions, that Predestination was not the Decree of God, to
Elect some, and pass by others; that God had certainly Elected none, but upon
Condition; That Christ died for all, and every one, etc. I say from these
Absurdities it follows:

Absurd. 1. First, that God would have All men, that is, every particular man
to be saved, contrary to the Scriptures; for if God will have all to be saved,
wherefore are they not saved? Will God have all to be saved, and can he not
have his Will? This Opinion is against the Omnipotency of God; by it, Gods
absolute Will, the Will of his good Pleasure may be defeated, and not
accomplished, which is a desperate shift, contrary to the truth, flat opposite
to the word of God, which says, our God has done whatsoever pleased him in
Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 135. 6. who has resisted his Will? Romans 9. 19. God is
in one mind, who can turn him? and what his soul desires, that he does, Job
23. 13. Indeed the Declarative or Revealed Will of God is not always
fulfilled, but his Absolute Will and Good Pleasure is always fullfilled; a
Christian, Catechized in the Principles of Religion, cannot make the Impotency
of man's will to prevail against the Omnipotency of God, or conceive his
purpose may be disappointed, or his Absolute Will frustrated by any thing in us.

Absurd. 2. Secondly, it follows from these Opinions, that there is an
Universal Election, of all, and every man; a witless conceit: for if all men
Universally be appointed to Grace, then there is no Election, or Choosing of
some; he cannot be said to Elect, that Chooses all: and if only some be
appointed to Grace, (as it must needs be in Election,) then is not Grace
Universal: it is flat against the word of God; for Christ avoucheth plainly,
that fewer are chosen then called, Mat. 22. 14. He says moreover, that all
which are given him shall be one with him, and have life everlasting, John 17.
2. 11. But all men shall not be one with him, and have life everlasting;
therefore all are not given to Christ of God the Father: all men's names are not
written in the Book of life, Apoc. 20. 15. the Kingdom of Heaven is not
prepared for all, Mat. 25. 35. Christ never knew some, Mat. 7. 23. And whereas
they build Universal Election upon the largeness of the Promise, if they
believe; upon the like ground they may as well make an Universal Decree of
Reprobation, whereby God Decrees all men to be damned indefinitely, if they
do not believe.

Absurd. 3. Thirdly, it follows, that there is an Universal Vocation; for
Universal Grace has these three parts, Universal Election, Universal
Redemption, and Universal Vocation, which is quite opposite to the word of
God; for from the Creation till Christ, one part of the world was a People, and
received into the Covenant; the other (and that the greatest part of the world)
was no People, and out of the Covenant. The Church at first was shut up in the
Families of the Patriarchs, and in the Family of Abraham, it was entailde on
Isaac: the world afterward was divided into the Jew, a Church; and the Gentile,
no Church, till the coming of Christ: therefore it is, that the Prophet Isaiah
called the Gentiles Prisoners, Isa. 49. 9. Hosea calls the Gentiles a People,
that had obtained no mercy at all, Hos. 2. 23. Peter says, that in times past
the Gentiles were not esteemed a People, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Christ denied the woman
of Canaan the Request for her Daughter, upon this distinction; it is not meet
to take the Childrens bread and cast it to Dogs, Mat. 15. 26. If any object,
that the Gentiles fell away from the Covenant; I answer, grant that of the
Fathers, yet their Children never heard of the Covenant; therefore it is that
the Prophet Isaiah says of the Gentiles, that neither God knew them, nor did
they know God, Isay. 55. 5. Universalist, I pray thee speak in earnest, how
could the Americans, Canibals, and other Savadges have any Call? No, Pelagian,
it is not Nature: No, Semi-Pelagian, it is not Grace and Nature; we cannot so
much as think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3. 5. I conclude hence no Universal
Call.

Absurd. 4. Fourthly, it follows from this Opinion of Universal Redemption,
etc. that God is all Mercy, and nothing else; whereas the sovereign end of all
Gods Actions is answerable to his Nature, which is not Mercy and Love alone,
but Justice also; and therefore the right End of man's Creation is the
manifestation of Gods Glory, both in Justice and Mercy; search the Scriptures,
and see if Justice also be not an Attribute of our God.

Absurd. 5. Fifthly, hence it follows that Predestination is for foreseen
Faith and Works; unless Gods Prescience discover something, his
Predestination Decrees nothing, but after the foresight of Faith and
Perseverance; and the former Gift of Predestination to Glory, must depend upon
a later Gift of Faith, quite contrary to the Word of God; for either it is Gods
will the Elect shall have Grace, and the Reprobates no Grace given them; or
else they believe, or not believe of their own Free Will; this later is gross
Pelagianisme, making Nature the beginning of Grace, and if the former be
granted, that God fore-sees no Grace, but what himself Predestinates to give;
nor no sin, but what upon the witholding of his Grace, the Reprobate will
freely work, then it follows that God will and does give Grace, because first
he has elected; and will give no Grace, because he has reprobated, and there
is no cause of either, but Gods own Will; no foreseen Faith or Works. Again
I reason thus, the End is always in intention, before the Means, primus
intention, ultimus executione, but Gods Will to elect men to Glory, is the
End; therefore Gods Will to elect men to Glory goes before his Will to give
them Faith and Grace; therefore he Elects not after, or upon the foresight of
Faith and Grace; therefore before he see Faith or Grace in Jacob, which he will
give him, he purposes to give him Life Eternal: But these men will give God
their Faith and Good Works in lieu of their Redemption by Christ, against
Isay. 52. 3. and Romans 11. 35. I know they distinguish 'twixt the Antecedent,
and Consequent Will of God, Gods Antecedent Will to save every man, although
considering the sins of men, he has a Consequent Will to condemn some: But
this distinction makes the matter more absurd, and salves it not; for God is
immutable, his Will is one as he is one; whatsoever he fore saw in any that
himself purposed to work; if he foresaw Grace, and the good use of Free Will
in Jacob, he purposed to work it by infusing it; what have we, that we have
not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7. Every good and every perfect gift is from above,
James 1. 17. If he foresaw Sin, and the ill use of Free Will in Esau, he
purposed to work it also, Romans 9. 13. 18. by witholding Grace and hardening;
and he not only purposed to Work that which he foresaw, but to Work and
Effect it, as the Means, and as a subordinate Second Cause, to bring man to the
End appointed: from hence it follows that Faith, Works, etc. are only Means
ordained by God to bring us to the End, not Causes of our Election. I cannot
tell how they can avoid the Papists Meritum e congruo, and plain Pelagianisme,
that maintain foreseen Faith and Works; for thus says Pelagius: Licet non
secundum merita bonorum Operum, tamensecundum merita bonae voluntatis datur
gratia, and ratio Pelagii est; alioqui Deus esset Acceptor personarum, si sine
ullis praecedentibus meritis cujus vult miseretur: That is, though Grace be
not given according to the Merit of our Good Works, yet it is given according
to the Merit of our Good Will; and the Reason Pelagius renders, is this, else
God should be a Respecter of Persons, if he have mercy on whom he will, without
regard of foregoing Merits; so that they are Cozens not far off, if they be not
near Cozens to Papists and Pelagians, that defend foreseen Faith, and Works;
all of them answer one another, even as the Echo does the Voice, and they will
wash away these blots, when the Blackmore changes his skin. Pelagius Redivivus
is now no news.

Absurd. 6. Sixthly, hence follows Free Will; I know they say that Gods Grace
must go along with our Will; but this excuse is only a Veil or Vizard, which
hides their Pelagian faces, that the ignorant People might not see them; so
that (as Augustine said of the like words used by the Pelagians) we would
receive them without scruple, but that they speak them, whose meaning is well
enough known unto us: Initium Fidei, and Conversionis desiderium est ex nobis,
incrementum a Gratia: the beginning of Faith, and the desire of Conversion, is
of our selves; the increase, of Grace: A^bitrium est ad hoc liberum, ut velit,
vel nolit admittere medicinam: the Will is free to will, or nill the admission
of the Medicine, so say the Pelagians; and the Arminians and our Universalists
say, Gods Grace must go along with our Free Will: he has a good wit that can
distinguish betwixt these two. I have read of one Melitides a natural fool,
who could not tell whether his Mother or his Father brought him forth; so these
men cannot tell, whether God begets them to himself, or their own Free Will
begets them unto God. I say therefore, that God determines man's Will, and yet
it is Free still; Gods Will is above ours, flows into it, and moves it, and
yet the Will follows the dictate of its own Intellect; is freed only from
Constraint, not from Necessity, from which the Will of Angels is not free, for
they can do no evil, they can do nothing but that which is good. And as a
man, by a device, should let Birds fly, and yet cause them all to go to such
a place, as himself would, so does God rule the Will: The Spirit of God, at
first, finds nothing in the Will, to help his Grace, in the Conversion of a
Sinner: First, Grace gives life to the dead Will, and then the Will being
revived, becomes an Instrument of God, both to apprehend his Grace offered, and
to work forward with it; but this by the Seed of Grace, and New Life, that
God has put into it, not by the Nature of man's Will: and as my Paper, whereon
I am writing, retains the Ink passively, and brings nothing of its own to
the writing, but being written on, it becomes an Instrument with me of the
writing; so is it in the Will of man at his Conversion. It is God only that
does justify, Romans 8. 33. For it is he only that forgiveth sins, Esa. 43. 25.
It is he only, that can by making us righteous in Christ, gives us right and
title to the Kingdom of Heaven: It is no action therefore of our own, or of
any Creature, neither is it wrought by our own Preparations and Dispositions.
For although every man is bound to use all Means, to attain to Justification:
Yet it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy, Romans 9. 16. For if God be the Agent in justifying us, then are
We the Patients: and for that cause we are never in the Scriptures exhorted to
justification, or to the parts thereof (which are not our officia, or duties,
but Gods beneficia, or blessings) as we are to the duties of sanctification,
whereunto we being already justified, and regenerated, do cooperate with the
Spirit of Grace; If the Son have made us free, we shall be free indeed, Romans
8. 36. We are made free, for of our selves we are the servants of sin, Romans
6. 18. 20. Better is it to ascribe too little, then too much to Free Will. if I
offend, be it rather in giving more to Gods Grace.

Absur. 7. Seventhly, hence it follows, that Predestination is mutable, all
things being forelaid, which are necessary and sufficient for perseverance, it
remains still in the power of man, to persevere, or not to persevere, says
Bertius in his Book of the Apostasy of Saints, and he endeavors to prove
this bold (I had almost said blasphemous) Assertion by diverse Texts of
Scripture: Non esse hominum alios ad vitam, alios ad mortem, aut perditionem
deputatos; sed de salute ad perditionem, and de perditione ad salutem transire
posse, there are not any particulars appointed to life or death, but they may
pass from either state to the other, said Pelagius; and numerus Electorum
potest augeri, ac minui, the number of the Elect may be less, or more, said
G^evincho. These. exhibit. page 137. Then Paul may, or may not be saved, and
whosoever is Predestined, is but contingently Predestined, if he persevere;
then the Author to the Hebrews is out, where he says, the Counsel of God is
immutable. Heb. 6. 17. Then the Papists may say, there is no Predestination of
the Reprobate, they are only fore-knowne, which is true in sano sensu, but not
in their sense.

Absurd. 8. Eighthly, hence it follows, all men are disposed and ordained of
God, so as they may obtain Eternal Life, if they will; their Predestination
being like unto an Hypotheticall Proposition.

Absurd. 9. Ninthly, hence follows falling from Grace, that the Seal of Gods
Election is not sure; that some, who were given to Christ, may be lost: Or as
if after our Regeneration, there were, as at our Creation, a posse mori, we
might die from God; woe to man, if his condition were the same in the second
Adam, that it was in the first: Indeed sides, quae creditur, may be forsaken,
but from, or a side, qua creditur, we cannot fall away. It is contrary to the
sixteenth Article, which is against a total, and final falling from Grace;
for the Article speaks of falling into sin after Baptism, and rising
again, by the same Grace: Now he that falls finally, cannot rise again, and
he that falls totally from Grace, cannot rise again by the Grace he had
received, because he is supposed to have lost all the Grace he received. The
Reformed Churches, all of them united, disclaim the Doctrine of falling from
Grace: Indeed the Righteousness required by the Law may be lost, and it is of
that, the Prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 18. But the Righteousness promised by the
Gospel cannot be lost. Card. Bellarm. himself speaks truth sometimes in this
particular, touching the Apostasy of Saints; it is true (says he) that the
Predestined, or Elected are in no danger of losing Eternal Life; and that
the terrifying threats used by the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures are to this
end, to stir up the Elect to watchfulness and diligence, Lib. 3. de Justif.
cap. 12. so that Motives they are to, and Means of Perseverance, no Arguments
at all, to prove the Saints Apostasy.

Absurd. 10. Tenthly, hence Justification by God only is utterly overthrown,
even in the Nature of it, which signifies justum facere, to make just, not
invenire, to find us just: for Justification is the Action of God without us.
To the Faithful there belongs a two fold Righteousness; the one of
Justification, the other of Sanctification; the former is the Righteousness of
Christ, and therefore the Righteousness of God, because it is the
Righteousness of him that is God, and is imputed only to the Believer: The
latter is ours, because inherent in us, though received from God, as all our
good things are; of this second there is no question, and the first being ab
extra cannot be from our foreseen Faith or Works.

Absurd. 11. Eleventhly, hence it follows, that God cannot tell who are his,
till they persevere to the end; and therefore Arminius was forced to make the
Object of Gods Decree, only qui vixerunt: quoties fideles statuimus objectum
Electionis, toties nos fidem, and perseverantiam in fide conjungimus, says
Grevinchovius: Our Register Books must first be given in, such a man dyed such
a day, before his name can be written in the Register Book of God; contrary to
Act. 9. 15. where Paul is called a chosen Vessel, even whilst he was a
Persecutor, and was going to Damascus with that intent; and contrary to Act.
13. 48. where in the first instance of their Conversion, it is said, As many as
were ordained to eternal life did believe.

Absurd. 12. Lastly, Universal Grace, or Universal Redemption was the opinion
of that wicked Heretic, Pelagius, condemned in a General Council, held at
Malta, about the year 425. against the Pelagians and Donatists, at which
Augustine was present, and 214. Bishops: and at a Counsel in Afric, where
all the Provinces came together, in the time of Boniface and Celestine Bishops
of Rome, to condemn Pelagius.

Prosper in an Epistle which he writ to Augustine de Reliquiis Pelagianae
Haereseos, has these words: Hane Pelagianorum definitionem, and
professionemesse; Universis hominibus propitiationem, quae est in sacramento
sanguinis Chriti, sine exceptione esse propositam; pro Universo humano genere
mortuum esse Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, and neminem prorsus a Redemptione
sanguin^s ejus exceptum, etiamsi omnem hanc vitam alienissimam ab eo mente
pertranseat: that is, the Pelagians profess that the propitiation into, or by
the blood of Christ, without exception, is common to all: that Christ died for
all mankind, and none is excepted, although he be all his life time ignorant
of Christ: Ad salutis donum omnes homines Universaliter vocari, sive per
Naturalem, sive per Legem scriptam, sive per Evangelicam praedicationem: All
men Universally are called to salvation either by Nature, by the Law written,
or by the preaching of the Gospel, so Pelagius, Prospers Epist: to August. Com.
7. And August. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 3. Cap. 3. says thus: Deus totumne
mundum Redemit? Ecce videmus homines in peccatis suis vivere, quomodo putabimus
Redemptos, quos permanere videmus Captivos? redimuntur, sed non liberantur;
haec sunt Sententiarum portenta vestrarum, haec inopinata mysteria dogmatum
novorum, haec Paradoxa Pelagianorum Haereticorum: That is, has God Redeemed
the whole world? Behold! we see men live still in their sins; how can we
think them to be Redeemed, that continue still Captive? they are Redeemed out
of Prison, and yet they are in Prison; these are your monstrous imaginations;
these are your idle mysterious conceits; these are the Paradoxes of Pelagian
Heretics.

If any man list to see these Opinions proved Pelagianisme, let him read
Perkins, Tom. 1. against Universal Grace, and his whole Tractate of Gods Free
Grace, and Man's Free Will; Doctor Davenant, his whole Book set out after the
Council of Dort; Doctor White, his Way, and Defense of the Way; Doctor Twisse,
Doctor Wille^, Calvin, Beza, Pet. Martyr, and all the Divines of the Reformed
Churches, that writ of this Subject: If any object, this, and that particular
man among the Protestants were of a contrary Opinion, I answer, so they might,
and yet I may plead the Protestant Churches: from this general Rule, there may
be two or three Exceptions, or William Lilly is out, and so is the whole Word.
And that these Opinions are plain Papistry, see Perkins, Tom. 1. pa. 98. he
reckons up sixteen Errors of the Papists about Predestination, and they, and
our Universalists agree in almost all of them. In Doctor Whites Way, and
Defense, the maine Controversies betwixt him, and the Jesuits are concerning
Universal Redemption; whether God will have all men to be saved: falling away
from Grace: certainty of Grace and salvation: foreseen Faith and Works:
Free Will; whether God have determined all men, good and evil, to certain
Ends; and the Jesuits, Arminians, and our Universalists agree in all these
Opinions. Sure none is so ignorant, but if he know any thing, he knows
Universal Redemption was the very top of the Arminian Tenets at the Council
of Dort: it is an Article of the Arminians Faith, the cooperation of Man's Free
will with Grace in the first Conversion; and the power it has to hinder, and
frustrate the work of Regenerating Grace; total and final falling away from
the Grace of Justification: these and the like were the Doctrines of Pelagians
and Arminians, and they are the subject of every Sermon among our
Universalists: all the Churches of Lower Germany made a complaint to King James
against the Armimans, and yet such Offenders find a Sanctuary among our
Universalists; Therefore I conclude thus:

If Universal Redemption was the old Heresy of the Pelagians; if it be
reckoned up among the grossest Opinions of the Papists, and agrees in all
things with the Arminians; then it ought not to be defended, or Preached by us
Protestants: but Universal Redemption was the old Heresy of the P^lagians, is
reputed among the gressest Opinions of the Papists, and agrees in all things
with Arminians; therefore it ought not to be defended or Preached by us
Protestants. The like Argument I may use against all those that defend
Universal Election, Universal Vocation, Foreseen Faith, and Works, falling
away from Grace, Free Will, etc. All these are mong the grossest Opinions of
Pelagians, Papists, Arminians: Ergo,

If these Opinions were truth, then no marvel, if men run so fast, as we see
they do run; for what a brave thing is it, that God will have all men to be
saved in their sense? what a comfortable Doctrine, that Grace shall be offered
to every one effectually, whether he be of the Church or not, at one time or
other, wheresoever, or howsoever he live? Christ died for all, and there will
be an offerture of peace on Gods part, which is in man's power to accept, when
he pleases. No wonder if men live, as they list, and do as we see they do,
this door being opened to all impieties; for yet there is a time (say they)
when Grace shall be offered effectually to All. Let me urge a few Arguments
in form, not so much against my Adversaries, that can say nothing, but because
I know there are in other Places, that are able to say something: And first
against Universal Redemption I reason thus.

Arg. 1. To whom Christ was a Redeemer, for them he was an Intercessor; these
two Offices of Christ ought not to be disjoined; but Christ was not an
Intercessor for all and every one; I pray for them, I pray not for the World,
John 17. 9. therefore it follows, he Redeemed not all, and every one: they
cannot bring one place of Scripture to prove he prayed for all; and yet to pray
for all was far short of pouring forth his Blood.

Arg. 2, If Christ died for all, and every one, then he rose again, ascended,
and sits at his Fathers right hand, for all, and every one; but sure they
are afraid to say the last, therefore they may be ashamed to say the first:
disjoyne these Offices in Christ, his Death, Resurrection, Ascension, sitting
at the right hand of God; and they make Christ but half a Savior; conjoyne
them, and by their Opinion, it is impossible but all men must be saved, if
Christ as he died, so he rose again, ascended, and sits at his Fathers
right hand for all.

Arg. 3. Christ was a Lamb slain from the beginning of the world: from thence
I reason thus; if Christ died for all, and every one, then he died for Caine,
Esau, Pharaoh, wicked Jeroboam, Antiochus Epiphanes, then railing Rabshakey had
his part in Christ, Julian the Apostata, and also Judas, and all that were
damned, yea, and Devils in Hell many thousand years before he suffered
death: but sure Christians cannot say this: I wonder therefore any Christian can
say that: did he actually shed his blood in the last Age of the World, for
them that were damned in Hell in the first Age of the World? Whether is this
more ridiculous, or impious?

Arg. 4. If Christ died, obtained Remission of sins, and Reconciliation with
God for all, then none are borne the sons of wrath by nature, or are
obnoxious to death and condemnation for Original sin; all are borne in the
state of Grace: but the Scripture says, we are by nature the sons of wrath;
and they dare not say, that we are borne in the state of Grace; then how can
they say, that Christ obtained Remission of sins and Reconciliation with God
for all?

Arg. 5. If Christ redeemed all, and every particular man, then God wills the
salvation of all, and of every particular man; it is true, they affirm both of
these, and I prove them both false on this manner: for either God wills not, or
he wills the salvation of every particular man; if God will not the salvation
of every particular man, it is that which we say, the Scriptures, and the
Reformed Churches with us: if he will and cannot, or will and does not, (which
is all one) as the Papists, Pelagians, Arminians, and Universalists say, then
how is God Omnipotent, if he cannot do what he wills; or will he once save
all, and will he not-afterward? Is God mutable as man? No sure; his name is, I
am; he is the same yesterday and to day; he is in one mind, Job 23. 13. With
God is no variableness, nor shadow of change, Ja. 1. 17. God wills a Change,
but he changes not; there may be mutatio facti, not deereti: Nineveh was
changed, but there was no change in God. Incomplete, and complete, antecedent,
and consequent wills are fictions of our Adversaries, and are the Attributes of
some other God: our God is one, and so is the will of our God; He but willed,
and it was so, Genesis 1. 6. 9. Dixit and factum est, willing, and Doing are all
one with God: in him, for him, by him, and through him alone are all things,
Romans 12. 36. That Idea Divina is both the Being, and the well Being of every
thing in Heaven, or Earth: he works all things, upon no Condition, after no
Example; but after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 5. He wills not
therefore (it is not so, because he will not have it so) that every particular
man should be saved.

Arg. 6. If Christ laid down his life for his sheep; was delivered to Death
for his Church and Children; gathered together Pilios Dei dispersos, the Sons
of God dispersed in what place soever; died, and gave himself to Redeem a
peculiar People, prayed not for all, etc. Then he did not Redeem everyone,
Fideles, and Infideles; all are not Sheep, his Church, his Children, his
People, nay, his peculiar People, as it appears, John 10. 27. 28. John 17. 9.
and almost the whole Chapter, Tit. 2. 14. Acts 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 25. John 1.
12. Psalm. 33. 12. sed verum prius, ergo posterius, the first is true, therefore
the last. I know they distinguish 'twixt Impetration, which, they say, was for
all, and real fruition, which, they say, is but for a few; Christ's prayers,
they feign, are meant of the first, not of the last; but it is false; for
these prayers were fulfilled, eo ipso momento, quo Christus ponebat animam, at
that instant when Christ laid down his life, though the actual fruition
followed after: the prayers of Christ had been to small purpose, had they not
apper^^^ned both to the first, and last; there is not one place of Scripture,
where Impetration is named without respect to Application; it must needs follow
therefore, that Christ died not for all.

Arg. 7. For whom Christ died, he so died, that he took their death and the
punnishment they deserved upon himself: so the Phrase of dying for any is to
be understood, as it is plain, 2. Sam. 18. 33. Romans 9. 3. but they dare not
say, that Christ took the Death and Punishment, which all deserved upon
himself, it is against John 3. 36. Mat, 7. 23. therefore he died not for All.
How to answer this Argument (which they are never able) they make themselves
Socinians, as in many things they make themselves Massilians, they will hardly
put me to prove.

Arg. 8. All those, for whom Christ died, may say, who can condemn us? Christ
died for us; who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Romans 8. 34. 35. but
all cannot say so, for there are infinites condemned, and therefore Christ died
not for All.

Arg. 9. Are all those, whom Universalists say have received this Grace of
Redemption, Regenerate? or are they not Regenerate? if they be Regenerate, then
all men are Regenerate; if not, then have all men power to believe, and to
attain salvation, if they will, whilst they remain unregenerate: they will
not say the first, and Pelagius could say no more then the last.

I might double this number of Arguments against Universal Redemption, but
that may be done when my Adversaries undertake to answer these; which they
(that is the Thomsonists) will never attempt. Yet let me allege the words of
Mr. Perkins, Tom. 1. page 302. where he says thus; Universal Grace
appertaining to all, and every man, may sitly be termed the School of
Universal Atheism, for it pulls down the Pale of the Church, and lays it
waste, like to a common Field; it breeds a carelessness, in the use of the
means of Grace, the Word, and Sacraments, when as men shall be persuaded, that
Grace shall be offered to every one effectually, whether he be of the Church or
not, at one time or other, wheresoever, or howsoever he live, etc. Now whether
were the Smith, the Miller, the Thatcher, the Thrasher, or he that sent and set
them on, more ignorant, or impudent, to charge me, and all the Reformed
Churches with me, of high Treason against the Crown Royalty, Love, Goodness,
Soverainty of the Son of God, for the words, which, the truth is, I took out
of Mr. Perkins in the place aforesaid; they might have had more reverence to
that worthy Man's memory, though they regarded not me. It may be at that grand
meeting, to devise, and do me some mischief (they know where, and when,) they
all laid their little wits together to devise and draw the Charge; but the
Smith that read it, writ it sure, it was so like him, Children challenge their
Parents, like Lips, like Lettice, the Matter and the Letter stunke much what
alike. Thus fearfully they fall, whom God forsakes; they run out of one
Extreme over the Medium into another Extreme, and so (...), as the Apostle
calls it, 2. These. 2. 2. quite out of their wits; High Treason against the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ (so they call their Universal Redemption, Free will,
etc.) charged upon, or against all the Reformed Churches at once by such men of
ignorance: Father forgive them, they knew not what they did.

Now let me use a few Arguments against their fictitious Election.

Arg. 1. If perseverance be a condition required in the Object of Election, as
they say, then there are none Elect til the End of this life: but Paul is
called an Elect Vessel, even whilst he was a Persecutor, Act. 9. 15. And S.
John wrote his second Epistle, to the elect Lady, (yet alive) and her children,
1. John 2. 1. Therefore Perseverance can be no Condition required in the
Objection of Election; the Antecedent is confessed, for perseverance is a part
of their Thesis, as I showed out of Amesius de Electione, pa. 1. neither do
they deny it; then the Consequence cannot be denied; how can it be known who
will persevere to the end, whilst they are yet alive? The Minor is true, for
they are the words of S. Luke, and S. John, ut supra; and I could prove it out
of a hundred places; therefore the Conclusion cannot be false, Perseverance can
be no condition in the Object of Election. They, even all of them,
Universalists, Papists, Arminians, defend falling away from Grace, and they
prove it, de facto, by a fearful Argument; for they themselves have fallen from
the Faith, and the Reformed Churches.

Arg. 2. They who were given to Christ, antecedenter ad Fidem, that they might
be Faithful, they were Elect antecedenter ad Fidem, that they might have Faith
and Perseveranee, not because they were such; but some are given to Christ that
they might have Faith and Perseverance; therefore they were elect, that they
might be Faithful, not for their Faith: the Major none can deny, and the Minor
may be proved out of Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him, not because
we were holy: the Apostle says the same, Ephesians. 2. 10. Faith is the fruit, not
the tree; the Effect, not the Cause of Election: we are elected to faith, not
for faith; antecedenter ad fidem, as I said, not propter fidem; there is no
other Cause of our Election, but only the Will of God. Nay more, the mediation
of Christ is not the Cause of Gods Decree, but Gods Decree, e contra, is the
Cause of Christ's mediation; he Predestined us unto the Adoption of Children,
by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 5.
The Jews were rejected for their unbelief; the Gentiles were not elected for
their Faith, but they stood by Faith, Romans 11. 20. We never read, that any
People, or particular Nation was elected for their Faith; the contrary we often
read, as Deuteronomy. 7. 7. 8. and Ezekiel. 16. First, the Lord says, this is my People,
before the People can say, the Lord is our God, Zach. 13. 9. Vera Electio non
invenit, sed facit fideles, true Election finds us not, but makes us faithful;
Qui enim de mundo mundum eligi fecit, quod eligeret, non invenit, says
Augustine in Joh. 15. God chose a World out of the World, for nothing that was
in the World. Indeed Arminius stands to it stoutly, that Faith in Gods Decree
of Election does, in order, go before, not follow Election: But yet that old
Axiom is, and will be truth, when Heresies and Heretics are dead, and with
the Devil, their Father; Deus in negotio Predestinationis non egreditur
extrase, God in Predestination goes not out of himself.

Arg. 3. The Scriptures teach us, that on some God will show Mercy, on others
his Justice, Exodus 33. 19. Romans 9. 22. 23. of his own Free Will, or good
pleasure; which proves that Election is neither for Faith, nor of all: Of the
same Clay the Potter makes both the Vessels that serve for clean uses; and
likewise also such as serve to the contrary; but what is the use of either
sort, the Potter himself is the Judge, Wisdom 15. 7. O house of Israel, can
not I do with you, as the Potter, says the Lord? Behold as the clay is in the
Potters hand, so are ye in mine, O house of Israel, Jer. 18. 6. And if any man
will strive against God, for doing with us as he pleases, the Prophet Isaiah
pronounces a woe against such an one; Woe unto him that striveth with his
Maker: Let the potsherds strive with the potsherds of the earth: shall the Clay
say to him that fashioneth it, what make thou? Woe unto him that says to his
Father, what begettest thou? etc. Isa. 45. 9. 10. God has got the upper
ground, do not contend against him.

Arg. 4. Christ says he had sheep among the Gentiles; Other sheep I have that
are not of this fold, John 10. 16 Therefore God had much people among them,
that had not heard of him: now this cannot be by Election, or in the Decree,
and Eternal Counsel of God; therefore there is a singular Election, even of
such as never had Faith.

Arg. 5. Our Adversaries might remember, Christ says, But many are called, and
fewer chosen, Matt. 20. 16. and 22. 14. From which words it follows, there is
neither an universal Vocation, nor an universal Election: but I touched these
things before, and shall hereafter, when I come to prove Gods absolute Decree.

Their Universal Vocation is of the same stamp with their Universal
Election, as counterfeit coin, I proved it before, and I may add further. This
Opinion necessarily implies, that God gives grace and means sufficient for
salvation to all men; and supposes that there is no mortal man, old, or young,
Christian, or Pagan, from the beginning of the World, unto the end thereof, but
God reveals to him the means of salvation; and, at least, in some instant of
his life, he sets him in such a state, that he may enjoy the means if he will,
and be saved: the Consequence is thus proved, because, if God will only save
such as use the means of salvation well, and damn such as use them ill, and
that consequently, because they use them well or ill; then he must in justice
reveal and exhibit these means unto them, because no man by himself can
recover them; and he must reveal and exhibit them to man, when he is in such
a state, that he has the use of his Free Will; as a King that wills the safety
of his Subjects, on condition that they keep his Laws, is bound to publish and
make his Laws known unto them; else if he execute any of them, it must be upon
a new point, and not upon their not keeping his Laws; so also it is impossible
that God should reprobate any, for the ill use of his grace, and contempt of
the means of salvation, that never had those means, nor ever heard of his
grace; as many millions of people in all Ages have been, and now are. The
first sort whereof are Infants, that either die in the womb, or unbaptized, or
reach not to years of discretion, and the use of reason, and Free Will: now
Predestination, is of no other reason in Infants, then in Old folk, but upon
the same grounds, and in the same manner, that God wills the salvation of the
one, he wills the salvation of the other: then let the Universalist tell me,
how the means of salvation is applied to Infants, or how they can make use of
the means?

The second sort, that never had, or heard of the means of salvation, are
Idiots, such as are born Naturalls, without the use of Reason; of whom the same
may be said, that is of Infants, that for want of Reason, and the use of Free
Will, they cannot be said to have sufficient means: for to the sufficiency of
the means must concur not only the perfection of the help revealed, but
also the ability of the Subject, to whom the said help is offered; if God have
left his Word to lead a man, and yet withholds Reason and faculty from him,
that he cannot hear, nor use it, it cannot be conceived, how he may be said
to have left sufficient means to that man.

The third sort, that never had the means of salvation, are Barbarians and
Pagans, that never heard of God, or Christ, or the Gospel, these also cannot be
said to have sufficient means of salvation; because the revelation of Christ
and his Gospel is the means, and they never had it: if it be objected, that
the Heathen may have certain inspirations, which may guide them first to
Grace, and then to Glory; then I demand, first touching these inspirations,
that are said to be thus offered, and stirred up in the Gentiles, are they
super-naturall, or natural? if supernatural, by what means are they wrought?
for the Word of God they have not, and Gods Spirit does never sufficiently
inspire, when it does not sufficiently reveal it self to be his Spirit; are
they natural, arising only from a natural knowledge? then I demand again,
whether they be able to bring him, that has them to Justifying Grace? if they
be not able, they are insufficient; if they say they be able, then this is
Pelagianisme, that a man by natural strength may obtain the Grace of God.

Two prodigious Opinions have I read touching this point; [In Whites Way, page
280.] one of the Papists, or some of them, who say, that the very Gentiles knew
God, and did many things wherein was no sin, and this was sufficient to save
them.

The other of that man of ignorance, who wrote the Charge of high Treason
against all, that deny Universal Redemption; there he says, (but God help
him, he knows not what he says) that man has yet liberty and power to
escape Condemnation, and can do that which God Commands. These Opinions are
fitter for Pelagians, who say, Gratia significat naturam ratione, and voluntate
praeditam, that Grace is Nature endued with Reason and Free Will; and that per
Opera Naturae homo promeretur auxilium gratiae, a man may open the window to
let Grace come in, as (besides Pelagians) most of the Papists say, but they
become not us, who profess our selves Protestants.

Yet further, to prove that Infants, Idiots, Infidels never had the means of
Grace, I may say thus; that the word of Reconciliation was not preached to all;
Reconciliation is by faith, and faith by the word, To. 10. 14. Which Word was
not, nay is not yet preached to all: was there not a Partition wall till it was
broken down? Did not Christ charge his Disciples, not to go into the way of
the Gentiles? nor into the Cities of the Samaritans? Mat. 10. 5. 6. Look into
that Parable of the Woman of Canaan, if the Word of God was not the Childrens
bread, Mat. 15. 24. 26. All the blind Americans, many of the barbarous
Affricans, the savadge Canibals, besides the Chinoys, so quick-sighted in other
things, yet had not heard of a Savior, till some few hundred years since: nay
more, our Brethren, if they please to prove Universal Vocation, may be yet,
almost the first to Preach the word of God to a great part of Finmark, the
Scricfinians, Lappians, and some Northern Isles within the Artick Circle,
among us Europeans; then how can they dream of Universal Vocation? Now our
Question is not, If grace be free, but whether this Free grace be effectually
and freely offered to all? Yea, but the Blacksmith, in that ugly thing he
brought, as black as himself, tells us of the Spirit; but it was writ by a
foul spirit: well, yet there were 12. Places of Scripture, to prove Universal
Redemption, I think set down by some simple Brother, sure not by Mr. T. for
he applied not one place, but said, they were plain Places, and so left it
simply to believe: now to these I need not answer, for they were barely named,
and nothing concluded, neither Syllogism nor sense, but left simply as the
Letter said: yet in answer to them, and the like places, I say thus:

There are several interpretations of such places as say, God will have all to
be saved; the chief whereof are these four, that follow: 1. God would have
all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, in that he makes
us to wish, and desire this our selves, by stirring us up to seek and pray for
salvation, because the Will that God works in us is said to be Gods Will: 2.
Where the Scriptures say, God will have all to be saved; by the word, all, such
only are meant who are saved, by restraining the Universal sign to the Elect
alone; that is, all who are saved, are all saved only by virtue of the Will of
God; as a Schoolmasters may be said to teach all the children in a Town, when
he only teaches all that are taught: 3. God by the signification of his Will
revealed in his Word, would all men to be saved, in as much, as he offers to
all men, either the Doctrine of the Gospel, or some other sign, whereby he
invites them to salvation; and this Exposition denies, that there is any Will
of good pleasure, or absolute Will in God, referred and determined to the
salvation of all, but only to the Means propounded, which of themselves are
sufficient, and able to lead men to salvation; thereby he carries himself as
one that has a purpose to save all: They call this Will of God, Voluntas
Signi; not Beneplaciti; the Will of the Sign, but not his absolute Will, which
first may not be fulfilled, and yet the last; his absolute Will is always
fulfilled: 4. God would have all to be saved, that is, he saves some in all
Estates, and Degrees of men; not singula generum, but genera singulorum, of all
sorts some, not every singular person of all sorts, whether they be rich or
poor, old or young, Jews, Greeks, Barbarians, God saves some of every
Condition: so Christ is said to have Redeemed some out of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and Nation, Rev. 5. 9. to have healed every Disease, that
is, every kind of Disease Mat. 4. 23.

This, and the second distinction I think the best to be applied to such
places of Scripture, where it is said, God will have all to be saved.

Again, I say, that by the word, all, we must understand all that believe; by
him all that believe are justified, Acts 13. 39. all that are weary and heavy
laden, Mat. 11. 28. He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, John. 3. 16. the Scripture has concluded all under sin,
that the Promise by the Faith of Christ, should be given to them that believe,
Gal. 3. 22. I might infer, but all, and every one believes not; therefore
Christ died not for All, and every one. It is apparent, that the word, All, is
oftentimes used for Many; as Romans 5. 18. 19. Augustine in his Manuell to Laur:
cap: 103. says thus: God would have all to be saved; not because there was no
man which he would have damned; who therefore would not do miracles among them,
which would (so he says) have repented, if he had done miracles; but by all
men, we must understand, all sorts of men, howsoever distinguished, whether
Kings, private persons, etc. These two, to be willing to save a man; and that
he should come to the saving knowledge of the Truth, are inseperably united
together, 1. Tim. 2. 4. but the second, we see, does not agree to all, and
every singular person; therefore the first cannot.

But here a question may be asked; did God then appoint all to be saved, upon
this Condition, if they believe? I answer, that it is absurd to affirm this;
for first, by that means the Decree of God should depend upon the Will of man,
whereas, on the contrary, Gods Decree does limit and order all inferior Causes:
secondly, it quite takes away the certainty of Gods Decree, because a
Conditional Proposition does set down nothing as being, or it does not
certainly affirm any thing; and we are elected to Faith; not for Faith, I
told you before.

They object again, (it is their usual Argument) If Adams sin destroyed
all, and Christ's merit does not save all; then is Adams sin more forcible to
condemn, then Christ's mercy is to save: To this I answer, we must value the
mercy of Christ by the efficacy, and dignity of it; for it was a more easy
thing to destroy all by sin, then by Grace to save but one: man, being but
mere man, could destroy all; but to save even one, none could do it, but such
an one, as was both God and Man; one man damned all, or brought them into the
state of damnation; but all men cannot save one.

But they object, that God is cruel, (...), says Mr. T. I wonder, how he did
to write the word; he goes further, God is an Abaddon, (for he uses as ill
language against God Almighty, as against me) if he ordain any, or the most of
men to damnation. To this I answer, that he charge me, and the Reformed
Churches falsely; We say, sin damnes; God damnes not, but for sin: and yet I
know our Thomsonists are not able to answer that of Paul, Romans 9. 21. where he
says, the Potter makes of, the same clay some vessels to dishonor: nor to
that, Prove. 16. 4. The Lord made even the wicked for the day of evil: nor to
that of Jude 4. Tbere are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old Ordained unto this Condemnation: Let them look into Exo. 33. 19. Jer. 18.
6. Isa. 45. 9. 10. if God may not take leave to do what he list.

This indeed we do say, that God in his ^ternall Decree did pass by some, with
a purpose not to show mercy on such, which purpose causes no necessity of
damnation, but by the sin of man coming between. Secondly, We say, God
could have Decreed, that even All men should have been utterly rejected, and
yet he should have been neither cruel nor unjust: he adjudged all and every
one of those foul and wicked spirits which fell from him to eternal torments,
was he cruel in that? he Decreed that men should live by the slaughter of
Beasts, is he cruel in that? God is no more bounden unto man, then unto bruit
Beasts.

But they object, that Christ took upon him the nature of man, therefore he
redeemed the nature of man, and so by consequence every man that pertakes of
humane nature: To this I answer, that it follows not, except we say, that
Christ Redeemed himself, he also did partake of humane nature; but they dare
not say, that Christ redeemed himself: every woman does partake the nature of
every man, yet is not every man each woman's husband, but hers alone, to whom he
is joined in Matrimony; and Christ also took upon him man's nature, common to
all Adams Posterity, yet is he the husband of his Church alone, be gave
himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25. that he might sanctify and cleanse it, v. 26.
that he might present it a glorious Church, v. 27. and so the Church became
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, v. 30. Therefore the Church alone can
justly challenge a title in, and to the death of Christ.

But they object again, that in many Places Christ is said to redeem the
World, as 1. John. 2. 2. Mr. T. charge with this Argument almost as
violently, as the Duke of Byron did his Enemies, of whom they report, that the
blood burst out of his lips, at every Charge. For Defense of our selves
therefore, we say thus; This word, World, signifies, 1. The frame of Heaven
and Earth. 2. All, both good and bad together. 3. The company of Unbeleevers
and haters of Christ. 4. The congregation of the Elect dispersed over the face
of the whole World, and to be gathered out of the World: In this fourth
signification we must understand that Place of John, and the like places: thus
the Church is often called by the name of the World, as 2. Cor. 5. 19. God was in
Christ reconciling the World; that World, it follows, to whom their sins are
not imputed. In John 6. 3. Christ is called the bread of life, that came down
from heaven, and gave life to the World: there is both Impetration, and
Application; he gave spiritual life, which can be meant of none, but the Elect
alone, who are there called the World: the same St. John expounds himself,
what he meant by the World, John 10. 27. 28. My Sheep hear my voice, and I
give them eternal life; they only therefore are that enlivened World.

I know, they object against us that of Paul; God is the Savior of all men,
especially, of them that believe, 1. Tim. 4. 10. But the proper meaning of that
place is, God preserves, provides for, and is good to all, especially to them
that believe; he makes his Sun to shine upon all, and sends them Rain and
Showers: Therefore they compare God to a Master of a Family, who is good to all
his servants, yea, to his Cattle; the very Hogs, and Dogs he keeps, but to his
Wife and Children he is very good. Beza translates the Word, (...), in that
place, not Salvator, but Conservator; and Aretius in his Comment upon the same
Verse says, Deus omnium, maxim Fidelium, Benefactor; God is a Benefactor of,
to all, but especially to the Elect: The most and best Interpreters make this
the meaning of the words: Earthly blessings he poures out to every one; but we
no where read, that God, Voluntate beneplaciti, by his absolute Will, would
have every particular man to be saved.

That place, 2. Pet. 2 1. Where Reprobates are said to be redeemed by Christ,
is meant of such as live in the Visible Church, who are said to be redeemed,
both in their own Judgments, and in the Churches Judgment of Charity; and
thus the Ministers may, and do apply Christ's death and Redemption to All.

There are many Objections of lesser Consequence, but why should I teach my
Adversaries, who are as wilful, as they would be wicked? the greatest comfort
I have, is, that if I cannot convert them (which I hope) yet a vessel can hold
no more, then it is able to contain. I conclude this Point therefore with that
of Aquinas: Christ's merit, according to the sufficiency thereof, carries it
self indifferently to all, but not according to the Efficacy; which comes to
pass, partly by Gods Election, through which the effect of Christ's merits is
mercifully bestowed on some, and partly by the just Judgments of Gods,
withholding his Grace from other some.

Now to fortify, and rivet all this Building by yet more impregnable Reasons;
I will prove it no cruelty in God, to do with his Creature what he pleases;
that God may elect, or reject whom he list; and that there is no other cause of
Gods Decree of Election, but his own Will: The fancies of our Universalists I
will confute by these Theses following.

I assert therefore; That Predestination is an eternal Decree of God, in time
causing effectual Grace, in all those whom he has chosen, and by this
effectual Grace bringing them infallibly to Glory: Now this Election, or
Dilection of some, supposes a passing by of others, and a leaving them to
their own selves; the cause of both is nothing else, but the Will of God: The
Parts of this Decree are two, Election, and Reprobation; the first, Gods
absolute Decree of preparing that Grace for some, which will preserve them; the
second, Gods absolute Decree of not preparing for others that Grace, which
would preserve them. Now these Decrees are not founded upon any different
foreseen Acts of men, but upon the alone Will of God, which is the most
absolute, supreme, and sovereign Cause of all things that are; having nothing
either above it self, or out of it self, to be any impulsive Cause, to move,
or incline it: Indeed, men's Wills are moved, and disposed by external Causes
out of themselves, because they are to be ruled by Equity, and Reason; and a
man's bare Will, without a Reason, is nothing; but Gods Will is not ruled by
another Will, or Rule of Reason or Justice; but it self is an absolute Rule
both of Justice, and Reason. A thing is not first of all reasonable and just,
and afterward willed by God; but it is first of all willed by God, and
thereupon it becomes reasonable and just; Volitiones pure conditionales sunt
alienae a sapientia divina, Decrees merely Conditional agree not with the
perfection of the Divine Nature; such Volitions, or Decrees are for us, who
have neither Knowledge, whether the condition will be performed, nor power to
work the condition, upon which the future Act of our Will was suspended: But
in God who knows what every man will, or will not do, and has power to make
men do the good he will, these Conditional Decrees are not purely, but mixtly
Conditional: that is, grounded on some absolute revealed Decree of God, to the
performance whereof he has tied himself.

And we ought to observe, that Reprobation, and Damnation differ exceedingly
much; Reprobation is a bare passing by; Damnation, a punishment: Inepte
faciunt, qui Reprobationis decretum, cum Damnatione confundunt; cum hujus causa
manifesta sit, nempe peccatum; illius vero sola Dei Voluntas; [Beza.] They are
very simple that seen ot the difference twixt Reprobation, and Damnation; Gods
Will is Cause of the first; sin of the last: Peccatum non est Causa
Rejectionis, sed est Causa Damnationis, [Zanchy.] sin is not the Cause of
Reprobation, but of Damnation.

Reprobation is not a denial of sufficient Grace, but a denial of such
special Grace, as God knows would infallibly bring men to Glory: and this
Decree does not shut up any man under a necessity of sinning, or of being
damned, but it permits men volun^arily and freely, to run into damnable
sins, and through their voluntary impenitency, to incur eternal damnation;
for the Sentence of Damnation lays not hold on men, qua non electi; sed qua
impii, not as non-elect, but as wicked.

It is contrary to Gods nature, causelessly, and cruelly to destroy his
creatures; but it is not contrary to his nature, to decree out of his mercy, to
bestow Grace and Mercy on some; and to Decree, out of the liberty of his Will,
to permit others, through their own voluntary default, by abusing the means
of Grace that is given them, to fall into eternal misery; he has mercy on whom
he will, Exo. 33. 19. If man had been created Wicked, or Evil, then God had
not had just occasion to punish the wickedness, whereof he himself was the
Author, and Maker; but being created good, and having given him power to
stand, he may justly punish him if he fall.

From this Decree of Preterition, or Reprobation it well follows; Judas is
reprobated; therefore he will not use the means, that God offers for his
salvation; but it is not a good Consequence to say; therefore God has not
given him sufficient means, or remedies to escape damnation, were not his own
wicked Will the only hinderance. These two Propositions may stand together; I
will, that if Judas repent, and believe, he shall have remission and salvation;
I will not give unto Judas the gift of Repentance, or Faith, that he may
attain salvation: As it is senseless to say, Gods Decree of giving Faith to
Peter, was suspended till Peter's Faith, and Repentance; so it is as senseless,
to say Gods permitting Judas to dye in Unbelief, and Impenitency was grounded
upon his Unbelief and Impenitency.

It Is true the Fathers were sparing in this Point, till that Monster,
Pelagianisme was Midwifed into the World; and yet, Deus in negotio
Predestinationis non egreditur extra se; and the Cause of Predestination is,
sola Dei Voluntas; so said all the Fathers, and so say the best Reformed
Churches; (for I say the Lutherans are yet defective in their Omnipresence, and
foreseen Faith) then how can there be any consideration of foreseen Faith
and Works? God goes out of himself, if he have regard to Faith, Perseverance,
or any thing that is not intra se: is it not nonsense to say, the Decree of
Predestination is intra se, if God have respect to any thing extra se? And if
any object, that God does nothing, therefore not Reprobate without a Reason; I
say, his Will is Reason sufficient; do we say, and pray, thy Will be done in
Earth, as it is in Heaven, and yet deny it in Predestination? the Psalmist does
prove it true in despite of proud man, Our God has done whatsoever pleased him
in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 135. 6. He did work, and he does work all things
after the Council of his own Will, Ephesians. 1. 5. Romans 9. 19. Suppose that I,
with others, come for entertainment to such a Gentleman's house, may he not
take them in, and refuse to afford me that favor, and for no other Reason, but
because he will not? If I should say, Sir, show me a Reason wherefore you
reject me: may he not answer; it is, because he will not accept me? must there
needs be a quarrel, or he may not? So here, must there needs be infidelity,
evil Works, Original sin, or some other ill condition in me, or else God
may not do with his own as he lift? sure none will say so against themselves;
then how can they suppose it so of God? The Master, whose Scholars we may, nay
we must be, Mat. 20. 15. said, it was lawful for him to do with his own as
he lifted; and may not God have the same leave? as that Parable seems to
prove; Stat pro ratione voluntas, is most proper to Almighty God.

Reprobation, by it self considered, is no punishment, therefore it supposes
no fault; the name signifies no more but not to allow of; sola voluntas,
decretum, beneplacitum, propositum Dei; all, or any of these cannot stand with
the foresight of Faith, or Infidelity; good or evil Works. Indeed God
foresees all sins, Original, and Actual; it were Atheism to deny it; but
that any sin, Original, or Actual ought to go before the first Act of God,
called Reprobation, I utterly deny; let them call Faith, Infidelity, good and
evil Works, but Objects, Motives, Reasons, Circumstances considerable in Gods
Decree; yet if they look into their Logic, it will let them see, that the
least of Causes, Causa sine qua non, is yet a Cause; and God, if he regard any
thing, but his own Will in Election, or Reprobation, must go extrase: to say
(as they say, to salve the Justice of God) that he could not Elect without
looking on man in massa Corrupta, and yet that he did not consider it as any
Reason of his Decree, is without Reason.

I know my wise Adversaries, the Blacksmith, or whosoever sent abroad that
babble, Object against these things, (and so do the Papists, because they will
not seem to play the Fools without Reason) that by this it follows the
Freedom of man's Will must perish: Gods Glory is obscured, says Mr. T. if he
punish necessitated wickednesses: The Papists, and Pelagians are of this
Opinion; then a Murderer, says Pighius, when he kills a man, may be
excused, because he has executed the Decree of God; then all care, diligence,
and endeavor is taken away, if our Thoughts, Words, Deeds be determined of
God; to such I may answer, or ask this Question; Can they do any thing that
God has not decreed? They are almost Atheists, that say they can; then it
follows, they can do nothing but it is decreed; Let Pet. Mart. answer for me,
part. 3. pa. 6. I wonder, says he, speaking of these and other Objections of
Pighius, that any Divine could let such an old Wifes Talecome out of his mouth;
Can Judas be excused of his wicked treason against our Savior, because he
heard the Lord foretell his mischievous design? John 13. 21. So then, it is a
simple, nay it is a sinful thing to excuse any sin, by the eternal or
absolute Decree of God: it is his own Will, not the Will of God, that the
mischiefe-munger, or the murderer regards; he cannot do otherwise; nay but
ask himself, and he will say he will not.

Such, as maintain Gods absolute Decree, hold necessity infallibilitatis, not
coactionis; they say that God determines man's Will; and yet it is Free, as I
showed before, and follows the dictate of its own Intellect: to reason thus,
God has eternally foreseen Judas his impenitency, therefore decreed him to
eternal damnation; therefore Judas shall infallibly continue impenitent, and at
length be damned, is a true inference; but this, God has eternally foreseen
Judas his impenitency, therefore Judas shall by coaction, or compulsion of his
Will, be made unalterably impenitent, and so be damned, is a false Conclusion;
The Agent is yet as free, as if God had not foreseen; the absolute will of God
to work faith, repentance, etc. in Peter, makes not these actions compulsory,
but makes the agent most free; for it gives him that spirit, of which the
Apostle says, ubi spiritus, ibi libertas: true and perfect liberty, and Gods
Spirit go both together; and e contra; non-Election denies men that Grace,
which would effectually and infallibly make them produce good Actions; but it
depriveth them not of their own natural freedom, neither does it compel
them to evil actions; Divina Voluntas non tollit potentiam ad oppositum; God
has determined to permit men to fail in attaining eternal life; but he is
not Author of their sins, whereby they incur eternal death.

In good Actions the Freedom of men Elected is not vain, though the End be
determined; because God has determined together with the End, that by their
free Actions they shall attain it; and in bad their Freedom is not vain;
because thereby their Consciences are convinced of their guilt; and Gods
Justice cleared in their damnation.

Reprobation, and the permission thereto annexed, imports not a witholding of
Grace, necessary for the avoiding of sin so permitted, much less a
necessitation of Sinners to their several sins; but a witholding of all
Grace, which would de facto be effectual to the avoiding of sin: so that
sin flows not from this (...), and Permission, as an Effect, from the Cause;
but (...) Consequence, from the Antecedent, necessitate infallibilitatis; as
the Sun, witholding his Beams, causes not darkness; yet darkness is a
Consequent: Neither does this Preterition or Reprobation imply a substraction
of any Graces, or helps obtained: but a non-Donation of such Graces, without
which God foresaw, that Reprobates, out of their own Free Will, would
infallibly perish in their sins: Deo Reprobante non irrogatur aliquid, quo homo
fit deterior: sed tantum non irrogatur quo fiat melior: man is not made worser:
but he is not made better by this Act of Preterition or Reprobation.

Nay, there is not only a bare permissive, but there is also an energeticall,
and operative Will in God, conjoined with the permissive Will; and this
operative, or energeticall Will of God is apparent in these six Circumstances:
1. God eternally decrees, and accordingly when sinful Actions are committed
gives the sinner power and use of Understanding, and Free Will, without which
he could not sin: 2. God thereby eternally decreed to concur, and does
concur ad materialem actum peccati, to the sin as it is an Action: 3. God
decreed the Circumstances, or Occasions, good as from God, whereupon he saw the
sinner would make evil use and sin: 4. God decreed to deny the Means, that
he knew, would have prevented such sins: and offered only such as he knew
the sinner would abuse to the committing of sin: 5. God limiteth, and
orders their sins, so that they break forth in no other measure, at no
other time, upon no other persons, then himself has fore-appoynted: 6. God
orders all these sins to his own Glory, and the good of his Elect.

For the most sinful Actions of man tend to the manifestation of Gods Glory,
either as Acts of mercy to the godly (in whom sin produces punishment;
punishment Repentance; Repentance Faith; Faith the Favor of God; and the
Favor of God Life, and Salvation) or as Acts of Justice to the Wicked, in whom
sin produces punishment; punishment, hardness of heart; hardness of heart,
incredulity; incredulity, hatred of God; and hatred of God, death and
destruction: All which is manifest in the different effects which sin
produced in godly David, and in ungodly Pharaoh; as for example, David's
Murder, and Adultery occasioned Reproves, and Corrections from God, 2. Sam.
12. Psalm. 6. Psalm. 22. These corrections and punishments wrought sorrow and
Repentance in David's heart, Psalm. 5. that Repentance, Faith, and trust in God,
Psalm. 30. Psalm. 31. Psalm. 52. Psalm. 23. That Faith and Trust obtained Love and
Favor from God, Psalm. 27. and that Love and Favor, an assured hope of Life
and Salvation, Psalm. 12. But Pharaohs oppressions provoaked God to send his
judgments, and plagues upon him; these plagues they hardened Pharoahs heart;
that hardness of heart caused incredulity; that incredulity the hatred of God;
and that hatred occasioned Pharaohs ruin and destruction in the red Sea, as it
is Exodus 14. Yea the goodness of God made the very drunkenesse, and incest of
Lot; the incest of Judah; the malice of the Jews; the treason of Judas; and
the injustice of Pilate, Means of man's salvation; yea even Adams Fall, the
fountain of sin, and misery in man, was by the wisdom of God made a means
of greater happiness to the Godly, then his perseverance and continuance in
Innocence could have been: For if life had been given, as a reward of our just
Works, (so the wittiest of the Schoolmen, Scotus) then our Work being finite
could not have merited an infinite reward, the enjoyment whereof but one minute
had passed our merit; whereas life eternal being now conferred upon the
faithful, not by way of Debt, but by the Free Grace and Mercy of God, this
infinite Gift is proportioned, not according to the mean merits of the
Receiver, but according to the goodness of God the Giver. So that even Sin
it self, on this manner, that I have showed may be said to be of God. Let a
man spur forward a lame Horse, in that he moves forward, the Rider is Cause;
but that he halteth he himself is the cause: When we see the Sun Beams
shining through a Glass, the Light is from the Sun; the Color not from the
Sun; but from the Glass: For, talis Actio cum tali defectu, is not of God; as
sinful Actions have in them formalem rationem peccati, and are opposite to the
Rule of Gods Law, so God neither is, nor can be the Causer of them; yet is he
the Cause of that inward or outward natural Action, wherein this defect of
man's Will is found: Entitas pravae actionis cadit in Voluntatem Divinam; yet
man has not only potentiam in se liberam, but liberum usum potentiae, not
only free power, but also free use of his power, as it appears in Thieves,
Adulterers, and the like, who, when there is danger, do not, yet after do
commit such sins.

God is no Enforcer in sinful Actions, yet may he be a Decreer, or Permitter,
suffering persons not elected to fall volu^tarily into sins; to continue
volu^tarily in the^, to their lives end; and for the^ to undergo endless misery
in another life. God decreed the permission, and disposing of sin, which he
foresaw upon his permission would be, but he did not decree the effecting, or
Existence of it, that it should be; it more appertained to Gods Omnipotent
Goodness to draw good out of evil; then not to suffer evil to be.

And as in bad, so also in good Actions, God not only fore-sees, that a man
will use his Free Will well: but wills and preordaines, that he shall use it
well. It is true, that men justified by Gods Predestination, by their endeavor
and deliberation, may be said to determine themselves to good Works; I say
after Justification: but it is God, that moves, and makes them thus to
determine themselves, and do all these things with a Free Will. This is a sure
Rule; a man does not that good thing, which by Grace he is able to do, unless
God make him to do it, as he has made him able to do it, if he will: Ad
perseverantiam in Fide and Gratia, non opus est nova, and speciali Gratia,
sufficit ad hoc vel quod Natura habemus, vel quod semel per Spiritum adepti
sumus; to perseverance in Faith and Grace, there needs no special Grace,
Nature, or Grace once received is sufficient for this: None have been so bold
to say thus, but the old Pelagians, and later Semi-Pelagians.

It is true, that Christ says of sinful Jerusalem; How often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as an Hen gathers her Chickens, and ye would
not? Mat. 23. 37. But he willed togather them, not Voluntate beneplaciti, which
cannot be resisted, but by his revealed Will, using the means which might (had
man not fallen) have been effectual; that impotency in our Wills comes not
from the Creator; but from man that fell from his Creator; and the Will is now
stark dead (as to good Actions) until it be enlivened by God: This damnable
Doctrine, that all men were redeemed by Christ, but not made free, because God
distributeth his gifts according to the carelessness of such as came to receive
them, was an old rotten Heresy, buried many hundred years since, and raised
up again by the Devil, to disturb the peace of the Church in our days.

To drive this nail any further, were needless, had I Men to deal with; but
my Adversaries, many of them, are such Beasts, as fought with Paul at Ephesus;
therefore, yet once over again, all this I have said shall be poved both by
evident Reasons; and out of the Word of God.

For 1. I say, God foresees all Contingent Effects to come, in his own
determination of the Causes thereof; and therefore seeing the Contingent
Operation of our Will, he determines it to the Effect. 2. Else there should be
two several beginnings of one, and the same Effect, in as much as Man's Will
should begin to work, as soon as God; and concur to the Effect willed, as
principally as God. 3. The Will of Man is but Gods Instrument; the Hatchet, the
Hammer, whereby God hewes out his own work; but every one that uses any
Instrument moves, applies, and determines it to his own will. 4. The Will of
Man is but a secondary, subordinate Cause, under the first Cause, which is God,
and exceeds not the measure of second Causes; but if it were not determined by
the first Cause, it should be all one with the first Cause it self: Second
Causes are always moved to their Effects by the First; and in their operations
reduced to the motion of one universal prime Cause, that is God. Therefore it
is, the Scriptures say, that the way of man is not in himself, neither is it
in man to direct his own steps, Jer. 10. 28. It is God that gives a new heart,
and puts a new spirit in man, Jer. 31. 33. God placed the members in man's body,
and orders them as it pleases him, 1. Cor. 12. 18. It is God that works in
us, both to will, and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13. The heart of
the King is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns it, as it pleases him,
Prove. 21. 1. He hardened Pharaohs heart, Exodus 7. 3. as hard as a stone; and he
takes away our stony hearts, and gives us hearts of flesh; he has done, he
does, and he will do what he will. The will of God was but fulfilled, when
Judas did betray Jesus, Act. 1. 16. Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the whole
Synagogue of the Jews, did no more then what God had determined to be done,
Act. 2. 23. and Act. 4. 28. The whole World united can do nothing but what God
will; and God is not moved consequently, by any thing which he as a superior
Cause moves and determines to the Effect; but God himself, antecedently, as a
superior Cause, moves and determines the Will of man to the Effect, or that
which it wills, be it good or ill.

Therefore it follows, God is not consequently moved by the good or ill use of
the Free Will of man: therefore the good use of man's Will foreseen moved not
God to Elect him, and the evil use of man's Will foreseen was not the Cause
that God Reprobated him: Therefore God had no Antecedent Will to save the
Reprobate, if they would, by their Free Will, receive and use his Grace aright:
therefore Gods Decree touching the Salvation, and Reprobation of men, is
lastly, and finally, resolved into his own pure Will.

Universalist; thou tellest me of the love of God to Man; and in that thou
tellest me true; for if all the World were full of Books; if all the men in
the world were Writers; and if all the water in the Sea were Ink: yet the
Books would be written, the Writers weary, the Ink spent, and yet the Love
of God to us poorly expressed: but then let me tell thee, that this Love of
God to man should make a reflection toward this Sun, and move man to love God
again, and nothing but God; and himself for this God, that loved him when he
was nothing, submitting himself wholly and soly to the Will of God.

There are four degrees of Love: First, a man loves himself for his own
sake, for he is flesh, and so naturally can love nothing but himself; but when
he sees, that he cannot subsist without God, then necessity compels him, but
for his own sake still, to fly to God; and when he has begun to love God,
though but for his own sake, and begins withal to taste and see how sweet God
is, then he loves God no more for his own sake; but for Gods sake; and when he
has attained to this third step, to love God for Gods sake, he stays there,
and strives (if it be possible for any man to obtain this heavenly happiness
here on Earth) to love himself only for Gods sake: Thus the true love of God
should both begin, and end only in God: like a Circle, which begins, and ends
in it self: Now let Mr. T. take heed, how he preach against this absolute
Will, and Power in God; and plead his own Faith and Works, lest God at length
be avenged on him; God has leaden heels, but iron hands; he seems to wink
with his eyes, but it is as Gunners use, that they may hit surer, when they
shoot.

Origin in his second Book against Celsus says thus: A certain man gave
counsel to his friend that was sick, not to send for the Physician, because
(said he) it is already appointed by Destiny, either that thou shall recover of
this Disease; or that thou shall not; if it be appointed by God, or by thy
Destiny, that thou shall recover, thou shall then not need the Physician; if it
be not appointed by God; if it be not thy Destiny to recover, the Physician,
though he come, cannot help thee; wherefore whether God have decreed thou
shall recover, or not, the Physician will be called in vain. Another, by the
like Argument dissuaded his Friend from Marriage: Thou will marry a Wife (said
he) to beget Children; but if it be thy Destiny to have Children, thou shall
have them without a Wife; if it be not thy Destiny, it will nothing further
thee to marry a Wife; for whatsoever Destiny has decreed in this kind will
come to pass; it is in vain therefore to marry a Wife.

Thus wicked men deride, and would rather that blind-man-buffle in the World,
then that God determine every Action and Event; or fix his Decree. But the
first did send for the Physician; and the second did marry a Wife: He used a
wiser Argument, who told them, that God having Predestined Men to such Ends,
Predestined also, that they should use the Means: The sick man might safely
answer; nay rather if God have Decreed I shall recover; therefore I will send
for the Physician, that by his means I may attain to that which God has
Decreed. Thus Hezekiah had fifteen years added to his life, by using the
means; and yet he is a Devil that denies, God did, from all eternity,
determine the certain number of his days: And that other might answer; if God
have appointed I shall have children, seeing it can, or ought to come to pass
by no other means, I will marry a Wife.

In this absolute Predestination, we are far enough from the Stoics Fate; they
subjected God himself to Fate; we subject Fate, that is the necessity of
things to Gods most Free Will; they, under the name of Fate, understood a
necessary connection of natural Causes and Effects; we teach that God can, and
often does suspend these Effects, and works besides, nay, against Nature: The
Stoics took away all contingency; We admit contingency in respect of second
Causes, but we say there is a certain prescience in the first Cause; all
things are ordered by the providence of God. Indeed the Turks, out of their
obstinate belief of Predestination, brutishly contemn all kinds of dangers;
for they say, that as soon as man comes out of his mothers Womb to enjoy the
light of the world, God writes in his forehead all the good or evil that shall
happen unto him; and particularly of what death he shall dye; the necessity
whereof (they say) no humane power can avoid: and hence it came to pass, that
Anno 1611. there died of the Plague in Constantinople 200000. in five months,
every day 12 or 15 hundred, for they will not turn away from a body dead of
this disease; nor forbear to visit their Friends being infected; no, they
conclude it contrary to all reason, that any good, or evil can be prevented,
seeing every thing is pre-ordayned of God. But we Christians are taught better
things; that we should not so foolishly examine the secret Counsels of God, as
to make them altogether agreeable to our blockish Reason.

I might enlarge my self on this Subject; I want not matter to stop the widest
mouth among my neighbors: but I will draw toward a Conclusion.

Reader, I pray thee seriously consider, if both the Supra-lapsarian, and the
Sub-lapsarian, may not meet, and sweetly set forth the Mercy, and Justice of
God: the Supra-lapsarians say, that in the first Act of Reprobation, God does
all for himself only; in the second, that is Damnation, he does all for sin: in
this last the Supra-lapsarian, and the Sub-lapsarian say, that God does the
second for Sin; I see not why he may not say, he does the first for Himself,
and so be in that a Supra-lapsarian: but foreseen Faith, and Works in the
first Act of God, clashes ex Diametro, against the Word of God. I know in God
there is no first, or last; prius or posterius; but yet for our better
understanding, we may conceive the Decrees of Election, and Preterition, in
order of priority, antecedent to the permission of sin, and therefore much more
to the prevision.

I conceive, the Question is not, whether God foresaw what Good, and Bad would
do; who dares doubt of that; but whether the Different Actions of Men,
foreseen, caused the Different Decrees, of their Election, and Preterition:
indeed it is impossible, but that God should see all things at once; therefore
he could not Predestinate, or Reprobate, without prevision, and permission of
sin; but even Original sin alone, though foreseen, could not be Cause, why
Peter was Predestined, and Judas not, seeing it was foreseen in both, and
made both ex aequo Reprobabiles; therefore it was Gods will, that made a
difference, and not any Original sin. God determined to permit the Apostasy
of Men, and Angels; to damn some of Men; all the Apostate Angels: yet God
might have Elected Cain, or Judas, unto Glory without injustice; and passed by
Peter; God forbid, we should say, the Divine Will was determined, and could not
do otherwise: yet Cain, Judas, and Peter, were equally guilty of Original sin.

We grant not; that by this absolute Reprobation, God Decrees, that Men not
Predestined, should unavoydably sin, that so they may certainly be damned;
but we grant, that God foreknoweth, persons not elected will voluntarily commit
those sins, for which he intends to damn them: but Negative Reprobation
neither procures, nor supposes any sin; as damnation does: The Decrees of
excluding men out of Heaven, and tormenting them in Hell, are different. I say
then, that even Judas, notwithstanding his Reprobation, might have been saved,
had he not continued voluntarily impenitent; if any say, he could not, yea but
I say he would not; there was by Gods Act of Reprobation, no necessity of
coaction imposed on his will.

And now if any object; that the salvation of all were more for Gods glory; To
this I answer, God is not to learn of us what makes most for his Glory; he
could have upheld the Angels, Adam; saved all, and every particular; but he did
not, he does not: therefore this absolute Decree to bring but some to
salvation, and permit others infallibly to fall, does make most for his glory.
Indeed Alphonsus K. of Castile said, God might have made his Works, and done
many things much better then he did; but it was Blasphemy; take you heed, Mr. T.

I must not omit, how that the 39. Articles agreed upon by the whole Clergy of
England, anno 1562. for establishing of Consent touching true Religion, are
flat opposite to these Opinions of our Universalists: they are against the 10.
Article, which says; That man, since the fall of Adam, has no Free Will, or
Power, to do any thing pleasant and acceptable unto God: they are against the
11. Article, which says, Justification is not for any of our own works, or
deservings: they are against the 12. Article, which says, Good works are only
fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification; and by Consequence, Election:
they are against the 17. Article, which calls Predestination to life, the
everlasting Purpose of God, wherely, before the Foundations of the World were
laid, he has constantly Decreed, by his Counsel secret to us, to deliver from
curse and damnation those, whom he has chosen in Christ out of mankind, and
to bring them by Christ to everlasting salvation, as vessels made to honor,
etc. So then the Foundation of Predestination to life, is the purpose of God,
and his Counsel; not foreseen Faith, whereby he has constantly Decreed
(Predestination is immutable) to deliver from Curse those only, whom he had
chosen in Christ; he had no purpose to save all; and they are called Vessels
made to honor, which implies other Vessels made to dishonor. If Mr. T. be a
Minister, then he might remember, that he once consented to the truth of
these Articles.

Indeed, Arminius in his Declaration to the States of Holland, and
West-Frisland, endeavors to prove, by 20. Arg. That God has not Decreed
absolutely to save certain particulars; And Bertius, his Scholar, says; This
absolute Decree opens a gate on this side to a dissolute life; on that side
to desperation. They say further, That the Opinion of precise Election, without
respect of foreseen Faith in the Elect, overthroneth all Religion. But,
Reader, thou may remember, that these two are much like those Artists, that
found out the Trade they professed; they are not the Children of our Mother:
both Arminians, and our Universalists, make a desperate use of this Doctrine:
but the Doctrine it self is no desperate Doctrine, or Doctrine of desperation,
but of Heavenly consolation; as we read in our 17. Article; the words are
these. The godly consideration of Predestination, and our Election in Christ,
is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such
as feel in themselves the working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their minds to
high and heavenly things; as well because it does greatly establish and
confirm the Faith of eternal Salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as
because it does fervently kindle their love toward God, etc. They that draw
desperate Conclusions, because of Gods Decree, are condemned in that Article;
and I am sure our Doctrine of Predestination is a savor of life unto life; if
it prove a savor of death unto death, it is only to such as pervert the
Doctrine of Holy Scriptures to their own destruction, 2. Pet. 3. 16. But the
Doctrine of the Arminians, and our Vniversalists, which makes Gods Election
depend upon the Will of man, which may totally, and finally fall from Grace, is
a most desperate Doctrine, and deprives a Christian of all comfort, both in
life, and death; a weak and woeful foundation, to build the salvation of man
(be it but in part, or in point of Perseverance) upon himself.

To reconcile Gods secret, and revealed Will, because we shall be judged by the
evidence of his revealed Will, yet according to his secret Will; and though
formal is ratio peccati, without all question, is not from God; yet how far he
suffers, or sets on Sinners (seeing he must not be outed in any humane Actions,
and Events, which are all sinful, or accompanied with such Circumstances) I
say these two stumble me most; and though (I thank God) he has given me some
satisfaction; yet I believe he is out, that expects a plain Reason; or to
prove all things in Scriptures by evident Demonstrations: Faith must believe
what Sense cannot conceive; it is a Christian man's honor, that he
over-reacheth Reason.

Now for a Colophon, or Period to this point of Predestination; I will set down
three, or four Examples, which if they do not probare, yet they may serve a
little illustrare; therefore I say thus: Suppose a Lord set 20. men on work,
upon condition that if they do his will, they shall be all Lords, even
Co-heires with his own Son; if they do it not, they shall suffer until they
give satisfaction: On ten of these twenty he set his affections so far, that if
they did miscarry, he would take a course to deliver them from the danger; they
all do quite contrary to their Lords Command; therefore he sent his only Son,
who both did his Fathers Will, which they should have done; suffered for that
they did not, or did amiss; and gave sufficient satisfaction, which the Father
accepts, as it was intended by the Son, for them ten, on whom he set his first
Love; but as for the other, he suffers them to perish in Prison, or to lie
there until they pay that which can never be paid. Can these last accuse their
Lord of Injustice? Or can the first ten conclude, because their Lord has set
his love upon them, therefore they may be careless? Nay rather, they will be
careful, and fearful to offend so kind, and loving a Lord. I know,
similitudo non currit quatuor pedibus: yet this I take to be not far from the
Case 'twixt God and Man: but this Example is to be understood of Man in that
condition, God Created him; for if considered in that condition, into which he
cast himself, then he is justly condemned, for not doing that, which now he
cannot do: For suppose, the Parliament command me to come to London, and I can
ride further, but because I will not do the Parliaments Commands, I cut one of
my legs off, or lame my self, and then plead, I cannot come; may not the
Parliament yet justly command me to come, though then I cannot come, because
when they commanded me I might have com'd? Mr. T. dare not speak against the
Parliament in such a case; but I can show how desperately He did speak
against God, if he dare offer to condemn any man for not doing that which, in
this condition, he cannot do; as if God were bounden to cure us, when we have
wounded, or killed our selves: Indeed the Father ran to meet his son afar off,
but he was not bound to go one foot from home. Suppose; two Travelers come to
my house; I may receive one; or both; or neither of both: that comparison of
two poor people, is not so proper, for we were Created in a Rich Condition.

Suppose; Two Houses built upon the same Ground; Foundations, Timber, Stone,
Workmanship, and all alike, able to stand twenty years, if no Storms or
Tempests touch them: But the Rain fell, the Floods came, the Winds blew, and
beat upon the Houses; yet the Builder having resolved to repair, and prop one
of them, it fell not; the other he left to it self, and it soon tumbled down:
was the Master bound to uphold them both, because he built them both?

Suppose; Two Candles burning by the same light; a blast of wind blows out
both of them; I come instantly, and light the one, and it burns again; the
other I will not light, so it never burns again; was I bound to light both of
them? Let us give God that same liberty which we take: Audax Japheti genus; see
the boldness of the sons of Adam, that would feign enter an Action against
God Almighty, if they could tell in what Court; for that this Potter uses his
Clay, as he pleases; and has not made all, Vessels of Honor, as they would
have him: yea, and which is worst of all, they are so addicted, or rather
wedded to their own conceits, that they can hardly with patience endure, to
hear the reasonable Opinion of others, contrary to their own: Every Sentence
in the Scriptures makes for them, like the Fool in Athens that thought, every
ship in the Haven was his own: they will hold the Conclusion, what Arguments
soever are alleged to prove the contrary: Thus zeal misled is like metal in
a blind horse, which is his own; or his Riders ruin.

They love the Children of their Brains, better then the Children of their
Bodies; so that when they have conceived mischief, and brought forth an Idol,
or an idle conceit of their own fancying, it grows up with them, it
delights them, and they rejoice in their own inventions, persuading
themselves; that now the Lord will be good unto them, seeing they have found
out a Truth; as Micha supposed, when he had got a graven Image, an Ephod, a
Teraphim, and a Wandering Levite, Judge. 17. 5. 11. for this their Device,
especially if it be painted with some color of holy Scripture, they esteem as
an Image, come down from Jupiter, Acts 19. 35. as a Doctrine from Heaven it
self; and hence forward all the blessings that they enjoy, flow from this
Opinion, that they hold: thus they burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, Jer.
44. 17. the Idol that they have made after their own hearts: therefore they
will lose their life rather, then their Religion, which they will defend with
tooth and nail; They will Preach for it, as Hannaniah did for his false-hoods,
Jer. 28. 11. They will dispute for their Opinions, as the Epicureans, and
Stoics did, Acts 17. 18. and write Books in defense of them, as Shemaiah did,
Jer. 29. 25. and persecute, if it be in their power, all that contradict them,
as Jeroboam did in defense of his Idolatry, 1. Kings 13. 4. whatsoever is
spoken out of the Word of God against them, they will not hear, no more then
the Jews would the Word of the Lord by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 44. 16. being
as hardly induced to think it no truth, that their own wit has discovered,
as the Ephesians to think them no Gods, that were made with hands, Acts 19.
26. Aseduced spirit has deceived them, as that did Ahab, when he fell at
Ramoth, in Gilead, 1 Kings 22. 21. so that they cannot deliver their own
souls, nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? Isa. 44. 20. They are
blind, and, which is worse, they will not see; foolish Prophets, that follow
their own spirit, Ezekiel. 13. 3.

What pity is it, that this Viper should creep continually upon the body of
our Church; and yet the hand of Authority (I hope for want of information) has
not shaken it into the fire? Usque quo, Domine? Usque quo? how long Lord? how
long? all those things are come upon us, and yet there is none that knows how
long, Psalm. 74. 9. 10. It is our parts, to pray; thy will be done in Earth, as
it is in Heaven; but even the Lord for Christ's sake, when it is his blessed
Will, deliver this Church from the effects of blind zeal, and over-bold
devotion.

And thus I have set down some of the Opinions of the Brethren in the Gospel,
about us; all their Opinions it is impossible to relate; they cannot tell their
own Tenets; they hold any thing, but the Truth. A certain Mathematician, in
reading a Lecture to his Scholars, was quite out; so he asked them if they
understood him; no, replied they; Indeed I wonder not, said he, nam Ego meipsum
non intelligo, for I understand not my self: the Brethren are as much out, as
this Mathematitian, and may say on the same manner. A Neighbor, not a fortnight
since, discoursing with Mr. T. told him; he ought not to take the Scriptures
always in a literal sense: for Christ said; he was a Door; a Vine; vet he was
neither of both, in a literal sense: he called the Bread, his Body; yet it was
not literally his Body: Mr. T. made answer, that our Savior Christ, when he
said so, clapped his hand on his Body, and said; Hoc est corpus meum, This is my
Body; but he meant it not of the Bread.

They say; Africa semper aliquid apportat novi; and Anglia abounds as much
with Monstrous Opinions; as Africa with Monsters: and the Fruits of these
evil Trees are as bad, as those, that grow upon the banks of the Dead Sea.

A Stranger can scarce ride twixt Bridge, and Lincoln, but he may hear, or
see the Country all set on fire: our parts of Lynsey vomit out flames as fast,
as Vesuvius; the Father against the Son; and the Son against the Father; the
Husband against his Wife; and the Wife against her Husband; the Brother would
betray the Brother to death; Friends and Neighbors are even ready to eat one
another; Wars, and Warlike Opinions, as if the Times, that Christ foretold,
had overtaken us.

At first; The Netherlands received the infection of this pestilent Doctrine
from Britain, by Pelagius; and now at last Britain has received the same
infection from the Netherlands by Arminius. The Peach-tree brought out of Asia,
and planted in Italy, of rank poison, became pleasant fruit: but the Papists,
and Arminian Opinions, brought out of Italy, and Germany, and planted upon our
Heaths, among us, mad Hylanders, have a quite contrary effect: for the
practices of the Brethren pass, and repasse Papists, and Arminians; all but
Anabaptists, in a super-superlative degree.

Nero set Rome on fire, that he might sing the Destruction of Troy, in suo
genere; in kind, or in its proper colors; he that has a mind to sing
Lachrymae, in a sympathizing tune, may see a sad example with us. Let a man but
look into the Towns all about Mr. T. and he may see, or hear them brawle and
brangle; so soon as they arise, and so they continue till they go to bed; such
Divisions, and Sub-divisions, as cannot but make our Enemies to laugh, and ous
Friends to weep.

The Church of God is now in two Extremes, a flood and a fire, in a flood of
tears,; and yet on fire in her different affections; alas, that neither this
flood can quench that fire; nor any fire, can dry this flood. The Divisions of
Simeon; the Divisions of Levi; the Divisions of Simeon against Levi; and the
divisions of Levi among themselves, who is able to behold with dry? a man
cannot think of, as he ought without without wet eyes. The Divisions of
Reuben do pierce the very soul of the Mother that bore him; and there is none
of all the Children, that she has brought forth, able to comfort their
Mother, that is even sick at heart, and sits by the high way side, begging
help of every one that passes by. Come hither, Heraclytus; stay Travailer,
and weep with us. If any man would tell wonders in his own, let him come first
into our Country, and there he may see that, which no good Christian can
desire, or delight to see.

I have read of one, who being borne blind, he had his sight given him by his
Prayers to God; but then he saw so many wickednesses, that he desired of God
to be blind again; and if the story tell truth, it was granted. Was it then
such an Age, as God has reserved us to live in? Our Mother is sore sick of a
Convulsion; pulld all to pieces, on a pitiful manner; like an Oak, that is
cleft in sunder with Wedges made out of its own body. Plutarch reports of a
beautiful Damsel, whom a company of young men contended for to be their
Bride; they would all of them have had her, but they could not agree, that any
one of the should enjoy her; therefore they cut her all to pieces, and took
each one a part; so then they all of them had her, and yet they none of them
had her: Religion is that beautiful Damsel, whom Papists, Antinomians,
Anabaptists, Arminians, Universalists, and other Schismatiks say they strive
for; but the truth is, they cut poor Religion all to pieces; and each one of
them have a part, but none of them have pure Religion.

If any man had lost his Religion, he might once have found it in Poland;
afterward in Amsterdam; but now in England, or else it is vanished out of the
world.

Medaea cut her child in pieces; a cruel Mother; but that Children should cut
their Mother in pieces, Ah cursed Children! Woe is me that ever I bore you, may
may our Mother the Church say to such churlish Children; as the Prophet Jer. of
his Mother, Jer. 15. 10. Surely bloody Children have you been unto me, may the
Church say unto such; as Zipporah to her Husband, when she threw the Childs
foreskin at his feet, Exodus 4. 23. Call me not NAOMI, that is a beautiful
Church, but call me MARAH, may our Mother say, for the Lord has dealt
bitterly with me, Ruth 1. 20. Richard the first K. of England, being in his
Fathers life time a disobedient Child, coming to meet his Fathers dead body,
Royally adorned for the Burial, according to the Majesty of his State, the
very Corpse (as it were abhorring, and accusing him for his unnatural
cruelties) gushed forth blood; whereat Richard pierced with remorse melted into
a flood of tears, on a most penitent manner: But we may see the wounds of our
Mother, the Church, as wide as in the Wars, if not as bloody, yet as deadly,
and yet her hard hearted Children have no remorse or pity on their poor
Mother, the Church. Go to the Isles of Chi^tim, and see; and send unto Kedar,
enquire of all the Nations round about us, if any Children use their Mother on
such a manner, Jer. 2. 10. Eyes, distill tears; Heart, drop down blood, if
thou have any sense or feeling of the sad sufferings of thy sorrowful Mother,
that is not eaten up, but worried of her Children, saevientes inter se, raging
among themselves, by such cursed cruel means to kill their Mother; as if some
of the old Danes; nay rather some old rotten Heretics were raised from death
to life, to ruin England. For a house to be on fire in one part, is pitiful;
but to be on fire in every part, it is a fearful thing. There were never such
things seen in England, since it was a Nation, as the Israelites said, when
they saw the scattered limbs, and pieces of the Levites Wife, Judges 19. 30.
The Red, and White Roses of Lancaster, and York, never had the like; nor the
two Lions of either Nation, Gold, and Gules.

Is he not rightly named Jacob, said Esau of his brother? for he has
supplanted me etc. Genesis 27. 36. And are they not rightly called Universalists?
for, (besides that they seek to supplant us) like the Pharisees, they compass
sea and land, to make their Proselites as universal, as their Opinions; and
they make them (if it were possible) worse then themselves.

Some of their practices in spreading their Opinions, I touched in my Preface;
but yet (that the Subject may be suitable to the Title, I gave it at the
beginning) let me a little further show the Reader their ordinary courses, to
catch such as are willing to be deceived, and to confront Ministers: therefore
thus.

If there be any that loves not, or likes not, or list to fall out, or can by
any means be drawn to quarrel with his Minister, there is hopes of him: some of
the Brethren set upon him to hear Mr. T. whom they extol to the heavens;
whither being come, he is welcomed, taken to his house, where they club; and
he is entertained to a cup of Ale, and such news as they have, or would have:
how much Ale has been usually sent for on a Sabbath, in one afternoon, I
have been told, and could hardly believe: all are Fellows alike; and this
Familiarity is a sound Argument to prove the truth of their Doctrine.

Then they appoint a meeting at some Town there abouts; the Brethren give
notice of it far and near; and there is a general Assembly of Men, Women,
Boys, and Wenches; Mr. T. speaks, (so they call it) either in the Church, or
in a private House, Chair, or Chimney, or without Doors, the same things,
over, and over again; as if the Brethren had besought him, as the Gentiles did
Paul, to preach the same words next Sabbath day, Act. 13. 42. For be the Text
whatsoever it will, he shakes hands with it immediately; they but meet, and part.
And the truth is, these meetings are so strong an Argument, to prove their
Opinions, that no one man; nay, no one Town is able to Answer.

Up go the Ministers Life's, and Doctrine, among the Brethren, and Sisters;
they cannot edify by such a Minister; another Preaches not Christ; a third,
false Doctrine; and then they consider, what affronts are fittest to be offered
to any of them. Aladine, Prince of Drangiana in Persia, built a beautiful
Palace, in a pleasant Valley; which having furnished, and fitted with all
things, that might ravish the eye, or care; he promised this Paradise (so they
called it) to his Partisans, if they would do this, or that mischief, against
some Prince, or Lord, that lived about him: so also my backe-friend, by his
fools Paradise of Universal Grace, offered to all effectually, sets wicked
men on work to commit many mischiefs against the Ministers that live about
him; I say, he sets on such, as in their fortunes can hardly be worser; or in
their manners wickeder And yet they crack continually, that they are set on,
and sent by Authority, and abuse their Names, whom they are unworthy to name;
they say, such sent them, who are Gentlemen of Honor, and as much Honesty;
whom, I am sure, will not own them.

Scarce one of all the Brethren, and Sisters, but are utter Enemies to their
own, and all the Ministers they know, or know not; they are Egyptians, and
shepherds are an abomination unto them, Genesis 46. 34. But Mr. T. drives a
dainty trade; we fetch our Tithes, and well are we, if we can have them for
fetching; they carry to Mr. T. etc. and if this Devil be cast out, the hopes
of his gain is gone.

I might show their uncivil behaviors in hearing the Word of God; I have
Preached to men 25 years; now to Monsters, that make strange faces; laughing,
jeering, and chatting in the Church. I have read of a woman that being left
poor at the death of her Husband, the Devil appeared unto her, and promised
to make her rich, upon condition, that she should perform these 3. things. 1.
Entice Church men to be naught with her: 2. Take poor people in o'th day, as
if she meant to give them lodging; and turn them out at night: 3. That she
would do, as these do themselves, and set their children and servants to do,
disturb the Minister in praying and preaching in the Church. Thus are they like
the Dog, that will neither eat Hay himself, nor suffer the Horse to eat. I
cannot tell how more fitly to compare them, then to the H^reticks, Bor^ori^ae,
whom they called thus for their beastly behavior.

And if any Minister dare be so bold, as to speak against their proceedings,
then Mr. T. engages all his Hearers against him; as he did engage them against
me: they are the words of that black Bill, sent abroad under his hand: He
preaches false Doctrine; and they must undertake to prove it true, by
Arguments, a fustibus, drawn from their fists: Indeed so did John Becold, the
Tailor of Leyden, after King, and Captain of the Anabaptists at Munster; and
so did David George of Delfe, that damned Heretic: I wonder how he can tread
so right in the steps of the Anabaptists, reading so few Books, besides the
Bible; for, by relation, he takes as much pains in the Pulpit, as any man
living; as little out of it; but this it is, to be inspired by the same spirit.

But above all their other practices, their public Meetings are most
offensive; and may in time prove as pernicious to the Commonwealth, as they
are at present, to the Church: the Lord God grant that Authority may look to it
in time, that we may sleep quietly in our beds by night, and not be affrighted
by such Fellows, de faece plebis, if we walk abroad by day. For multitudes to
meet, on this manner, at a little Town, without consent of the Minister, and
other Inhabitants, is such a course, as was used at Mulhus, in Turingia, and at
Munster, in Westphalia, among the Anabaptists; it never was among good
Christians. Indeed Robert le Bruce K. of Scotland, admitted of women and boys,
to supply the rooms of trained Soldiers in his necessities; and though he
thereby got the day: yet I hope, that we who fight the battles of the Lord of
Hosts, shall never be defeated by such a simple policy; a rowt of silly Women,
ignorant Men, and a rabble of Girls, and Boys.

For my own, and my good Neighbors sake, I must signify, that there are in
our Town but 2. constant Hearers of Mr. T. that go to him: when he comes to
them, then he may have 4. or 5. more, but not many; not one Husbandman (that I
know of) will go out of doors to hear him; I think desires not he should
come into their doors, except one, who is almost deaf and blind, and came
scarce this half year to hear me; but the woman was first in the
transgression, how can it be but there must needs follow a fearful falling
away? when men, or women, love the company, the discourse, the writings of the
grossest Sectaries of all sorts, and loath the truth? And for these 2. that are
his constant Hearers, there is no mischief would be thought on with us, were
it not for them; their excuse, when they say, or do, what they may suffer for,
is, that they were drunk. One of them would have hired a Neighbor to fall out
with me; he offered him money at several times; but the honest man hated such
an horrible wickedness; and told me how he tempted him. They have sworn
both of them, even to the taking away of life; I say not, forsworn. Like
Salamanders, they delight to live in the fire; if any Brangle be with us, or
about us, O brave! They are like those fishes, that love troubled waters; like
Flies; they sit either on sore places, or are padling in dung; and Baalzebub is
the God of these Flies. They say, Hyppocrates left a Rule to all his Fellow
Physicians, which he commanded them to observe, on pain of his Curse; it was
this; That they should Cure others with Medicines, Simple and Compound;
themselves, with Sack, and Claret: But these Men (if I may call them Men) use
the same Physic themselves, that they prescribe to others: yet if they do go
to Hell, as Roboald K. of West-Frysons, said, they may find some of their
friends, if the Devil dare let them come thither; there is the doubt, left they
trouble him, as much as they do us. I, and mine, are bound to bless God, that
the elder Brother could not tell how to be so wicked, as the younger would have
had him; for he is plenus rimarum, full of holes, as a Riddle, and can hold
nothing; any body, or a cup of Ale, may set open the Stable door, and let out
the Ass within. And which is strange, yet true, Lions and Bears are won with
kindnesses; but these men are worse then Beasts; Do them a courtesy (and you
dare not but do it) then, who dare meddle with them? as if they could set the
Devil, as they do their Dogs, on any thing.

They say, Amphions Music made the stones to dance, and drew them after him;
savadge men they meant, sure, that were before senseless as stones: they tell
us, that the Dolphins saved Arions life, because he played and sung so sweetly:
the Pythagoreans undertook to cure the Melancholy; nay, the Mad man's fury by
Music. When the evil Spirit from God was upon Saul, David took a Harp, and
played with his hands; so Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil Spirit
departed from him, 1. Sam. 16. 23. I have often heard out of many a Ministers
mouth such sweet Melody, as past Arions and Amphions skill, beyond compare; put
down the Pythagoreans Pipes; it must be short of that sweet Singers tongue,
it is true; not of his Harp and Hand, though they warbled never so well; and yet
the Devil does not depart from Saul, he is as ill as ever: We pipe but they
will not dance: I had rather undertake to charm a hungry Lions mouth, to win
a Tiger, or to meet a wild she Bear, and make her tame, then to mollify or
make a change in these men's manners: never men took more pains to be
virtuous, then they do to be vicious; no Aesculapius can cure their ill
Conditions.

But suppose they do that which (I trust in God) the Devil by their means
shall never be able to do; yet as Epaminondas said of his two Daughters, the
Battails of Mantinea, and Leuctra; so may I say too, this Daughter of mine is
like to outlive their cruelties, and vindicate her Fathers credit against the
Opinions, and the Practices of such shameless Sectaries: Having obtained help
of God, I continue to this day, as Paul said in such a Case, Acts 26. 22.
though they are and have been very Jews unto me: and come what can come, it
shall be welcome; if I cannot be secured from the troubles of men on Earth; yet
I know nothing can hurt me that comes from God in Heaven. Now let Mr. T. tell
me truly, if such Phaetons, as set the world on fire, be fit Companions for
Ministers; if yet he be a Minister, which who believes? Birds of one feather
will fly together; but I cannot hear that ever he used the Company of any
Minister: nay, has he not, does he not abdicare se ab Officio, put off the
Office (as they do that renounce their Baptism) by joining in the right hand
of fellowship, and admitting equally men of any Trade or Occupation, to Preach,
or Teach with him in public, though they be no Ministers? Besides, Bishops,
and Presbyters are an abomination to him; and as for the People, they cannot
make a Minister; ^il dat, quod non habet; no Cause can give to the Effect, that
which it has not first in it self: and he ought not to take that Office to
himself; it is against Heb. 5. 4. Therefore I do not deny, but I doubt he is
no Minister. Let him remember, that may be lawful in Ecclesia constituenda,
which is not lawful in Ecclesia constituta; that may be lawful in the
planting, or gathering of a Church, which is unlawful afterward.

However it be, his practice is against the 23. Article; the words of that
Article are these: It is not lawful for any man to take upon him the Office of
public Preaching, or Ministering the Sacraments, in the Congregation, before
he be lawfully called, and sent to execute the same. And these we ought to
judge lawfully called and sent, which be chosen, and called to this work, by
men, who have public Authority given un-unto them in the Congregation, to call
and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard. I do not instance in this Article,
otherwise then as it agrees with the practice of all Protestant Churches in
Europe; and it may be proved out of the word of God, by such Arguments, as it
is impossible to answer.

For the Apostles were all sent by our Savior; first he furnished them with
gifts, Mat. 10. 1. and then he gave them their Commission: verse 5. As my
Father sent me, so send I you, John 20. 21. If the people chose the Deacons,
yet the Apostles laid their hands upon their heads, etc. before they sent them
forth, Acts 6. 6. Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders in every Church, Acts 14.
23. Take heed to the Flocks,, over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers, Acts 20. 28. And yet they were all made Ministers by Men, that were
thus made by the Holy Ghost; Timothy was made a Minister, by the imposition of
the hands of the Presbytery, 1. Tim. 4. 14. and Timothy made others Ministers
by the imposition of hands, 1. Tim. 5. 22. and so did Titus, Tit. 1. 5. No man
takes (that is, ought to take) this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. who had as an inward, so an outward Call:
Nay, Christ himself gloried not himself to be an High Priest, he had a Call,
Heb. 5. 5. Neither the Heavens could abide to see, nor the Earth to bear the
shameless burden of such as came unsent: but the one melting consumed with
fire; and the other opening swallowed them up alive, Numb. 16. 32. 35. To say,
that all the people are holy alike, hand over head, it was the sin of Corah,
and his Company, Numb. 16. 3. Common waters cannot heal so well, as the waters
of Jordan, that had the Promise. That Argument of theirs, Is not the Spirit of
God as effectual in others, as in them they call Ministers? is much like that
of Naaman the Syrian; are not Abana, and Pharphar, Rivers of Damascus, better
then any River of Israel? 2. Reg. 5. 12. The power of the Keys is not in the
People; the Promise was to the Apostles, and the Ministers, their Successors;
and yet some of the People may have a greater measure of the Spirit, then many
of the Priests.

Because such a Captain may be as able as his General, may he therefore usurp
the Office of his General? Because many private Soldiers may be as able as
their Captain, may they therefore usurp the Office of their Captain? Because
many Lawyers may be as able as the Judges may they therefore take upon them to
be Judges? Because many Gentlemen may be as honest as a Justice of Peace may
they therefore take upon them to be Justices of Peace? they allow it not among
them that are the Ministers of our Parliament; then it may not be allowed among
us who are the more immediate Ministers of our God. Any Butcher might have
killed a Bullock in Sacrifice as well or better then the Priests; but yet a
King durst not be so bold; there are other means for private men to employ
their Gifts; they may not in Preaching publickely the Word of God. Who dare do
any thing in the name of the Parliament without a Commission? Friend, how
came thou in hither, we may well say to such as take upon them the Office of
the Ministry, without a Call? By what Authority do thou thus, and who gave
thee this Authority? The brazen Censers, wherewith they that were burnt, had
offered, were made Bread-plates for a covering of the Altar, to be a
memorial, that no stranger, who is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to
offer incense before the Lord, that he be not, as Korah, Numb. 16. 39. 40. All
this I have said, is nothing unto that which may be said, both against the
Opinions, and the Practices of the Brethren about us: and yet I have said
enough, had I wise men to deal withal; but bray my Adversaries in a Mortar,
and they will be the same. I know that God, that made the heart, can mollify
their stony hearts; Christ can open their eyes, as he did the two Disciples,
that saw him not, though they sat at meat with him, Luke 24. 30. 31. No more
then Hagar, did the Well, that was so near, till God opened her eyes also,
Genesis 21 19. Even the same God, for Christ's sake, pity this poor, simple,
seduced People. And so I draw to a Conclusion.

Now then consider what I have said, and the Lord give you understanding: and I
beseech Mr. T. by the Death and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, that he
seek no more to tear Christ's seamelesse Coat; we are Brethren, travailling
toward our heavenly Country; let us not fall out by the way: Preach the truth
in love; send home wandering sheep to their own Folds; but infect them not; or
so metamorphize them, that they turn Woolves, come home, and worry their own
Shepherds. The Office of an Evangelist is now ceased; (...), busy Bishops, or
busy Presbyters, in other men's Parishes, are forbid, 1. Pet. 4. 15. He reckons
such among Murderers, and Thieves: take heed to the Flocks, over which the
Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, Acts 20. 28. Where is any warrant to meddle
with other men's Flocks? Paul thought it not good to take Mark, because he went
not, at first, with them to the Work, Acts 15. 38. He is too bold, that builds
upon another man's Foundation.

The Lord grant me to discharge my own Charge, for who is sufficient? But let
not Mr. T. meddle in every man's Charge; it may argue courage in him (so I call
it) not discretion. I shut up all with the advice of St. Paul to his Ephesians,
Ephesians. 4. Since he has given some Apostles, some Pastors and Teachers, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edifying of the Body of Christ: be not henceforth any more Children, tossed
to, and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of
men, and cunning craftines of those that lie in wait to deceive; but speaking
the truth in love, grow up to him in all things, which is our Head, even
Christ; from whom the whole Body fitly joined together, and compacted by that
which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the Body, to the edifying of it self in love.

And therefore if there be any consolation in Christ; if any comfort of love;
if any fellowship of the Spirit; if any bowels and mercies, fulfill my joy,
that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one
Judgment; endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace:
knowing that there is but one Body, one Spirit, one Hope of our Calling, one
Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through
all, and in us all. Behold, how good and pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell
together in unity: it is like the precious ointment, that was powered upon
Aarons beard; as the dew of Hermon; and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion, Psalm. 133. If all the Graces of a Christian should make one
Ring, Love would be the Diamond; there the Lord promised his Blessing, and
Life for evermore, where there is Love. Now the very GOD, who is Love,
sanctify us throughout; and I pray God that our whole spirit, and soul, and
body, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
the God of Peace and Love, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. Unto the same God, that is able to
keep you from falling, and to preserve you faultlesse before the presence of
his glory, with exceeding joy; To the only wise God our Savior be Glory, and
Majesty, Dominion, and Power, now and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

