The Westminster Wonder;
Giving an Account of a Robin-Red-Breast, who, ever since the Queens Funeral
continues on the Top Pinnacle of the Queens Mausoleum or Pyramid, in the Abbey of
Westminster, where he is seen and heard to Sing, and will not depart the Place,
to the Admiration of many Beholders.

To the Tune of the Jealous Lover.
Licensed according to Order.

YOU Loyal Subjects of this Isle,
Be pleased to attend a while,
To this Relation which I bring;
You never heard so strange a thing,
In any former Ages past:
Queen Mary Died December last,
And a Robin Red-Breast, to this day,
Continues Singing where she lay.
Not in the Mourning Chamber, no,
Where Death did strike the fatal Blow;
But in Westminster-Abby where
They did a Pyramid prepare,
Against her solid Funeral;
This they did her Mausoleum call,
Where in the Abbey it was placed
With rich and sumptuous Beauty graced.
The very Art of Man was tried,
To make it richly Beautified,
Angels and Cherubims of Gold,
A sight most glorious to behold.
This Monument does Taper rise,
A Pinnacle at top likewise;
There is, and eke a Wonder too,
Which I declare is strange and true.
This is a Wonder strange, I say,
Ere since that great and solemn Day,
Of the Interment of our Queen,
There is a Robin Red-Brest seen,
Upon the very Top of all:
He sings a Note soft, sweet, and small,
Which is most pleasant for to hear,
When they the Royal Place draw near.
Sometimes it flies a little way,
Yet from the Place it will not stay,
But soon returns with speed again,
Where it does Night and Day remain.
Upon the Pinnacle it sits
Spreading its little Wings by fits,
And in the very midst of Prayer,
This Robin he sits singing there,
And is not missed; yet we conclude,
He must fly forth sometimes for Food;
Which done, his flight he back does take,
And never does the Place forsake,
The News was carried far and near,
That Robin Red breast does appear
Upon the Queens Mausoleum still,
Which does all Men with Wonder fill.
Renowned Lords and Ladies gay,
And common People day by day,
Upon their hearing this Report,
They to the Abbey all resort,
Where Robin Red-breast they behold,
Upon the Pinnacle of Gold;
And it is the Thoughts of Rich and Poor,
The like was never known before.
A wise Astrologer declares.
It is a sign that our Affairs
Will be successful e'vry Spring,
Which makes the Robin Red-breast sing.
He learns from these sweet Songs of Joy,
That Potent France shall nere destroy
The Church, though good Queen Mary Died
For God above will be our Guide.
London, Printed for James Read near Temple-Barr, 1695.


