A DECLARATION OF THE SCOTTISH ARMY CONCERNING Their immediate marching
toward the Borders of England; As also the Reasons of their coming, together
with their Resolution touching the same.

LIKEWISE The number of their Army, both Horse and Foot, and their advance,
with this Motto in their Ensigns, For Religion, Crown, and Kingdom.

Whereunto is annexed, The Resolution of the Northern Counties, concerning the
Scottish Army; and their present proceedings therein.

7ber 13 LONDON: Printed for R. V. and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill, MDCXLVII.

A DECLARATION Of the Scottish ARMY CONCERNING Their marching toward the
North of England, under command of Lieut. General David Lesley.
SIR,
THE Scottish Army (under command of Lieutenant General David Lesley) are
returned from the North of Scotland, and are now upon the Borders of England,
where He has quartered them for the present, but at no great distance,
although many in number, and an army of a great Body; diverse reports are
ecchoed in these parts, but that of that of the greatest credence, is, their
resolution to stand firm to the treaty and covenant betwixt the two Kingdoms,
the army (as we hear) does consist of about twelve thousand horse and foot,
most of them well armed, the Foot having this Motto in their Ensign, For
Religion, Crown, and Kingdom, and some with the Bible.

What their intentions are, we cannot as yet discover, but they pretend fair,
and have declared as follows:

That their present motion and advance toward the Borders of England, is for
the better accommadation of the Soldiery, and to take up their Winter quarters
for the refreshment of that Army, which has of late undergone, and perfected
so great a work, in reducing of the Kilkettonians, and sub duing the potent
Enemy of that Kingdom, having for many years been continually in actual
service in the Field.

And they do further declare, that they have no design against the Kingdom of
England, as has bin suggested by many, neither have they any desire to invade
this Kingdom, or cross the River Tweed, as has been reported by some of the
Borderers of this Nation. Further declaring, that they have been, and shall be
ever ready to join with their Brethren of England, in all things that may tend
to the preservation of the solemn League and Covenant, and the peace and
prosperity of both Kingdoms, etc.

Divens of the Scottish Horse quarters verg near us, the Lord Coopers Regiment
not far of, Colonel Hambleton, and the Jockies dear Valentine, are also with
their Regiments about the Shire of Douglasdale, the Lord Sinckler is said to
have a gallant and full Regiment in the County of Anaudale, diverse other
Colonels are with their Regiments about the Counties of Merch, and Teverdale,
and has given strict command that no violence or misbehaviour be used against
any Englishman, that does happen within their quarters, upon what occasion
soever, as they will answer it at their peril.

We have lately received further intelligence, that another part of the
Scottish Army, are advancing up toward Edinburgh, under the command of Major
General Middleton, which army consists of about seven thousand, Horse and Foot.

We do not hear any thing of their further approach, few days will dissolve
the mistie Cloud, and bring those things which are now hidden to their full
splendour and brightness, which is all, from

Your affectionate friend to serve you, W. Wheatly.
Barwicke, September. 7. 1647.
The Copy of another Letter from the North.
SIR,
UPon the close of this Letter, we received further news from the North, viz.
That the Committee of Estates in Scotland, have chose two Commissioners, the
one to give a visit to his Majesty, the other to come to the Parliament; they
bring with them the Treaty and the Covenant, and have received instructions
from the Committee of Estates how to treat thereon, with the Commissioners of
the Parliament of England.

By an Express from Lancashire, and other parts adjacent, it was further
intimated, viz. That the Gentry and Commonalty in those parts, are resolved to
stand in a posture of defense against the Scots Army, in case they should
advance over Tw^ed; and to that end, does keep constant watch in several
places adjoining upon the Counties of Tevidale, Annandale, and Duglasdale: By
the next you shall hear further, from

Yours to se^ve you, W.W.

From Newcastle thus.
Right Honorable,
REceiving your Letter concerning Mr Cheesely th^u^h his free passage (before
it came) was granted an^ t^^re^n your expectation an^w^red, yet that a clear
and right interpretation may be had of the cause of stopping Mr. Chee^ely, and
all misinterprerations removed, I desire to demonstrate the grounds and reasons
of what I did, and give your Honors amp^e and what further satisfacti^n I can
in the t^ing, that no offense may be taken thereat, First my in^elligence from
the South told me of dangerous risings and tumu^^s ^n the city of London
against the Parliament occa^^oned by the ^nstigation of some particular
male-contented persons, who endeavored to embroyle this Kingdom in a second
war and was laboring to kindle a flint in your Nation, and had ^ent some
Agents thither to set the work on foot: (which seemed too probable by that
which fell from the mouths of many of your Clergy in their Pulpits about the
same time) and that the Speakers of the Parliament were (with most of the
members driven from the Houses, and glad to fly to the Army for safety.

And they with the Army marching toward the City with a resolution to
suppress those tumults: and Mr. Cheesely coming in the mean time (before I had
received any express from the Army how the state of affairs stood, and before
I knew that Mr. Speakers, and the rest of the Members were safely returned to
the Houses) and showing me a paper without a seal, which he pretended to be
the Speakers pass (which I knew not nor him neither) and not having the
Generals pass, nor letting me see your Commissioners pass, (but only at last
told me that he had it) but did not show it me at all, I was doubtful that he
might have been a party engaged in that dangerous combination against the Parl
and Army, and going to do some ill offices in your Kingdom, and therefore upon
these grounds and some others, I thought it my duty (in discharging of the
trust reposed in me) to desire Mr Cheesely to stay here till I sent an express
(which I did with all speed) to Major General Lambert in Yorkshire, upon the
return whereof Mr. Cheesely had free passage, and was no longer stayed.

And therefore I hope no such construction will be put as that there was the
least intention in me (or any thing conducing to it) to violate the happy
friendship and union betwixt the two Nations, which I with all cordialnesse,
and reality have endeavored, and shall with all my power study to preserve,

For the Right Honorable the Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland.
FINIS.

