A Word to ENGLAND Touching their FASTINGS.

Sent in a Letter, from a godly Christian to his private Friend, to be
presented to the public view of the Magistrates, Ministers, and People of this
Kingdom.

ISA. 58.5, 6, 7. Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to
afflict his soul? is it to bow down his head like a bulrush? -- will thou call
this a fast, and an aceeptable day to the Lord?

Is not this the Fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every
yoke?

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry? and that thou bring the poor that
are cast out to thy house? when thou see the naked that thou cover him, and
that thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh?

London: Printed by R. Austin. 1648.

A word to England touching their FASTINGS.
OH England! look upon the face of thy fastings in Gods word. How is it, that
having so plain a word to direct thee, thou fastest so much in vain? Do
thou not yet see what the fast is which God has chosen? How it stands in
easing all that are oppressed, and refreshing such as are distressed?

Do thou not see that it is Mercy that pleases the Lord? that is the fast
that he has chosen. Bring no more vain That is forms without the true work
of a fast.
Oblations; but do the work of the fast which God has chosen.

Unty the bands of wickedness; have thou, or thy Forefathers made any bands
which cause wickedness? Loose those bands; are thou sensible of any burdens
that lie heavy upon the neck of thy Brother? undo those burdens; see thou
thy Brother under oppressions: set him free. Break every yoke.

And having eased their shoulders of heavy pressures; then go on to refresh
such as need thy refreshments: Thy Brother is hungry, and thou have bread, give
to him, and satisfy his hungry soul: Thy Brother is cast out, and thou have
harbor, bring him to thy house; Thy Brother is naked, cover him.

Look upon the wants of thy Brother, that is, every one that stands in need of
thee; go not on the further side to avoid the sight of thy needy Brother, as
the Priest and Levite did; Luke 10.31.32.
But look on his needs, draw out thy soul to him, hide not thy self from
him, for he is thine own flesh. Act. 17.26, 27. Mal. 2.10.
We are all one offspring, we have all one Father; one God has created us.

Let the Magistrate do his part, take off the Laws that lie heavy upon the
Consciences of men, as bands and yokes: and ease also the outward condition of
all oppressed ones.

Let the great man of the earth do his part, Cease to grind the faces of the
poor, by straining all out of them that he can get.

Let the mean man cease to interpose between the meaner man, and the greater;
and cease to sit a greater Oppressor over the poor then the mighty, by
enriching himself, in enlarging the oppressions of the mighty ones.

Let the Teacher do his part, Isa. 51.20, 21.22, 23.
let him cease to put the cup of affliction into the hands of the people; and
let him declare the nailing up of the handwriting of Ordinances upon the
Cross, Col. 2.14.
and the taking thereof out of the way: Tit. 2.11. Luke 2.10 14. Heb. 2.9. Col.
1.23. Isa. 28.16. Romans 9.33. John 3.16. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19
Let him declare the perfect mercies of God in Christ to every creature: Let
him declare the perfect sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the sure foundation that
is laid in his death for every Creatures Faith: and let him declare Gods being
in Christ; and not imouting of sin unto the world: Let him deal that bread
that came down from Heaven, to the hungry; let him bring the cast-out ones,
wanderers from Christ, unto Christ, our house and habitation; Let him endeavor
to cover their nakedness with his garments; let them declare glad tidings to
every creature, Mar. 16.15. Mal. 2.10.
and no longer deal treacherously with their Brother, by being partial in the
Covenant; for we have all one Father, and so shall he ease the oppressed, and
refresh the distressed in spirit.

Oh ye Magistrates, ye mighty men, ye mean men, ye Teachers of others, let
these works of mercy delight you.

Oh ye inhabitants of England, thou noble Island, how would thy God bless
thee, and delight in thee, if once thou were weaned from the multitude of thy
vain imaginations, and would follow his counsels.

If the work of a right fast were found in thee, (which is all merciful
dealing, Isa. 58.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
a fruit of Gods mercifullnesse to thee) then should thy light break forth as
the morning, thine healing should spring forth speedily, thy righteousness
should go forth, the glory of the Lord should be thy reward, thou should
call and the Lord would answer. The Lord will satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones. Thou should be like a watered Garden, and like a
spring of water, whose waters fail not. And they that shall be of thee, should
build the old wast places: Thou should raise up the foundations of many
generations, and thou should be called the repairer of the breach, and the
restorer of paths to dwell in.

But if you refuse to obey the counsel of the Lord, then these things will
come upon you.

Ye Magistrates shall be purged away as dross and tin, that the Lord may be
eased of you; Isa. 1.24, 25, 26, 27.
and others shall be restored, who shall redeem Zion with judgment, and her
Converts with Righteousness.

Ye mighty ones of the Earth, Isa. 5.15, 17. Isa. 14.4.26.
and ye mean or middle men, shall be brought down, that the oppression of the
poor may cease, and that the Earth may be eased of you: for you are too heavy
a burden for it to bear much longer. And whereas your pride causes you to
oppress, therefore will the Lord of hosts strike home at such pride, and
stain all your glory, and bring all your earthly honorable into contempt, who
seek honor of men, Isa. 23.9.
and would have their honor rise up out of the Earth, and seek not honor of
God only.

Ye Teachers of others, if you will not lay it to heart, to give glory to the
Name of the Lord, by exalting his free, and full, and faithful mercies in his
Son to every Creature, that so all men may see a sure foundation for their
Faith; Then hear this word, The Lord will make your solemn things as dung and
dirt, and spread that dirt upon your faces, and one shall take you away with
it. The Lord will make you base and contemptible before all the people, for
being partial in his Covenant of life and peace. Mal. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10.


SIR,
I Heard that you were full of trouble in your spirit, and how it is with you
now I know not, it is needful it should be so with us sometimes, that our
faith may be tried and exercised, and we may learn to give more heed to our
comforting guide the Holy Spirit, and we may be kept still coming unto that
living stone the Lord our Savior, from whom flows all our clearness of
conscience, and consolations: and that we may be taught to keep in memory what
he has done for us, How that he has died for our sins, according to the
Scriptures; and even from hence arises our comfort, that Christ has died for
our sins: 1 Cor. 11.2, ^.
he that understands and believes this in faith, is comforted by it, and
rejoices in the Lord; for those plain and simple tidings, are tidings of
great joy, and therein have the Saints rejoiced together in former times,
praising God that their sins were not imputed, being laid on his Son Jesus
Christ, and that this Jesus was risen and ascended, thereby giving assurance of
a lively hope for us. Wherefore in the multitude of other affairs and notions,
and knowledge, let not this be overlooked or forgotten (though it seem a
common or low notion, and be in the mouths of such as little understand it)
That it is very truth, and there is no lie in it, that our Jesus has borne our
sins, and there is given into his hands eternal life for us, for this is
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; and therefore it is to be
preached to every creature, and where it has been received, remember with what
peace, and joy, and consolation, and hope, it has raised up the beleivers of
it, as in Acts 2. it is recorded touching the great number that believed: and
in the sixteenth Chapter, touching the Jailors believing, he rejoiced in God,
as also in other Scriptures.

I have sent you enclosed in this Letter a writing touching Englands Fastings,
you may peruse it, and as you have opportunity, communicate it as you think it
may be profitable: I commit it to you, and leave it to the success which God
shall give it. I take my leave, and rest,

Your loving friend and fellow servants, T.W.


FINIS.

