A LETTER SENT FROM Col: Whaley, BEING Commanded by the KING to declare His
MAJESTY'S great dislike of a late Pamphlet scandalous to his MAJESTY: Being
Entitled, His Majesty's Declaration to all His Loving Subjects, touching his
inclination for peace, dated the 27. August 1647.
THE Which Pamphlet, his Majesty utterly disavows, as being published without
His knowledge or consent. Aug: 31

London, Printed by I. Coe, for Henry Overton in Pope's Head Ally, 1647.

FOR HIS HONORED FRIEND Sr. Arthur Haslerig, These present.
SJR,
THere is a paper of the twenty seventh Instant, (entitled His Majesty's
Declaration) made public, it is patronized upon the King, but I assure you,
His Majesty is much abused in it; he has many times to my self and others
expressed not only his disavowing, but utter dislike of it; at first it
something troubled him, but it being so unlike any thing of his, and so contrary
to his known intentions, he was confident it would not gain credence with
any; yet since, hearing that diverse both in City and Country, and Army, were so
fondly credulous as to deem it to be His Majesty's, and so were much offended
at it, it was the Kings Command J should certify my friends how extremely he
is wronged, and truly Sir, you would do the King but right, and discharge J
conceive no more then your own duty to endeavor the finding out the Author,
and making him exemplary, and J am confident the King expects so much justice
therein. Here is little news in Court more then this, that the King yesterday
was a hunting in New Park, killed a Stag and a Buck, afterward dined at Syon,
stayed three or four hours with his Children, and then returned to Hampton,
where there is great resort of all sorts of people to him, but not so many
Cavaliers as is reported, it is confessed, no Gentleman is debarted the liberty
of kissing the Kings hand, yet no stranger stays long, we have fresh and fresh
appearances, the faces which appears in the morning, you sildome see in the
afternoon, at the farthest, but the next day. The Lord Convoway has taken his
leave of the Court for present, I have no more to acquaint you with; I shall
only again mind you, that to vindicate the King by discovering and punishing
the Libeller cannot but give great satisfaction to his Majesty: I remain,

Hampton Court. Aug. 29. 1647. Your very Faithful and affectionate Servant,
Edw: Whaley


