A DECLARATION To Great Britain and Ireland, showing the downfall of their
Princes, and wherefore it is come upon them: Because CHRIST is riding on his
white horse, conquering his Enemies till he have destroyed Antichrist, who has
made the Nations drunk with the Cup of her fornications: and till he have
destroyed Mahomet, that great deceiver of the people.

REVEL. 6.2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that sat on him had
a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conquering, and to
overcome.

Written and directed to Great Britain, and all other Nations; By me Robert
Wharton, wel-wisher to my Countrymen, and to all the faithful in Christ Jesus
throughout the World. With an humble advice to the Army.

This Treatise is approved and commended, and thought worthy to be Printed,

by Master Hugh Peter's.



LONDON, Printed for R. L. 1649.

blazon or coat of arms representing the royal emblems of England (a rose),
Scotland (a thistle), France (a fleur-de-lis), and Ireland (a harp), each
crowned TO THE READER:
Courteous Reader,
WHy should it seem strange to any that the Lord Christ is going forth like a
mighty Conqueror, to overcome his Enemies, and to overturn those that stand in
his way. I pray consider how much the Church of Christ has been in the
Wilderness of the World, like the Ark upon the Flood, when the World was
drowned, and for sixteen hundred years has that great Dragon cast out a flood
of persecutions to devour her by his wicked instruments, whom he has set at
work, yet has the Lord mightily preserved it in all ages to this time, and now
the Lord is bringing her forth of her affliction, and to make her a praise upon
earth: now are her enemies mad, despising her, and seeking to turn her back
again, but their surviving will be to their own destruction: consider, how have
all those sped that have strove against her, or but lent an hand against her
since Queen Mary's days, both Kings, Princes, and the meaner sort of people and
how have they been crossed in all their designs, and it has been their
confusion which has fulfilled the words of our Savior Christ, Matthew. 21.44.
And whomsoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken to pieces, but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder; ye, and he says, he
will bruize them with an iron rod, and break them in pieces like a potters
vessel, Psalm. 2.9.

If this be his doing already in these latter years, then is it high time for
us to consider what we have to do, and to be seeking for the right way, not
pleasing our own fancies, but be like unto David, he says, My soul is ravished
with desire, and never is at rest, but seeks to know thy judgments high, and
what may please thee best: so our Savior Christ says, Ask and it shall be
given you, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto, says
our Savior, every one that asks receives, and he that secketh finds, and
to him that knocks it shall be opened. I pray see what glorious promises we
have to build upon, it is not upon a sandy foundation, but upon that firm rock
Christ himself who spoke the words with his own mouth, who never cast off any
that came to him by faith, as Saint Paul, Heb. 11. Without faith it is
impossible to please God; For he that comes to him must believe, that God is,
and that he is a rewarder of all those that seek him diligently. If it be so,
let us be earnest with the Lord, that he will be pleased to enlighten our souls
with strength from Heaven, as Paul was, who said, Through Christ I can do all
things, but without Christ he can do nothing, Philip. 4. if it be so, that
Christ must be our supporter while we live in this life, of our pilgrimage, and
that all true holiness must proceed from him, in who^ dwells all the fulness of
the Godhead bodily, and that without him we can neverattain to heaven, then let
us seek every moment of our lives for holiness in this life, and that will
bring us to that haven of happiness which will make us happy to all Eternity,
that never shall have end, which if otherwise our minds be set to cross the
Lords designs he has in hand, and turn enemies to him and his friends that
live the lives of holiness, be you sure that your account at the last will be
miserable, as says the Lord in the Proverbs, 1.24. Because I have called and
you have refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but you
have set all my Counsels at naught: therefore will I laugh at your destruction,
and mock when the thing you fear comes on you: Then shall you call, but I
will not hear, they shall seek me early, but shall not find me, because they
hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord: Then shall the Kings
of the earth, with the mighty men, Captains, bond and free, hide themselves in
the dens; rocks, and holes of the earth, but all will not serve, for if they
cannot hide themselves from death, who is the Lords messenger, when the Lord
comes himself they shall not be able to hide themselves from his fury, if this
be so, that the Lords coming will be so terrible when he comes to revenge the
cause of his beloved, who has been so long and many years in bondage and
captivity, nothing but fury and revenge will serve his turn upon them that
stand in his way, then let all those who are of such violent spirits be afraid
and stand out no longer against this great work the Lord has going on in the
world; but let them become friends rather then enemies; Least they be torn in
pieces, and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50.22. Now let us consider since
the Lord has begun to show the power of his coming in England, since the last
persecution in Queen Mary's days, how have they sped that lent a hand to
Antichrist? have they not been brought to the Block or to the Halter? so when
the Bishops with their wicked Counsel began to persecute, how strangely were
they defeated in all their purposes? then the King and his Nobles, they would
revenge the Bishops cause and their own designs, and how strongly were they
overthrown, and lost their lives? for as most know, their power was so strong,
that at every field fight, the King had, he got the better at the beginning,
but before the battle was ended, he lost all; which did appear, he had power
and strength enough to overcome all had his cause been good. But he being
weighed in the Balance and found too light, could not stand against the work
the Lord Christ had in hand. Now, consider, the Lora is not shaking and pulling
down the great pillars of this Land only, but he is shaking other Kingdoms as
well, as does appear in France and other Kingdoms, and thus will he do among
all Nations, till he has taken possession of all the Kingdoms of the World,
that they may become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, as you have it in
the Revelations. Now, when the Lord has taken possession of all, then shall
that Prophecy be fulfilled which the Lord spoke by the Prophet Esaias, And it
shall come to pass in the latter days, that the Lords house shall be prepared
in the height of the Mountains; and shall be higher then the highest, or, as
may be said, higher then the Kingdoms of the World, for his power, glory, and
beauty: Then shall all Nations seek unto him, a multitude of people shall
speak one to another, Come let us ascend to the hill of the Lords house, he
will instruct us in his ways, and we will walk in his paths, for out of Sion
shall come a Law and the Word from Jerusalem, yea, and shall give sentence
among the Nations, yea, and the multitude of the people shall break their
Swords into Mattocks, and their spears into pruning hooks, they shall not learn
War any more, nor lift up a weapon one against another, then shall the high
heads of men be brought low, and the Lord only shall be exalted, Esaias 2. Then
shall be fulfilled the word of the Lord concerning his people and his enemies,
saying, Behold, my servants that rejoice for very quietness of heart, but ye
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and complain for vexation of Spirit: your name
shall you leave for a curse among my chosen, for the Lord shall slay you, and
call his servants by another name, Esaias 45. Now, to consider, concerning this
Prophecy, that Esaias spoke of many things concerning Christ's coming in the
flesh for the redemption of man, is accomplished, which was the greatest work
of all works, but for the accomplishing of his power, in bringing his people
from the bondage of their enemies is but now begun, and when he has done
concerning his enemies, and taken possession of all Kingly powers and
authority, then shall be brought to pass the Prophecy of Esaias the Prophet,
Shall learn War no more, which shall be fulfilled at the time the Lord has
appointed: now the Lord has appeared for his people, and is going on his way
conquering his enemies, either go on with him, or go out of his way of his
fury, lest you be found partakers with them in their sinfulness, and so be
partakers with them of their punishment, then let us beware while it is called
to day, least if we come in the hardness of our hearts, heaven be shut against
us to all eternity, and then too late to call for mercy: therefore our Savior
Christ gives us warning, saying, Watch, for ye know not when the master
comes, whether at noonday or at midnight, or at the cock crowing, or at the
dawning; lest he come suddenly, he find you sleeping: and what I say unto you,
I say unto all. Watch: Mark 13.35, 36. Now, I pray you in the fear of the
Lord, consider what the Lord has done, and what he is now a doing, and the
Lord enlighten your understanding that ye may see more and more of the Lords
appearing for his people, and be partakers with them of their happiness in
Christ.

The Lord unite the Nations together, that as we are but one people and
language, so we may be of one heart and mind; which the Lord grant for Jesus
Christ his sake. AMEN.

Yours R.W.

Errata.
To the Reader, l. 5. for much r. long, page 5. line 22. as for r. abhorred, p.
9.18. r. when ye, p. 10. l. 18. r. Essex from the Land service, r. my Lord of
from the Sea, p. 11. l. 18. r. appear, ibid. l. 31. r. seemed to frown on
them. p. 12. l. 1. for take r. lose, ibid. l. 33. r. buried.

A Declaration to Great Britain.
TO all my loving country men, whom I am bound to love, I am desirous to impart
a few lines concerning the great work that God has wrought for his Gospel in
this latter age of the World, especially in England, where we are a Nation, as
first, to consider how he works, next what he has brought to pass. It
pleased the Lord in King Henry's days about the 9th. year of his Reign, that
the Lord brought to light the Gospel here in England by the hand of Luther, who
sent it to this Nation, where it was accepted among many people with great joy
and comfort to their poor souls: This being done, it pleased the Lord to
continue it till Queen Mary's days, then begun a great persecution to come
again by that red Dragon which is spoken of Revelations, Chap. 12. concerning
Michael and his Angels who fought with the Dragon and his Angels, which was
figured out plainly by Queen Mary who gave the red Dragon for her Arms, and so
played her part accordingly, as you all know by the story, but it pleased the
Lord to shorten her days and set up a Governor who favored the Gospel, then
was the power of the Devil brought down, and whosoever rose up against the
Gospel were brought to the block or the halter: likewise the Spanish Navy who
came to devour up the Gospel how were they overthrown in the sea, and their
great General Don Pedro brought in to the mercy of the Queen, after the Lord
had removed her, he set up the King of Scots to rule over us, who before he
came into England, made a Covenant with his Ministers to purge the Church of
England, who came and was Crowned our King, which being done, and a Parliament
called, then did the Devil, that red Dragon, begin to set his own servants, the
Papists, to work, who thought when they had blown up the Parliament devised a
project to have proclaimed that the Puritans had done it, and so have raised
the whole Country to out off the people of God most barbarously, but the Lord
who neither slumbers nor sleeps, befooles them all, and brought them miserably
to their ends, yet did not this great mercy put out King in mind how the Lord
dealt lovingly with him in bringing him out of a poor Country into a glorious
land, where he had all the pleasures that might be afforded, as we all know,
that he had delivered him and his Nobles from such a deadly blow, and made him
of a poor Scotch King a glorious English King, which would make me think the
more the Lord had honored him, the more he should have sought for to glorify
the Lord, but he did not, for concerning the Covenant he made with his
Ministers in Scotland he neglected, casting it behind his back, which when the
Ministers saw, they came into England to White Hall, where one of them made a
Sermon before him, putting him in mind how he had broke his Covenant with God
and man, and how the Lord would lay to his charge his Covenant he made
concerning purging the Church of England, he charged him deeply, but he charged
him so deeply with it, that as soon as he had done his Sermon, he was soundly
checked for it, sent to the Tower, where he lay a time, but means being wrought
for him, he was released, banished the land, to come no more; but mark what
befell, in short time, the King married his daughter to the King of Bohemia,
who were turned out of their Country, and have lived as strangers in another
Country, and were maintained by the charge of England, and their children
fighting against the people of God, as ye see to this day, when they were
turned out of Bohemia, the next chance that befall, Prince Henry was poisoned,
thus were his children curbed and cut off, though his children were thus
miserably brought under and cut off, yet did he not consider nor call to mind
wherefore the Lord had brought this judgment on his children, but sinned yet
more, by suffering a Papist house to be built up in Blackfriars, but mark
what befell, as soon as they were in their devotions with their strange gods,
the house fell down on their heads, as Dagon fell before the Ark of God, where
were killed some fourscore persons, besides what was maimed, yet did not this
strange work move him, but he sinned yet more, sending his son to Spain, and
France, to get a wife that served strange gods, and to make it appear more,
procured a Chapel for Papistry to be built up at Saint Jameses where it
stands to this day; but take notice what befell him, he that was his dearest
friend, whom he preferred before God and his people, became his ruin, which was
the Duke of Buckingham, who with his Mother wrought Sorceries, and so poisoned
the King as would have been proved if things had been brought to trial, thus
was his end miserable, who preferred the enemies of Jesus Christ before the
Lords worship, not ruling the Nation in obedience to the Lord: this being done,
and his days ended, his son snatched the Crown to his head, Reigning in strange
manner as ye have seen, not ruling the people as in obedience to God and the
Lord Christ, but as a covetous King to God's dishonor, preferring his own
designs before Gods word; he suffering any thing to be done for money,
preferring the friends to Papistry before Gods worship, and preferring the Duke
that helped to destroy his father, before the whole Kingdom, slighting the
whole Nation, and set him up in the throne of his heart; but miserable was that
wicked man's end, when he was cut off from him; then were the Bishops and their
friends set up in his heart, he allowing them to do whatsoever they pleased:
then did they begin to make havoc of Gods worship, changing the Sabbath into
pastimes, for people to serve the Devil; and set forth an Order for it:
thinking that for sports and pleasure they could the easier draw the whole
Nation to their design, and so put down the true worship of God: then was
Papistry advanced, and all the friends to it in high esteem; then did they
think all was their own, and nothing could hinder them, so jovially went they
on: then went the King on in his designs, suffering all that could bring money
into his Treasury, to reign as petty Kings under him, in pilling and polling
the Nation by oppression; as Patentees, and making a new Freedom; how many
poor apple-women and broom-men, rag-merchants, and people of all sorts, sold
and pawned their bedding, and their clothes for a new Freedom; and when all
was done, it proved a very cheat, thus was the Kings coffers filled with
oppression: thus did the King, his Bishops, and his wicked crew reign for a
time. But mark, what befell, when the Lord saw them thus triumphing in their
jollity, like the unjust Steward, sitting and drinking with the drunken, and
smiting their fellow servants, Luke 12. Then did the Lord begin to a wake his
people, then did he stir them up to prayer, then did they begin to multiply
and flock together: then did the Lord put them. Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus says, the
Lord, I will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Isarel, to do it for
them: I will increase them with men like a flock.

But mark, when the wicked crew faw what was doing, and knew not what would
become of their projects, then did they begin to smite them about the ears,
imprisoning them, and banishing them; then did they see what they could do with
Scotland, then were they thrown out with these white coats, then did the people
in the City of London, begin to grow more sensible when they saw the Scots
withstand them, and so became stronger and stronger; when the King, the
Bishops, and their wicked crew saw their wicked designs begun to shake and
cotter, then were they in a straight, nothing would serve their turn but the
destruction of the people of God: then did they in their wicked Counsels
conjoyne with the King of Spain to send an Army to cut off the City and take
the spoil of it for his reward; then did they raise an Army against Scotland,
cunningly carried the arms, and strength from Sussex and those parts their
joining to the sea, that the Spaniard might not be exposed: thus, in their
cunning designs did they conjoyn, but take notice how they were befooled, the
King of Spain sending his Army hither, thinking all was his own, was befooled
wonderfully; though he sent such great strength, having many friends to
entertain them, as the Earl of Northampton, an arch Papist, and Pennington
with his ships to assist him: Dover Castle that should have been made strong to
oppose such an enemy, had nothing to resist them, thus did our homebred
enemies assist foreign enemies to cut us off, then did the Lord appear for us
wonderfully, and provided a neighbor Nation to sink the Spaniards in the Sea,
yet was it an impossible work for Van Trump to have done, had not the Lord
appeared for us, for Fennington with his ships fired at the Dutchmen, and did
them much hurt, for which they did accuse him when he went with the Queen into
Holland to the Hague: how did the Lord work wonderfully in casting our enemies
into the Sea? who should have cut our throats, and many of them that escaped
with life came to the City to beg their bread, who saw the glory of the City,
but could not share of the wealth of it: now judge you whether the Lord
appeared for his people or no; but see farther, how the King of Spain was
served after, he lost his great Navy at Sea, next year after, he lost the
Kingdom of Portingale, so let all the wicked be served, that join hand in hand
to destroy the inheritance of the Lord.

Now when the King with his wicked Counsel, could no way prosper, but his
designs still crossed, and befooled with going to Scotland, where he lost his
labor, and all the money that he had got in unjust ways, spent in that
design for Scotland, then were the wicked crew enraged, but the more they
stirred the more they ensnared: then began their woe: then mark how Strafford
was served for his wickedness, then was the Bishop taken by the Horns like
the Ram in the Bush, and sacrificed like as he would have sacrificed the people
of the Lord. Thus has the Lord appeared for his peoole, yet for all this the
enemies of the Lord will not see what the Lord is doing, but they will go on,
and though they see plainly that the Lord is destroying his enemies, yet will
they be more vile, raising up War, but it proves their own destruction, as
consider the evil that our King has brought on him and his posterity, and all
because he could not set up Papistry, and bring the Nation into a slavish
condition, o that wicked will that is in man by nature, though to the
destruction of himself and his posterity, which though he had wealth enough by
the revenues of three Kingdoms, yet would not all this serve him, but a
tyrannical government over the Nations, surely they that have hearts to
consider and well understand this, may very well know that he had no great love
to the Nation, but to rule like a Tyrant, or a cursed stepfather, that loves
the wealth the children are heirs unto, but strives to make the children away:
who would have gone from his people as he did, when he was so royally and
lovingly entertained by them, a great gift given him, another to his Queen, and
another to the Prince, by the Citizens of London, which was not the gift of one
man but the gift of many: yea, how did the Citizens entertain the Queens
Mother? thus did the people rejoice to do them good, and for all this
kindness, they sought to spill our blood: and who must he choose but Papists
for his trusty friends, as Arundel, Lunsford an arch Papist, to be Lieutenant
of the Tower, to beat the City about our ears, this love and kindness have we
found at his hands for the great love we showed him when he took up a War
against the Scots, he spared their blood, and granted their desires, but when
he came to reason with us, nothing but fire and sword served his turn, to
destroy us a poor and blind people, that should so much desire the life of
him that was not only a destroyer of the body but likewise of the soul, by
seeking to put out the light of the Gospel, and to have set up papistry, as you
may see by his actions, under a color, desiring to have Religion as it was in
Queen Elizabeth's days, and so to have set up Papistry, but with his Lordly
Bishops, but all would not serve his turn, for when he had run his course, in
the place where he had sinned, in the same place he must end his days, a sad
condition, for in the time of his prosperity he built a Masking-house for the
Devils worship, or sporting, upon the same place where the Lords name was
called on, the Masking-house being built up to overtop Gods place of worship,
yet do I not say that is the true place of Gods Worship, for the place that
God chooses for his worship is in the heart, yet that place was chosen by man
to call on the name of the Lord; therefore did the Lord, as for his wicked
design, and so brought blood upon his head, as he has done on his Nobles, and
the rest of his friends that were the enemies of Jesus Christ.

But, me thinks, I hear him be wailing Straffords blood, truly he needs not,
for never was man more sorry for his friends death then he was for his, had he
pitied this Nations blood as he pitied his, there had been no War raised by
him to cut off English men as he has done.

Some say that Duke Hambleton clears the King of Irelands blood, as concerning
the Protestants there, how many times has he been moved in every Treaty by the
Parliament to cause War to cease there? but would not yield to it, then judge
you whether he be guilty of that blood or no. Again, some say it was not
lawful for the Parliament assisted by the Army to put him to death, will ye
say so? are they not they whom the Lord has put the Sword into their hands to
execute vengeance on his Enemies? is his blood dearer to him then the blood of
his Saints? though he was an utter enemy, so far as his power did reach, to cut
off the people of the Lord.

But you will say, that David would not lay his hand on his King, a great
reason, for David knew that he was anointed to be King by the Prophet of the
Lord, therefore had it been presumption against the Lord to snatch the Crown to
his head, and not wait the Lords leisure, for David was told by the Spirit of
the Lord that he should be King, and that Saul's days should be shortened:
Again, Saul was a friend to the Nation, cutting off the Gibonites, thinking to
do the people, his Subjects a pleasure; but ye saw no such affection in our
King toward the people his subjects, but take notice how the Lord dealt with
Saul after he had destroyed him by his enemies, his wrath was not appeased so,
but he revenged the blood of strangers on his seed, caused a dearth for four
years to come upon the Land, and would not be appeased till he had rooted out
his posterity: If the Lord dealt so with him that was a friend to the Nation,
how much more will he be angry with those that will spill the blood of the
Nation, and destroy the Lords Inheritance. Yet one great work I do behold,
and I doubt a sad one, that our Ministers should so much bewail his death that
proclaimed them Traitors, who would not have spared their lives but have put
them to death, and so have put out the light of the Gospel, as you may take
notice concerning his actions, and those that were in counsel with him in
their wicked practices: had it not been death for any that should have come to
give him evil counsel against the Gospel, or against the Lords inheritance:
Had he been a godly Prince, would he have slighted the death of his Father as
he did, when he was told he was poisoned, and when a Parliament was called in
the beginning of his Reign, how would he have searched out the offenders? but
he caused the Parliament to be put by, and sit no more: likewise, concerning
Rochel work, what treachery was there laid against the poor Protestants there,
judge ye, they sent hither for help, against the Papists, for fear of being
overcome by them; and he promised them help, but when their greatest need and
desires came on them, he sent the ships against them, whereby they were
overthrown: thus from the beginning of his Reign to his last days has he been
an enemy to the people of the Lord; and will ye cause the people to mourn after
him that so much has sought after their destruction: truly, a sad case.

Christ says ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, I am sure he
does not command you to mourn after his enemies, when he is destroying them, do
you not know that Christ is on his white horse riding on his journey,
conquering and overcoming his enemies, Revel. 6.2. And has not he set you as
watchmen upon the walls to give the people notice what he is a doing: is he not
going forth to conquer the Kingdoms of the world, that they may become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ?

Then I pray consider, what ye have to do, forget this darling of the world,
and set not the people a mourning after him that spared not our blood, but
reach the people to mourn after him whom we have pierced with out sins, even
the Lord Jesus Christ. But now let us consider who are our friends concerning
the great work that is now in hand, begun in the World, are they not they whom
you have stirred up in your Sermons to fight the Lords battle against the
mighty? did you not take up that Text concerning Meroz? saying, Curse ye Meroz,
curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, that come not out to help the Lord
against the mighty: have ye not said, let him that has no sword sell his cloak
and buy one? how have you been the cause partly of raising this Army, and how
have they prevailed against your enemies even by your prayers? I pray remember
the condition we were in many times, and how the Lord preserved you and us by
their hands, and how were days of thanksgiving stirred up by you to the
Parliament, to cause the people to rejoice with you? and shall all this be
forgotten? I pray remember Leicester work, what a case were we in then, when
the Country said, What will become of the Roundheads now? how did you call us
together to fasting and prayers? and how were your Prayers heard by the Lord,
and a gracious return from the Lord was sent you by the hands of these men from
Nasby, then how did we and you bless the Lord for this great mercy so that
ever after out enemies could never prevail, such was the great mercy of the
Lord to you and us. I pray remember what you said, some of you, when you saw
these men give large and merciful Propositions, when they had conquered your
enemies at Oxford, did you not say, that they would prove pricks and thorns in
their sides and ours, and did it not so come to pass, as we have seen, and now
they have overcome them again by the mighty power of the Lord Christ, dashing
Babylons brats in pieces, ye go about to hinder them, giving their enemies
occasion even to curse them, as I have heard: sure this is a sad case, when ye
shall seek to weaken their hands, thus strive not against them, for had not
this been of the Lord, they had never done so much as they have: therefore
count not them your enemies, for ye shall have cause to say once more, to call
them your friends, when ye shall see plainly what the Lord is a doing.

Who knows whether the Lord be going to make a new heaven and a new carth, or
now as is promised, in Revel. 21.1. Know ye not that when a Noble man goes to
take possession of a great place or house full of lumber that he will cause his
servants to cast out all the lumber that he may place his royal furniture in
the room, and will not a great Landlord throw out such tenants out of his
inheritance that will pay no rent, but abuse such tenants, that will pay
honestly to their power: then I pray consider what the Lord Christ is a doing,
is he not coming to take possession of his in heritance that he bought so
dearly of his Father, and is not all the world his to do with all his pleasure,
will he be tide to the spirits of men to do what they please, surely no; I pray
remember how long the Church has been in the Wilderness of the world, and how
the red Dragon has cast out floods time after time to devour her, and how he
has sat like the great Prince of the World upon thrones usurping authority
over the Nations, and playing the tyrant over the Lords inheritance; and now he
finds his time grow short, and his Kingdoms shall be taken from him, he grows
mad, but now is the time come that he must be cast out one throne after
another; that the Kingdoms of the World may become the Kingdoms of the Lord:
and his Christ, Revel. 11.15.

If this be so, that the Lord is coming as chief General, with his bow in his
hand, shooting at his enemies, and with his Crown on his head, conquering the
Kings of the earth, and the mighty men, trampling them and their crowns under
his feet, that would not bow to his golden Scepter, Psalm. 2.9. Revel. 19.17,
18. If this be so, that the Lord has begun already to take possession as may
appear, by his doings here, as consider what he has done ever since the
persecution in Queen Mary's days, how have they prospered that have had the
mark of the beast in their forehead, or that have lent a hand against this
work; that is going on in the world, how has Spain sped, for coming here? how
has Denmark sped for sending strength hither to help the King against the
Lords work; was he not almost beaten out of his Country by the Swedes? and
what became of that Army that the Queen brought over hither all the Irish,
French, and other Nations, came not they to their graves; and look on Spain and
France they must lash on another while we were busied here, what King would not
help his brother King, rather then his Commons should over come him? will be an
example for other Nations to do the like, yet all this will not do: therefore,
let us consider what this power is, it is not the power of man, nor the sword
of Gideon; but the power and sword of the Lord: as it has appeared plainly, by
many examples in this land: now if this be the Lords doings here. What will be
his doings in other lands among the great and lofty Nations where he has to
do, Isa. 27.23. Me thinks, I see them begin to shake, now is that red Dragon
troubled, now are his forces mustering together for the defense of his
Babylonians among the Nations, but all will not do: for now has the Lord been
performing that promise that is spoken of in the 63 of Esaias, Now is he
delivering his people, and now he has begun, look for no change, but to go
forward in the World, till he has quite subdued that great enemy of the world,
that has so long tyrannized over the Lords inheritance.

If it be so, that the Lord be summoning in the Emperors and Kings, with their
mighty men to appear before the Bar of his Justice: then is it time for us to
look about us; and be like the Virgins that have their lamps trimmed, and
their lights burning, that they may wait on their Master, the Lord Jesus
Christ, Matthew. 25. who says, Watch for ye know not when the Master comes. If
the Lord be on his way, destroying his enemies in his fury, leading them into
captivity, that have led into captivities, killing them with the sword, that
have killed with the sword, Revel. 13.10.

Then is it time for the people of the Lord, yea, the Ministers of Jesus Christ
to be united together, and seek to the Lord to have the Root of bitterness
that is among them plucked up by the roots, which has been a great cause to
Gods people to stagger and stumble in this time, when the Lord is executing his
enemies: Truly, it has been a great cause of giving advantage to the enemy to
laugh us to scorn; yea, it has given them advantage to take up the sword
again, which has been the cause of much bloodshed since Oxford giving up,
and may be the cause of more, if not speedily prevented by an agreement among
Ministers: who are divided, who knows whether the Lord has done with his
enemies, will begin with his people, or no; and chastise them in the sight of
their enemies? and will not this grieve you shall see the Lord lashing you in
the sight of your enemies, for them to laugh at you? The Lord open your eyes
that the errors which are between you may be plainly seen by you, so that they
may be plucked up by the roots, and cast into hell, from whence they came. Now
the Lord bring you together in love, that your differences may be so ended,
that the Lord may smell a sweet savor in giving your selves up together in
love to the Lord, so shall the people of the Lord greatly rejoice, and your
enemies be dismissed of their prey they long and look for; thus will there be a
great advantage unto a happy peace in the Nation then shall the glory of the
Gospel break forth in this Land like a burning and shining light to the whole
world; which will be a great means to darken errors: then shall the Ministers
be seen once more like the Stars in Christ's right hand, whom their enemies did
once seek to pull down by proclaiming them Traitors.

Then will the Lord delight to do us good, and bring down the power of the
enemy still more and more, till he have quite overthrown Antichrist, and
plucked down his throne, which shall be down in his appointed time; which time
is set, and known to the Lord, even to the very day and hour appointed, which
being done, Mahomet his time must suddenly follow then, then down must come all
other thrones, where the red Dragon has his power: and when all these
Kingdoms of the world are subdued to the obedience of Christ. Then shall the
Dragon be quite conquered, and chained up for a thousand years, Revel. 20.3.
Then shall that Prophecy be come to pass, which was spoken by our Savior
Christ to his Disciples, in Luke 21.24. concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem, where he says, And they shall fall by the edge of the Sword, and
shall be led away captive into all Nations: thus has that appeared long ago,
sixteen hundred years; the next Jerusalem must be trodden down of the Gentiles
until the time of the Gentiles shall be fulfilled. Now according to the
Prophecy of our Savior Christ, When all the Kingdoms of the world are
subdued to his obedience, then shall the Jews become an United Nation again,
and Jerusalem shall be builded a glorious City; the Lord Christ reigning
spiritually among them.

But to consider of the great mercy of the Lord, in bringing down the power of
our homebred enemies; what enemies had we in the Parliament to keep back the
work, the Lord had going on for the defense of his people? how did they seek
ways to overthrow all by treachery, by sending money, and other provisions in
the time of my Lord of Essex? and so made our enemies proud over us; had not
the Lord curbed them, and kept them under; but when they could not prevail,
then did they take my Lord of Warwick, and placed Committees in his room, yet
that would do them no good; they were so befooled by the mercy of the Lord;
then to try another project, they chose Sir Thomas, now Lord Fairfax to be
General, and gave him a large Commission, thinking it should break his neck:
now judge ye, how treacherous they were to the Seats they sat on, and to the
City, yea, and to the destruction of the Lords Inheritance: O miserable men!
how did they lift themselves up in their wicked ways? as ye shall hear.

After my Lord General had received such a large Commission from them, then
did they give him nothing but pressed men, that swore they would run to the King
and would not suffer a Drum to be beat up, to gain soldiers in love to him,
then did my Lord of Essex his men stand out by thousands, being loath to forsake
their old General, and serve a new General; then see further, their ase
practices: when the King was got out of Oxford to range abroad and spoil, then
was the General to beat against dead walls at Oxford, where he lost his men,
then in the mean while they caused the Leiutenant General and Colonel
Vermuten who followed the King in the Rear to withdraw to their Quarters; so
in the mean time the King fell on Leicester, where was lost much blood on both
sides, and the City taken by the enemy: thus may you see what treacherous
Parliament men did hatch, for the upholding their Covenant they made to the
Lord, and sought to destroy all the work the Lord set them to do: o wicked
covetous men, what falls both to God and man seeking after nothing but
covetousness and treachery; now are ye abhorred both of the Lord and men; a
hissing to all Nations: now are your servants become your masters; yea, and
without a great return unto the Lord, and great satisfaction to the Nation
whom ye have deceived; ye are but miscrable. Leicester's blood cries out
against you for revenge: the Lord lay it to your hearts that are guilty of it,
that it may not be laid to your charge at the great Day, when the Lord Christ
shall come to judge the World.

But to consider, the sad condition we were brought into by their evil ways, I
cannot forget: how did the Royal Party cry out all was their own? and what
will become of the Roundheads? now truly, that time ought not to be
forgotten: then how did the people of the Lord slock together, both night and
day? and how did they prevail with the Lord, even when we were at the lowest?
then was help and deliverance most precious then did the Lord arise like one
out of a sleep, rowzed up the spirits that were half dead, then were out
enemies smote on the hinder parts; then was there no treacherous Hotham to be
found, then were out enemies utterly routed; so did the Lord graciously for us,
till our enemies were vanquished: thus did the Lord cross the designs of
wicked men, and broke their bands asunder, mightily prospering his own work:
yet for all they see such mighty overthrowes given to out enemies, yet would
they go on plotting their evil designs; but when our parts got the better,
then would they give way; patience by force: thus did they linger out the time,
thinking all would turn, but the Lord laughs them to scorn, making them the
outcast of men.

Yet one thing is to be noted, after the Armies had conquered their enemies,
giving them large Propositions, that they should arise no more in opposition,
they broke their Articles, and rose again, as did appear in Kent, Wales, and
Essex, and other places: then how did they brag and vapor, when the Army was
parted and engaged, and indeed put to such hard service, that the Heavens
seemed to frown on them; yea, and the whole World caused them to frown, with
many that before had taken their parts, which made their condition to seem very
sad: then did the Lord seem once more to appear for them, and gave them power
over their enemies, then were they utterly reuted in every place where they
were gathered together, then did the Scots invade the Land, thinking to
overcome all, and so become masters over us; who came not to sight for the King
only, but to enslave the Nation as did appear: if this be so, then what mad
spirits have we, that would rather take all, and become Slaves to another
Nation, then to be crossed of our foolish wills: the Lord charge our mad spirits,
that we may see what is for our good, unite us together again, and make us a
happy Nation, that we may serve him; who said, First, seek the Kingdom of
Heaven, and all these things shall be added unto you.

But to look further, how many opportunities had our enemies and lest all
friends? friends in the Parliament, friends in the whole Nation, except a few,
that the Lord had chosen for us friends amongst all Nations; yea even the whole
World, except a few, the Lord had chosen, and the weaker sort, to which makes
me call to wind a Speech, that the Dutch Embasadour said, when he had seen the
Kings Army at Oxford and our Army that attended their motion, said he, the King
has a gallant Army; but you have a good God to sight for you: which was as
much as if he had said, If ye have not the Lord to fight for you, ye are
undone: then judge ye, after all these examples, and great deliverances,
whether the Lord has fought for us, or no?

Yet one great work I must not forget, concerning the Leiutenant General, and
his Brigade. 2 Remember when the Scots came first into England, to oppose the
King about Religion, out Parliament for their assistance in that work, sent
them a great Sum of money, and so to depart the Land: which when the French
heard of it, they made a play of English men, and Scotch men; the English man
was stripped naked from the shoulders to the Waste, and the Scotch man beating
him where he pleased; this being done, Low were English men laughed to scorn?
as the Scotch men could laugh at it is at their pleasute: which was the greatest
blot that ever English men had put on them: but take notice how this blot was
wiped off: the Scots with a great Army marched into the Land, thinking to be
masters of all, as did appear by their actions, but their cause being unjust,
the Lord strengthened the hands of our soldiers to sight against them, who
very valiantly scattered them like a mist; marched into their Country, had
their Demands, caused their enemies to be disbanded, entertained in their
chief City with great respect: came off with honor to our Nation: and shall
we be unthankful unto the Lord for such mercies as these be desiring to have
them? shall we be ungrateful to our friends that have wiped off such a stain
from the Nation, with the ventring their lives? the Lord forbid, this great
evil that reigns in their spirits; that ever we should turn against our
friends, that have spilt their blood tosave us from being destroyed; the Lord
humble both Ministers and people, that we may see our own misery, and amend,
that the Lord may be pleased to unite the Nations, that we may become the
Temples for the Lord Christ to dwellin: then shall holiness be our delight,
and the Lord will delight to do us good: so shall we dwell safely, and none
shall make us afraid; but for my part, that have wrote this Book, I have
desired that my hand might be dried up like the hand of Jeroboam, never to
pluck it in again, and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, then that I
should write any thing against the Honor of Christ, I never took the like
work in hand before now, but all my prayer is, that the Nations may be united
again, and that the Lord Christ may reign over us. The Lord give us such a
Parliament as may hate covetousness, that they may do that which is just for
the poor Commonalty, that above all they may seek unto the Lord, to know what
is his will concerning a true Government, for his Worship: and this being done,
surely, the Lord will delight todwell among us: which will be the happiest
condition, that ever Nation lived in; which that it may be so, the Lord
strengthen us with his holy Spirit to go on in a loving way, both Ministers and
people: and so the Lord prosper us all, while we are so seeking, and doing his
Will; to whom be ascribed all Glory and Honor, both now and evermore, Amen.

I pray mark well, and consider what Instructions we have in Psalm 146. so
likewise in Isat. 58.

To the Worthies of the ARMY.
BUt unto you the Noble Champions of England, whom the Lord has rade Conquer
ours over his enemies; conquering those that were like the mighty Anakims of
the Land, whose command was obeyed through three Kingdoms, and whose name was
honored upon the great Ocean, how has the Lord made you like Josuah, and
Caleb? conquering the enemies of the Lord Christ? and like David cut off the
head of Goliath? and shall not the Lord be honored by you for all this? surely,
that were a great dishonor to the mighty work he has put into your hands to
do: I pray consider how the Lord has given all the Land unto your hands to
dispose of, scattering your enemies, and making them amazed: now does all
Nations stand and wait to see what will be the intent of your actions: some
say, that ye are hypocrites, making a stirrup of Religion, to yet up into the
saddle, and sion thence, to the Throne; some say, that now ye are become
Masters of all, ye will become mighty men over your brethren; serving your own
turns, and to the poor Commons whom ye have fought for, shall be worse
enslaved then ever; by having many Task-unsters reigning over us: Should it be
so, your latter end would be worse then your beginning, yea, and the Lord would
serve you, as he did Jehn, who though he sought the Lords Battles, and did all
that was in the Lords heart for him to do, yet because he did all for his own
ends, deceitfully; the Lord the camed to bring the blood of the Lords enemies
on the head of him and his posterity: such is the wages of them that do the
work of the Lord deceitfully; but ye have not shown your (...) the Lord gives
(...) all who are the chiese in the Army) hearts like John(...) who when he had
done conquering the enemies of the Lord, (...) which is a great work, which
(...) to be done (...) by great men, and Lawyers, for they (...) the poo^^ of
their right; it can^^^^ (...) they have perverted true justice and judgment
(...) the poor, the Lord had (...) them in the (...) their hands; and they had
a (...) how miserably have they brake all? laying hold on covetousness and
oppression, unjustly robbing the poor Commonalty, though they had all their
own estates in their hands; the Kings Estate, the Bishops Lands, Deliquents
estates, and making Sessemerts on all men's estates: yet all this could not pay
your Army, and can we look for redreste, justice and right, from such
Covenant-breakers as these? surely, no: the Lord will turn them out of their
Anthority call them to account, as he did Achan; and paid both them and their
posterity their wages, except a mighty change be wrought from above: if this be
so, that the Lord will turn such offenders out of his service, that sat on
Thrones, as Gods, and thus choose you to do right and justice with the Sword;
then the Lord give you hearts sitting for such a great work, that the poor
Commonalty may be relieved, and have their rights again, which they have been
wronged of: and those cries that have ascended up to the Lord; and that it may
be your chiefest care to countenance the Gospel, and be friends to all those
that have been partly the cause of your taking up the Sword: truly, the Lord
has made them isntrumental Shepherds to drive many of his Flocks to his Fold,
though the Lord had determined before whom they should be, and now has the
Lord made a separation among them, and a mist is cast before them, which makes
them fail in their judgments toward you, concerning the work you have in
hand; but surely, the Lord will drive away that great cloud, and clear up
their judgments toward you, that there may be unity and love between them and
us: and that your actions which are to ensue, may beget such love in the hearts
of the people, that they may say surely, the Lord has raised you for good to
the Nation, which will be a greatmeans to draw the hearts of the Nation to
join in the Work of the Lord with you: and unite the hearts of the people
that are divided: not only to be in love one with another again, but likewise
toward you: Now the Lord give you hearts, that ye have taken up the sword to
fight for the advancing of the Worship of Jesus Christ, and the Liberty of the
Subject, delivering the poor out of bondage, dealing to every man his due, and
setting those that are unjustly imprisoned, at liberty; which being done, the
Lord prosper your proceedings, that ye may see the fruits of your labor with
joy and comfort; And so I end, desiting the Lord to direct your hearts to join
with them that are not self-ended: which is the prayers of many godly people
for you, and so, Amen.

Yours to command (whiles ye go on in godliness and truth) Robert Wharton.

FINIS.
THE sincere and genuine intent of the Author in this Treatise, being wholly to
set forth Gods glory in his great Works done for this Nation, and to stir us up
to be reconciled, and to live in love and peace one with another, and in
righteousness in our several places: showing only the downfall of all
Authorities that do oppose Christ Jesus and his Kingdom, who will prevail:
therefore I say: Imprimatur,

Theodore Jennings.
April the 19th. 1649

