Die Lune 7. Decembr. 1646.
ORdered, by the Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, that six hundred Copies and
no more, of the Advice of the Assembly of Divines presented to this House,
Concerning a Confession of Faith, be forthwith Printed for the service of both
Houses and the Assembly of Divines, and that the care of the printing thereof
be referred to the Assembly of Divines. And the Printer is enjoined (at his
peril) not to print more then six hundred Copies of them, or to divulge or
publish any of them.

It is further Ordered, that no person presume to Reprint, Divulge, or publish
the said ADVICE or any part of it, till further order be taken herein by both
or either of the Houses of Parliament.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

The humble ADVICE OF THE ASSEMBLY OF Divines, Now by Authority of PARLIAMENT
sitting at Westminster, Concerning a Confession of Faith, Presented by them
lately to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

A certain number of Copies are Ordered to be Printed only for the use of the
Members of both Houses and of the Assembly of Divines, to the end that they may
advise thereupon.

LONDON, Printed for the Company of STATIONERS.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The
humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines, now, by Authority of PARLIAMENT,
sitting at WESTMINSTER. Concerning a Confession of Faith.
CHAP. I. Of the Holy Scripture.
ALthough the light of Nature, and the works of Creation and Providence do so
far manifest the Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God, as to leave men
unexcusable; yet are they not sufficient to give that knowledge of God and of
his Will, which is necessary unto salvation. Therefore it pleased the Lord, at
sundry times, and in diverse manners, to reveal himself, and to declare that his
Will unto his Church; and afterward, for the better preserving and propagating
of the Truth, and for the more sure establishment and comfort of the Church
against the corruption of the flesh, and the malice of Satan and of the World;
to commit the same wholly unto writing: which makes the Holy Scripture to be
most necessary; those former ways of Gods revealing his Will unto his people,
being now ceased.

II. Under the name of Holy Scripture, or the Word of God written; are now
contained all the Books of the Old and New Testament, which are these:

Of the Old Testament.
GEnesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomie Joshuah Judges Ruth I. Samuel
II. Samuel I. Kings II. Kings I. Chronicles II. Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther
Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes The Song of Songs Isaiah Jeremiah
Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hoseah Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk
Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi
Of the New Testament:
The Gospels according to MAtthew Mark Luke John
The Acts of the Apostles Paul's Epistles to the Romans Corinthians I.
Corinthians II. Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians Thessalonians I.
Thessalonians II. To Timothy I. To Timothy II. To Titus To Philemon
The Epistle to the Hebrews. The Epistle of James. The first and second
Epistles of Peter. The first, second, and third Epistles of John. The Epistle
of Jude. The Revelation of John.
All which are given by inspiration of God, to be the Rule of Faith and Life.

III. The Books commonly called Apocrypha, not being of Divine inspiration, are
no part of the Canon of the Scripture; and therefore are of no authority in the
Church of God, nor to be any otherwise approved, or made use of, than other
humane Writings.

IV. The Authority of the Holy Scripture, for which it ought to be believed and
obeyed, depends not upon the Testimony of any man, or Church; but wholly upon
God (who is Truth it self) the Author thereof: and therefore it is to be
received, because it is the Word of God.

V. We may be moved and induced by the Testimony of the Church to an high and
reverent esteem of the holy Scripture. And the heavenlinesse of the Matter,
the efficacy of the Doctrine, the majesty of the Style, the consent of all the
Parts, the Scope of the whole (which is, to give all glory to God,) the full
discovery it makes of the only way of man's salvation, the many other
incomparable Excellencies, and the entire perfection thereof, are Arguments
whereby it does abundantly evidence it self to be the Word of God: yet
notwithstanding, our full persuasion and assurance of the infallible truth, and
Divine authority thereof, is from the inward work of the Holy Spirit bearing
witness by and with the Word, in our hearts.

VI. The whole Council of God concerning all things necessary for his own
Glory, man's salvation, Faith, and Life, is either expressly setdown in
Scripture, or by good and necessary consequence may be deduced from Scripture:
unto which nothing at any time is to be added, whether by new revelations of
the Spirit, or Traditions of men. Nevertheless we acknowledge the inward
illumination of the Spirit of God to be necessary for the saving understanding
of such things as are revealed in the Word: and that there are some
circumstances concerning the Worship of God, and Government of the Church,
common to human actions and Societies, which are to be ordered by the Light of
Nature and Christian Prudence, according to the general Rules of the Word,
which are always to be observed.

VII. All things in Scripture are not alike plain in themselves, nor alike
clear unto all: yet those things which are necessary to be known, believed,
and observed for salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in some place
of Scripture or other, that not only the Learned, but the unlearned, in a due
use of the ordinary means, may attain unto a sufficient understanding of them.

VIII. The Old Testament in Hebrew (which was the Native Language of the people
of God of old,) and the New Testament in Greek, (which at the time of the
writing of it was most generally known to the Nations) being immediately
inspired by God, and by his singular care and providence kept pure in all Ages,
are therefore Authentical; so as, in all Controversies of Religion, the Church
is finally to Appeal unto them. But, because these Original Tongues are not
known to all the people of God, who have right unto, and interest in the
Scriptures, and are commanded, in the fear of God, to read and search them,
therefore they are to be translated into the vulgar Language of every Nation
unto which they come, that the Word of God dwelling plentifully in all, they
may worship him in an acceptable manner; and, through patience and comfort of
the Scriptures, may have hope.

IX. The infallible Rule of Interpretation of Scripture is the Scripture it
self: and therefore, when there is a Question about the true and full sense of
any Scripture (which is not manifold, but one) it must be searched and known by
other places that speak more clearly.

X. The Supreme Judge by which all Controversies of Religion are to be
determined, and all Decrees of Councels, Opinions of Ancient Writers, Doctrines
of men, and private spirits, are to be examined; and, in whose Sentence we are
to rest; can be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in the Scripture.

CHAP. II. Of God, and of the holy Trinity.
THere is but one only, living, and true God: who is infinite in Being and
Perfection, a most pure Spirit, invisible, without body, parts, or passions,
immutable, immense, eternal, incomprehensible, almighty, most wise, most holy,
most free, most absolute, working all things according to the Counsel of his
own immutable and most righteous will, for his own glory; most loving,
gracious, merciful, long-suffering, abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin; the rewarder of them that diligently seek
him; and withal, most just and terrible in his judgments, hating all sin, and
who will by no means clear the guilty.

II. God has all life, glory, goodness, blessedness, in, and of himself; and
is alone in, and unto himself allsufficient, notstanding in need of any
creatures which he has made, nor deriving any Glory from them, but only
manifesting his own Glory, in, by, unto, and upon them: He is the alone
Fountain of all Being, of whom, through whom, and to whom are all things; and,
has most Sovereign Dominion over them, to do by them, for them, or upon them
whatsoever himself pleases. In his sight all things are open and manifest; his
knowledge is infinite, infallible, and independent upon the creature, so as
nothing is to him contingent, or uncertain. He is most holy in all his
counsels, in all his works, and in all his commands. To him is due from Angels
and men, and every other creature, whatsoever worship, service, or obedience he
is pleased to require of them.

III. In the Unity of the Godhead there be Three Persons, of one substance,
power, and eternity; God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost. The
Father is of none, neither begotten, nor proceeding: The Son is eternally
begotten of the Father: the Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and
the Son.

CHAP. III. Of Gods Eternal Decree.
GOd from all eternity did, by the most wise and holy Counsel of his own Will,
freely, and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass: yet so as thereby
neither is God the Author of sin, nor is violence offered to the will of the
Creatures, nor is the Liberty or contingencie of second Causes taken away, but
rather established.

II. Although God knows whatsoever may, or can come to pass upon all supposed
conditions, yet has he not decreed any thing because he foresaw it as future,
or as that which would come to pass upon such conditions.

III. By the Decree of God, for the manifestation of his glory, some men and
Angels are predestined unto everlasting life, and others foreordained to
everlasting death.

IV. These Angels and men thus predestined and foreordained, are
particularly, and unchangeably designed, and their number is so certain, and
definite, that it cannot be either increased, or diminished.

V. Those of mankind that are predestined unto Life, God, before the
foundation of the world was laid, according to his eternal and immutable
purpose, and the secret Counsel and good pleasure of his Will, has chosen, in
Christ, unto everlasting glory, out of his mere free grace and love, without
any foresight of Faith, or Good-works, or perseverance in either of them, or
any other thing in the creature, as conditions, or causes moving him thereunto:
and all, to the praise of his glorious grace.

VI. As God has appointed the Elect unto glory; so has he, by the eternal
and most free purpose of his Will, foreordained all the means thereunto.
Wherefore they who are elected, being fallen in Adam, are redeemed by Christ,
are effectually called unto faith in Christ, by his Spirit working in due
season, are justified, adopted, sanctified, and kept by his power through faith
unto salvation. Neither are any other redeemed by Christ, effectually called,
justified, adopted, sanctified and saved; but the Elect only.

VII. The rest of mankind God was pleased, according to the unsearchable
counsel of his own Will, whereby he extends, or withholds mercy, as he
pleases, for the glory of his Sovereign Power over his creatures, to pass
by; and, to ordain them to dishonor and wrath, for their sin, to the praise of
his glorious justice.

VIII. The Doctrine of this high Mystery of Predestination is to be handled
with special prudence and care, that men attending the Will of God revealed in
his Word, and yielding obedience thereunto, may, from the certainty of their
effectual Vocation, be assured of their eternal Election. So shall this
Doctrine afford matter of praise, reverence, and admiration of God, and of
humility, diligence, and abundant consolation to all that sincerely obey the
Gospel.

CHAP. IV. Of Creation.
IT pleased God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for the manifestation of the
glory of his eternal power, wisdom, and goodness, in the beginning, to
create, or make of nothing, the World, and all things therein, whether visible
or invisible, in the space of six days; and all very good.

II. After God had made all other creatures, he created man, male and female,
with reasonable and immortal souls, endued with knowledge, righteousness and
true holiness, after his own Image; having the Law of God written in their
hearts, and power to fulfill it: And yet, under a possibility of transgressing,
being left to the liberty of their own will, which was subject unto change.
Beside this Law written in their hearts, they received a command, not to eat of
the tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, which whiles they kept, they were
happy in their Communion with God, and had Dominion over the Creatures.

CHAP. V. Of Providence.
GOd the great Creator of all things does uphold, direct, dispose, and govern
all creatures, actions, and things, from the greatest even to the least, by his
most wise and holy Providence, according to his infallible foreknowledge, and
the free, and immutable counsel of his own Will, to the praise of the glory of
his wisdom, power, justice, goodness, and mercy.

II. Although, in relation to the foreknowledge and decree of God, the first
Cause, all things come to pass immutably, and infallibly: yet, by the same
Providence, he orders them to fall out, according to the nature of second
causes, either necessarily, freely, or contingently.

III. God, in his ordinary Providence makes use of means, yet is free to work
without, above, and against them at his pleasure.

IV. The almighty power, unsearchable wisdom, and infinite goodness of God
so far manifest themselves in his Providence, that it extends it self even
to the first Fall, and all other sins of Angels and Men; and that not by a
bare permission, but such as has joined with it a most wise and powerful
bounding, and otherwise ordering, and governing of them, in a manifold
dispensation, to his own holy ends: yet so, as the sinfulness thereof
proceeds only from the creature, and not from God, who being most holy and
righteous, neither is, nor can be the Author or Approver of sin.

V. The most wise, righteous, and gracious God does oftentimes leave for a
season his own children to manifold temptations, and the corruption of their
own hearts, to chastise them for their former sins, or to discover unto them
the hidden strength of corruption, and deceitfulness of their hearts, that
they may be humbled; and, to raise them to a more close and constant dependence
for their support upon himself, and to make them more watchful against all
future occasions of sin, and for sundry other just and holy ends.

VI. As for those wicked and ungodly men whom God, as a righteous judge, for
former sins does blind and harden, from them he not only withholdeth his
grace, whereby they might have been enlightened in their understandings, and
wrought upon in their hearts; but, sometimes also withdraws the gifts which
they had, and exposes them to such objects as their corruption makes occasions
of sin; and withal, gives them over to their own lusts, the temptations of the
world, and the power of Satan: where by it comes to pass that they harden
themselves, even under those means, which God uses for the softning of others.

VII. As the providence of God does in general, reach to all Creatures; so
after a most special manner, it takes care of his Church, and disposes all
things to the good thereof.

CHAP. VI. Of the Fall of Man, of Sin, and of the Punishment thereof.
OUr first Parents being seduced by the subtilty and temptation of Satan,
sinned, in eating the forbidden fruit. This their sin, God was pleased,
according to his wiseand holy counsel to permit, having purposed to order it
to his own glory.

II. By this sin they fell from their original righteousness and communion
with God, and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled in all the faculties
and parts of soul and body.

III. They being the root of all mankind, the guilt of this sin was imputed,
and the same death in sin and corrupted nature, conveyed to all their posterity
descending from them by ordinary generation.

IV. From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly indisposed,
dis-abled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly inclined to all evil, do
proceed all actual transgressions.

V. This corruption of nature, during this life, does remain in those that are
regenerated; and, although it be, through Christ, pardoned, and mortified, yet
both it self, and all the motions thereof are truly and properly sin.

VI. Every-sin, both Original and Actual, being a transgression of the
righteous Law of God, and contrary thereunto, does, in its own nature, bring
guilt upon the sinner; whereby he is bound over to the wrath of God, and curse
of the Law, and so made subject to death, with all miseries spiritual,
temporal, and eternal.

CHAP. VII. Of Gods Covenant with Man.
THe distance between God and the Creature is so great, that although
reasonable Creatures do owe obedience unto him as their Creator, yet they could
never have any fruition of him as their Blessedness and Reward, but by some
voluntary condescension on Gods part, which he has been pleased to express by
way of Covenant.

II. The first Covenant made with Man, was a Covenant of Works, wherein Life
was promised to Adam, and in him to his Posterity, upon condition of perfect
and personal obedience.

III. Man, by his Fall having made himself incapable of Life by that Covenant,
the Lord was pleased to make a Second, commonly called the Covenant of Grace;
Wherein he freely offers unto sinners Life and Salvation by Jesus Christ,
requiring of them Faith in Him that they may be saved, and promising to give
unto all those that are ordained unto Life, his holy Spirit, to make them
willing, and able to believe.

IV. This Covenant of Grace is frequently set forth in Scripture by the name of
a Testament, in reference to the death of Jesus Christ the Testator, and to the
everlasting inheritance, with all things belonging to it, therein bequeathed.

V. This Covenant was differently administered in the time of the Law, and in
the time of the Gospel: Under the Law, it was administered by Promises,
Prophecies, Sacrifices, Circumcision, the Paschal Lamb, and other Types and
Ordinances delivered to the people of the Jews, all fore-signifying Christ to
come: which were, for that time, sufficient and efficacious, through the
operation of the Spirit, to instruct and build up the Elect in Faith in the
Promised Messiah, by whom they had full remission of sins, and eternal
Salvation: and is called, the Old Testament.

VI. Under the Gospel, when Christ, the substance, was exhibited, the
Ordinances in which this Covenant is dispensed, are the Preaching of the Word,
and the Administration of the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper:
Which, though fewer in number, and administered with more simplicity, and less
outward glory; yet, in them, it is held forth in more fulness, evidence, and
spiritual efficacy, to all Nations, both Jews and Gentiles; and, is called the
New Testament. There are not therefore Two Covenants of Grace, differing in
substance, but one and the same, under various dispensations.

CHAP. VIII. Of Christ the Mediator.
IT pleased God, in His eternal purpose, to choose and ordain the Lord Jesus,
His only begotten Son, to be the Mediator between God and Man; the Prophet,
Priest, and King, the Head, and Savior of His Church, the Heir of all things,
and Judge of the World: Unto whom He did from all eternity give a People, to be
his Seed, and to be by him in time Redeemed, Called, Justified, Sanctified, and
Glorified.

II. The Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity, being very and eternal
God, of one Substance, and equal with the Father; did, when the fulness of
time was come, take upon Him man's nature, with all the Essential properties,
and common infirmities thereof, yet, without sin: being conceived by the Power
of the Holy Ghost, in the womb of the Virgin Mary, of her substance. So that,
two whole, perfect, and distinct Natures, the Godhead and the Manhood, were
inseparably joined together in one Person, without Conversion, Composition, or
Confusion. Which Person, is very God, and very Man, yet one Christ, the only
Mediator between God and Man.

III. The Lord Jesus, in his humane nature thus united to the divine, was
sanctified and anointed with the holy Spirit, above measure, having in him all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; in whom, it pleased the Father, that
all fulness should dwell; to the end, that being holy, harmless, undefiled,
and full of grace and truth, he might be thoroughly furnished to execute the
Office of a Mediator, and Surety. Which Office he took not unto himself, but
was thereunto called by his Father, who put all power and judgment into his
hand, and gave him commandment to execute the same.

IV. This Office, the Lord Jesus did most willingly undertake; which that he
might discharge, he was made under the Law, and did perfectly fulfill it,
endured most grievous torments immediately in his Soul, and most painful
sufferings in his Body; was crucified, and died; was buried, and remained under
the power of death; yet saw no corruption. On the third day he arose from the
dead, with the same body in which he suffered, with which also he ascended into
Heaven, and there sits at the right hand of his Father, making intercession,
and shall return to Judge, men, and Angels, at the end of the World.

V. The Lord Jesus, by his perfect obedience, and sacrifice of himself, which
he, through the eternal spirit, once offered up unto God, has fully satisfied
the Justice of his Father; and purchased, not only reconciliation, but an
everlasting inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven, for all those whom the Father
has given unto him.

VI. Although the work of Redemption was not actually wrought by Christ till
after his Incarnation, yet the virtue, efficacy, and benefits thereof were
communicated unto the Elect in all ages successively from the beginning of the
world, in, and by those promises, types, and sacrifices, wherein he was
revealed, and signified to be the seed of the woman which should bruise the
serpents head; and the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world: being
yesterday, and to day the same, and for ever.

VII. Christ, in the work of Mediation, acts according to both Natures, by
each Nature doing that which is proper to it self: yet, by reason of the unity
of the Person, that which is proper to one Nature, is sometimes in Scripture
attributed to the Person denominated by the other Nature.

VIII. To all those for whom Christ has purchased Redemption, he does
certainly, and effectually apply, and communicate the same, making intercession
for them, and revealing unto them, in, and by the Word, the mysteries of
salvation, effectually persuading them by his Spirit, to believe, and obey, and
governing their hearts by his Word and Spirit, overcoming all their enemies by
his Almighty Power and Wisdom, in such manner, and ways, as are most
consonant to his wonderful and unsearchable dispensation.

CHAP. IX. Of Free Will.
GOD has endued the Will of man with that natural liberty, that it is neither
forced, nor by any absolute necessity of nature determined to good or evil.

II. Man, in his state of Innocence, had freedom, and power, to will, and to
do that which was good, and well pleasing to God; but yet, mutably, so that he
might fall from it.

III. Man by his fall into a state of sin, has wholly lost all ability of Will
to any spiritual good accompanying salvation: so as, a natural man, being
altogether averse from that good, and dead in sin, is not able, by his own
strength, to convert himself, or to prepare himself thereunto.

IV. When God converts a sinner, and translates him into the state of grace, he
freeth him from his natural bondage under sin; and, by his grace alone,
inables him freely to will, and to do that which is spiritually good; yet so,
as that by reason of his remaining corruption, he does not, perfectly, nor
only, will that which is good, but does also will that which is evil.

V. The will of man is made, perfectly, and immutably free to good alone, in
the state of Glory only.

CHAP. X. Of Effectual Calling.
ALl those whom God has predestined unto life, and those only, he is pleased
in his appointed and accepted time, effectually to call, by his Word and
Spirit, out of that state of sin and death, in which they are by nature, to
grace and salvation by Jesus Christ; inlightning their minds, spiritually, and
savingly to understand the things of God; taking away their heart of stone, and
giving unto them an heart of flesh; renewing their wills, and by his almighty
power determining them to that which is good, and effectually drawing them to
Jesus Christ: yet so, as they come most freely, being made willing by his grace.

II. This effectual Call is of Gods free, and special grace alone, not from
any thing at all foreseen in man, who is altogether passive therein, until
being quickened and renewed by the holy Spirit, he is thereby enabled to answer
this Call, and to embrace the grace offered, and conveyed in it.

III. Elect infants, dying in infancy, are regenerated, and saved by Christ,
through the Spirit, who works when, and where, and how he pleases: So also,
are all other elect persons who are incapable of being outwardly called by the
Ministry of the Word.

IV. Others, not elected, although they may be called by the Ministry of the
Word, and may have some common operations of the Spirit, yet they never truly
come unto Christ, and therefore cannot be saved: much less can men, not
professing the Christian Religion, be saved in any other way whatsoever, be
they never so diligent to frame their lives according to the light of Nature,
and the Law of that Religion they do profess. And, to assert and maintain,
that they may, is very pernicious, and to be detested.

CHAP. XI. Of Justification.
THose whom God effectually calls, he also freely justifies: not, by
infusing righteousness into them, but by pardoning their sins, and by
accounting and accepting their persons as righteous; not, for any thing wrought
in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; nor, by imputing faith it
self, the act of believing, or any other evangelicall obedience, to them, as
their righteousness, but, by imputing the obedience and satisfaction of Christ
unto them, they receiving, and resting on him and his righteousness by faith;
which faith, they have, not of themselves, it is the gift of God.

II. Faith, thus receiving and resting on Christ and his righteousness, is the
alone instrument of Justification; yet is it not alone in the person justified,
but is ever accompanied with all other saving graces, and is no dead faith, but
works by Love.

III. Christ by his obedience, and death, did fully discharge the debt of all
those that are thus justified, and did make a proper, real, and full
satisfaction to his Fathers Justice in their behalf. Yet, in as much as he was
given by the Father, for them; and, his obedience and satisfaction accepted in
their stead; and, both, freely, not for any thing in them; their Justification
is only of free grace; that, both the exact justice, and rich grace of God,
might be glorified in the justification of sinners.

IV. God did, from all eternity, decree to justify all the elect, and Christ
did, in the fulness of time, die for their sins, and rise again for their
justification: nevertheless, they are not justified, until the holy Spirit
does, in due time, actually apply Christ unto them.

V. God does continue to forgive the sins of those that are justified: and,
although they can never fall from the state of Justification; yet, they may by
their sins, fall under Gods fatherly displeasure, and not have the light of his
countenance restored unto them, until they humble themselves, confess their
sins, beg pardon, and renew their faith and repentance.

VI. The Justification of Believers under the old Testament, was, in all these
respects, one and the same with the justification of Believers under the new
Testament.

CHAP. XII. Of Adoption.
ALl those that are justified, God vouchsafes, in, and for his only Son Jesus
Christ, to make partakers of the grace of Adoption: by which they are taken
into the number, and enjoy the liberties and privileges of the children of
God, have his Name put upon them, receive the spirit of Adoption, have access
to the Throne of Grace with boldness, are enabled to cry, Abba, Father, are
pitied, protected, provided for, and chastened, by him, as by a Father; yet,
never cast off, but sealed to the day of redemption, and inherit the promises,
as heirs of everlasting salvation.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sanctification.
THey who are effectually called, and Regenerated, having a new heart, and a
new spirit created in them; are further sanctified, really, and personally,
through the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection, by his Word, and Spirit
dwelling in them: the Dominion of the whole body of sin is destroyed, and the
several lusts thereof are more and more weakened and mortified; and they, more
and more quickened and strengthened in all saving graces, to the practice of
true holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.

II. This Sanctification is throughout, in the whole man; yet imperfect in this
life, there abiding still some remnants of corruption in every part: whence
arises a continual, and irreconcilable war; the flesh lusting against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh.

III. In which war, although the remaining corruption, for a time, may much
prevail; yet, through the continual supply of strength from the sanctifying
Spirit of Christ, the regenerare part does overcome: and so, the Saints grow in
grace, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

CHAP. XIV. Of Saving Faith.
THe grace of Faith, whereby the elect are enabled to believe to the saving of
their souls, is the work of the Spirit of Christ in their hearts; and is
ordinarily wrought by the Ministry of the Word: by which also, and by the
administration of the Sacraments, and prayer, it is increased and strengthened.

II. By this Faith, a Christian believes to be true, whatsoever is revealed in
the Word, for the authority of God himself speaking therein; and, acts
differently upon that which each particular passage thereof contains;
yielding obedience to the Commands, trembling at the threatenings, and embracing
the Promises of God for this life, and that which is to come. But the
principal Acts of saving faith, are, Accepting, Receiving, and Resting upon
Christ alone for Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal life, by virtue of
the Covenant of Grace.

III. This Faith is different in degrees, weak, or strong; may be often and
many ways assailed, and weakened, but gets the victory; growing up in many to
the attainment of a full assurance through Christ, who is both the Author and
finisher of our faith.

CHAP. XV. Of Repentance unto life.
REpentance unto life, is an evangelicall grace, the Doctrine whereof is to be
preached by every Minister of the Gospel, as well as that of faith in Christ.

II. By it, a sinner, out of the sight and sense not only of the danger, but
also of the filthiness and odiousness of his sins, as contrary to the holy
nature, and righteous Law of God; and, upon the apprehension of his mercy in
Christ to such as are penitent, so grieves for, and hates his sins, as to turn
from them all unto God, purposing and endeavoring to walk with him in all the
ways of his Commandments.

III. Although Repentance be not to be rested in, as any satisfaction for sin,
or any cause of the pardon thereof, which is the act of Gods free grace in
Christ; yet is it of such necessity to all sinners, that none may expect pardon
without it.

IV. As there is no sin so small, but it deserves damnation; so there is no sin
so great, that it can bring damnation upon those who truly repent.

V. Men ought not to content themselves with a general repentance, but it is
every man's duty to endeavor to repent of his particular sins, particularly.

VI. As every man is bound to make private confession of his sins to God,
praying for the pardon thereof; upon which, and the forsaking of them, he shall
find mercy: so, he that scandalizeth his Brother, or the Church of Christ,
ought to be willing by a private or public confession, and sorrow for his
sin, to declare his repentance to those that are offended, who are thereupon to
be reconciled to him, and in love to receive him.

CHAP. XVI. Of Good Works.
GOod Works are only such as God has commanded in his holy Word, and not such
as, without the warrant thereof, are devised by men, out of blind zeal, or
upon any pretense of good intention.

II. These good works, done in obedience to Gods Commandments, are the fruits
and evidences of a true and lively faith: and, by them, Believers manifest
their thankfulness, strengthen their assurance, edify their Brethren, adorn
the profession of the Gospel, stop the mouths of the adversaries, and glorify
God, whose workmanship they are, created in Christ Jesus thereunto; that,
having their fruit unto holiness, they may have the end, eternal life.

III. Their ability to do good works, is not at all of themselves, but wholly
from the Spirit of Christ. And that they may be enabled thereunto, besides the
graces they have already received, there is required an actual influence of
the same holy Spirit, to work in them to will and to do, of his good pleasure:
yet are they not hereupon to grow negligent, as if they were not bound to
perform any duty, unless, upon a special motion of the Spirit; but, they
ought to be diligent in stirring up the grace of God that is in them.

IV. They, who in their obedience, attain to the greatest height, which is
possible in this life, are so far from being able to supererogate, and to do
more than God requires, as that they fall short of much which in duty they are
bound to do.

V. We cannot, by our best Works, merit pardon of sin, or eternal life at the
hand of God, by reason of the great disproportion that is between them and the
glory to come; and, the infinite distance that is between us and God, whom, by
them, we can neither profit, nor satisfy for the debt of our former sins, but,
when we have done all we can, we have done but our duty, and are unprofitable
servants; and, because, as they are good, they proceed from his Spirit; and, as
they are wrought by us, they are defiled, and mixed with so much weakness and
imperfection, that they cannot endure the severity of Gods judgment.

VI. Yet notwithstanding, the persons of Believers being accepted through
Christ, their good works also are accepted in him, not as though they were in
this life wholly unblameable and unreproveable in Gods sight; but that, he
looking upon them in his Son, is pleased to accept, and reward that which is
sincere, although accompanied with many weaknesses and imperfections.

VII. Works done by unregenerate men, although, for the matter of them, they
may be things which God commands, and of good use both to themselves, and
others: yet, because they proceed not from an heart purified by faith; nor are
done in a right manner, according to the Word; nor, to a right end, the glory
of God; they are therefore sinful, and cannot please God, or make a man meet
to receive grace from God. And yet, their neglect of them is more sinful, and
displeasing unto God.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Perseverance of the Saints.
THey, whom God has accepted in his Beloved, effectually called, and
sanctified by his Spirit, can neither totally, nor finally, fall away from the
state of Grace: but shall certainly persevere therein to the end, and be
eternally saved.

II. This Perseverance of the Saints, depends not upon their own free will, but
upon the immutability of the Decree of Election flowing from the free and
unchangeable love of God the Father; upon the efficacy of the merit, and
intercession of Jesus Christ; the abiding of the Spirit, and of the seed of God
within them; and the nature of the Covenant of Grace: from all which, arises
also the certainty, and infallibility thereof.

III. Nevertheless, they may, through the temptations of Satan and of the
World, the prevalency of corruption remaining in them, and the neglect of the
means of their preservation, fall into grievous sins; and, for a time, continue
therein: whereby they incur Gods displeasure, and grieve his holy Spirit,
come to be deprived of some measure of their graces and comforts, have their
hearts hardened, and their consciences wounded, hurt, and scandalize others, and
bring temporal judgments upon themselves.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the assurance of Grace and Salvation.
ALthough hypocrites and other unregenerate men may vainly deceive themselves
with false hopes, and carnal presumptions of being in the favor of God, and
estate of salvation; which hope of theirs shall perish: yet, such as truly
believe in the Lord Jesus, and love him in sincerity, endeavoring to walk in
all good conscience before him, may, in this life, be certainly assured that
they are in the state of grace, and may rejoice in the hope of the glory of
God, which hope shall never make them ashamed.

II. This certainty is not a bare conjecturall and probable persuasion,
grounded upon a fallible hope; but, an infallible assurance of faith, founded,
upon the divine truth of the promises of salvation, the inward evidence of
those graces unto which these promises are made, the testimony of the Spirit of
Adoption witnessing with our spirits that we are the children of God: which
Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance, whereby we are sealed to the day of
redemption.

III. This infallible assurance does not so belong to the essence of faith, but
that a true believer may wait long, and conflict with many difficulties before
he be partaker of it: yet, being enabled by the Spirit to know the things which
are freely given him of God, he may, without extraordinary revelation, in the
right use of ordinary means, attain thereunto. And therefore it is the duty of
every one, to give all diligence to make his calling and election sure; that
thereby his heart may be enlarged in peace and joy in the holy Ghost, in love
and thankfulness to God, and in strength and chearfullnesse in the duties of
obedience, the proper fruits of this assurance: so far is it, from inclining
men to looseness.

IV. True believers may have the assurance of their salvation diverse ways
shaken, diminished, and intermitted; as, by negligence in preserving of it, by
falling into some special sin, which wounds the conscience, and grieveth the
spirit; by, some sudden, or vehement temptation, by Gods withdrawing the light
of his countenance, and suffering even such as fear him to walk in darkness
and to have no light: yet are they never utterly destitute of that seed of God,
and life of faith, that love of Christ and the brethren, that sincerity of
heart, and conscience of duty, out of which, by the operation of the Spirit,
this Assurance may, in due time, be revived; and by the which, in the mean
time, they are supported from utter despair.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Law of God.
GOD gave to Adam a Law, as a Covenant of Works, by which he bound him, and all
his posterity to personal, entire, exact, and perpetual obedience; promised
life upon the fullfilling, and threatened death upon the breach of it: and
endued him with power and ability to keep it.

II. This Law, after his fall, continued to be a perfect rule of
righteousness, and, as such, was delivered by God upon Mount Sinai, in ten
Commandments, and written in two Tables: the four first Commandments containing
our duty toward God; and the other six, our duty to man.

III. Beside this Law, commonly called Moral, God was pleased to give to the
people of Israel, as a Church under age, Ceremonial Laws containing several
typical Ordinances, partly of worship, prefiguring Christ, his graces, actions,
sufferings, and benefits; and partly, holding forth diverse instructions of
moral duties. All which Ceremonial Laws are now abrogated, under the new
Testament.

IV. To them also, as a Body Politic, he gave sundry Judicial Laws, which
expired together with the State of that People; not obliging any other now,
further than the general equity thereof may require.

V. The Moral Law does for ever bind all, as well justified persons as others,
to the obedience thereof; and that, not only in regard of the matter contained
in it, but also in respect of the authority of God the Creator, who gave it:
Neither does Christ, in the Gospel, any way dissolve, but much strengthen this
obligation.

VI. Although true Believers be not under the Law, as a Covenant of Works, to
be thereby justified, or condemned; yet, is it of great use to them, as well as
to others; in that, as a Rule of life informing them of the will of God, and
their duty, it directs, and binds them to walk accordingly; discovering also
the sinful pollutions of their nature, hearts, and lives; so as, examining
themselves thereby, they may come to further conviction of, humiliation for,
and hatred against sin; together with a cleerer fight of the need they have of
Christ, and the perfection of his obedience. It is likewise of use to the
Regenerate, to restrain their corruptions, in that it forbids sin: and, the
threatenings of it serve to show, what, even their sins, deserve; and, what
afflictions, in this life, they may expect for them, although freed from the
curse thereof threatened in the Law. The Promises of it, in like manner, show
them Gods approbation of obedience, and what blessings they may expect upon the
performance thereof; although, not as due to them by the Law, as a Covenant of
Works. So as, a man's doing good, and refraining from evil, because the Law
encourages to the one, and deterreth from the other, is no evidence of his
being under the Law; and, not under grace.

VII. Neither are the forementioned Uses of the Law contrary to the grace of
the Gospel, but do sweetly comply with it; the Spirit of Christ subduing, and
inabling the will of man, to do that, freely and cheerfully, which the will of
God, revealed in the Law, requires to be done.

CHAP. XX. Of Christian Liberty, and Liberty of Conscience.
THe Liberty which Christ has purchased for Believers, under the Gospel,
consists, in their freedom from the guilt of sin, the condemning Wrath of God,
the Curse of the Moral Law; and, in their being delivered from this present
evil World, bondage to Satan, and Dominion of sin; from the evil of
afflictions, the sting of death, the victory of the grave, and everlasting
damnation; as also, in their free access to God, and their yielding obedience
unto him, not out of slavish fear, but a Childe-like love and willing mind.
All which, were common also to Believers under the Law. But, under the New
Testament, the liberty of Christians is further enlarged, in their freedom from
the yoke of the Ceremonial Law, to which the Jewish Church was subjected; and
in greater boldness of access to the Throne of Grace, and in fuller
communications of the free Spirit of God, than Believers, under the Law, did
ordinarily partake of.

II. God alone is Lord of the Conscience, and has left it free from the
Doctrines and Commandments of men, which are, in any thing contrary to his
Word; or beside it, if matters of Faith, or Worship. So that, to believe such
Doctrines, or to obey such Commands, out of Conscience, is to betray true
Liberty of Conscience: and the requiring of an implicit Faith, and an absolute
and blind obedience, is, to destroy Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also.

III. They, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty, do practice any sin, or
cherish any lust, do thereby destroy the end of Christian Liberty, which is,
that being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve the Lord,
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of our
life.

IV. And because the Powers which God has ordained, and the liberty which
Christ has purchased, are not intended by God, to destroy, but mutually to
uphold and preserve one another; They, who upon pretense of Christian Liberty,
shall oppose any lawful Power, or the lawful exercise of it, whether it be
Civil or Ecclesiastical, resist the Ordinance of God. And, for their publishing
of such Opinions, or maintaining of such Practices, as are contrary to the
light of Nature, or to the known Principles of Christianity, whether concerning
Faith, Worship, or Conversation; or, to the Power of Godliness; or, such
erroneous Opinions or Practices, as either in their own nature, or in the manner
of publishing or maintaining them, are destructive to the external Peace and
Order which Christ has established in the Church, they may lawfully be called
to account, and proceeded against by the Censures of the Church, and by the
Power of the Civil Magistrate.

CHAP. XXI. Of Religious Worship, and the Sabbath Day.
THe light of Nature shows that there is a God, who has Lordship and
Sovereignty over all, is good, and does good unto all, and is therefore to be
feared, loved, praised, called upon, trusted in, and served, with all the
heart, and with all the soul, and with all the might. But, the acceptable way
of Worshipping the true God, is instituted by himself, and so limited by his
own revealed Will, that he may not be Worshipped according to the imaginations
and devices of men, or the suggestions of Satan, under any visible
representation, or any other way not prescribed in the holy Scripture.

II. Religious Worship is to be given to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
and to him alone; not, to Angels, Saints, or any other Creature: and, since the
Fall, not without a Mediator; nor in the mediation of any other, but of Christ
alone.

III. Prayer, with Thanksgiving being one special part of Religious Worship,
is, by God, required of all men: and, that it may be accepted, it is to be made
in the Name of the Son, by the help of his Spirit, according to his Will, with
understanding, reverence, humility, fervency, faith, love, and perseverence;
and, if vocal, in a known tongue.

IV. Prayer is to be made for things lawful, and for all sorts of men living,
or that shall live hereafter: but, not for the Dead, nor for those of whom it
may be known, that they have sinned the sin unto death.

V. The reading of the Scriptures with godly fear; the sound Preaching and
Conscionable Hearing of the Word, in obedience unto God, with understanding,
faith, and reverence; singing of Psalms with grace in the heart; as also, the
due administration, and worthy receiving of the Sacraments instituted by
Christ; are all, parts of the ordinary Religious Worship of God: Beside
Religious Oaths, Vows, Solemn Fastings, and Thanksgivings, upon special
occasions, which are, in their several times and seasons, to be used, in an
holy and religious manner.

VI. Neither Prayer, nor any other part of Religious Worship, is now under the
Gospel, either tied unto, or made more acceptable by any place in which it is
performed, or toward which it is directed: but God is to be Worshipped every
where, in Spirit and Truth; as in private Families daily, and in secret, each
one by himself; so, more solemnly, in the public Assemblies, which are not
carelessly, or wilfully to be neglected, or forsaken, when God, by his Word or
Providence, calls thereunto.

VII. As it is of the Law of Nature, that, in general, a due proportion of time
be set apart, for the Worship of God; so, in his Word, by a positive, Moral,
and perpetual Commandment, binding all men, in all Ages, he has particularly
appointed One Day in Seven, for a Sabbath, to be kept holy unto him: which,
from the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, was the last Day
of the week; and, from the Resurrection of Christ, was changed into the First
Day of the week, which, in Scripture, is called the Lords Day, and is to be
continued to the end of the World, as the Christian Sabbath.

VIII. This Sabbath is then kept holy unto the Lord, when men, after a due
preparing of their hearts, and ordering of their common affairs before hand, do
not only observe an holy Rest, all the Day, from their own works, words, and
thoughts about their worldly employments, and recreations, but also are taken
up the whole time, in the public and private Exercises of his Worship, and in
the Duties of necessity, and mercy.

CHAP. XXII. Of lawful Oaths and Vows.
A Lawful Oath is a part of Religious Worship, wherein upon just occasion, the
person swearing, solemnly calls God to witness what he asserteth, or
promises; and to Judge him according to the truth, or falsehood of what he
swears.

II. The Name of God only, is that by which men ought to swear; and, therein it
is to be used with all holy fear and reverence. Therefore, to swear vainly, or
rashly, by that glorious and dreadful Name; or, to swear at all, by any other
thing, is sinful, and to be abhorred. Yet, as in matters of weight and moment,
an Oath is warranted by the Word of God, under the New Testament, as well as
under the Old; so, a lawful Oath, being imposed by lawful Authority, in such
matters ought to be taken.

III. Whosoever takes an Oath, ought duly to consider the weightiness of so
solemn an act; and therein to avouch nothing, but what he is fully persuaded is
the truth. Neither may any man bind himself by Oath to any thing but what is
good and just, and what he believes so to be, and what he is able, and
resolved to perform. Yet is it a sin, to refuse an Oath touching any thing that
is good and just, being imposed by lawful Authority.

IV. An Oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of the words, without
equivocation, or mental reservation. It cannot oblige to sin: but, in any thing
not sinful, being taken, it binds to performance, although to a man's own hurt.
Nor is it to be violated, although made to Heretics, or Infidels.

V. A Vow is of the like nature with a Promissory Oath, and ought to be made
with the like Religious care, and to be performed with the like faithfulness.

VI. It is not to be made to any Creature but to God alone: and, that it may be
accepted, it is to be made voluntarily, out of Faith, and conscience of Duty,
in way of thankfulness for mercy received, or for the obtaining of what we
want; whereby we more strictly bind our selves to necessary duties; or, to
other things, so far, and so long, as they may fitly conduce thereunto.

VII. No man may Vow, to do any thing forbidden in the Word of God, or what
would hinder any duty therein commanded; or which is not in his own power, and,
for the performance whereof, he has no promise of ability from God. In which
respects, Popish Monastical Vows, of perpetual single life, professed Poverty,
and Regular Obedience, are so far from being degrees of higher Perfection, that
they are superstitious and sinful snares, in which, no Christian may entangle
himself.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Civil Magistrate.
GOd, the supreme Lord and King of all the World, has Ordained Civil
Magistrates, to be, under him, over the People, for his own Glory, and the
Public good: and, to this end has armed them with the Power of the Sword,
for the defense and encouragement of them that are good, and for the punishment
of evil doers.

II. It is lawful for Christians to accept and execute the Office of a
Magistrate; when called thereunto: in the managing whereof, as they ought
especially to maintain Piety, Justice, and Peace, according to the wholesome Laws
of each Commonwealth; so, for that end, they may lawfully now, under the New
Testament, wage War, upon just and necessary occasion.

III. The Civil Magistrate may not assume to himself the administration of the
Word and Sacraments, or the power of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: yet, he
has authority, and it is his duty, to take order, that Unity and Peace be
preserved in the Church, that the Truth of God be kept pure, and entire; that
all Blasphemies and Heresies be suppressed; all corruptions and abuses in
Worship and Discipline prevented, or reformed; and all the Ordinances of God
duly settled, administered, and observed. For the better effecting whereof, he
has power to call Synods, to be present at them, and to provide that
whatsoever is transacted in them, be according to the mind of God.

IV. It is the duty of People to pray for Magistrates, to honor their Persons,
to pay them Tribute and other Dues, to obey their lawful Commands, and to be
subject to their Authority, for conscience sake. Infidelity, or difference in
Religion does not make void the Magistrates just and legal Authority, nor free
the People from their due obedience to him: from which, Ecclesiastical persons
are not exempted; much less has the Pope any Power and Jurisdiction over them,
in their Dominions, or over any of their People; and, least of all, to deprive
them of their Dominions, or lives, if he shall judge them to be Heretics, or
upon any other pretense whatsoever.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Marriage, and Divorce.
MArriage is to be between one Man and one Woman: neither is it lawful for any
Man to have more then one Wife, nor for any Woman to have more then one
Husband; at the same time.

II. Marriage was ordained for the mutual help of Husband and Wife, for the
increase of mankind with a legitimate issue, and of the Church with an holy
seed; and, for preventing of uncleanness.

III. It is lawful for all sorts of people to marry, who are able with
judgment, to give their Consent. Yet, is it the duty of Christians to marry
only in the Lord: And therefore such as profess the true reformed Religion,
should not marry with Infidels, Papists, or other Idolaters: Neither should
such as are godly, be unequally yoked, by marrying with such as are notoriously
wicked in their life, or maintain damnable Heresies.

IV. Marriage ought not to be within the degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity
forbidden in the Word; No can such incestuous marriages ever be made lawful by
any Law of man or consent of Parties, so as those persons may live together as
man and wife. The man may not marry any of his wives kindred, nearer in blood,
then he may of his own; nor, the woman, of her husbands kindred, nearer in
blood, then of her own.

V. Adultery, or fornication committed after a Contract, being detected before
marriage, gives just occasion to the innocent party to dissolve that Contract.
In the case of Adultery after marriage, it is lawful for the innocent party to
sue our a Divorce: And, after the Divorce, to marry another, as if the
offending party were dead.

VI. Although the Corruption of man be such as is apt to study arguments,
unduely to put asunder those whom God has joined together in marriage: yet,
nothing but adultery, or such wilful desertion as can no way be remedied, by
the Church, or Civil Magistrate, is cause sufficient of dissolving the bond of
marriage: Wherein, a public, and orderly course of Proceeding, is to be
observed; And, the persons concerned in it, not left to their own wills and
discretion, in their own Case.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Church.
THe Catholic or Universal Church which is invisible, consists of the whole
number of the Elect, that have been, are, or shall be gathered into One, under
Christ the Head thereof; and is, the Spouse, the Body, the Fullness of Him that
fills all in all.

II. The Visible Church, which is also Catholic or Universal, under the
Gospel (not confined to one Nation, as before, under the Law) consists of all
those, throughout the World, that profess the true Religion; and, of their
Children: and is, the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, the House and Family of
God, out of which, there is no ordinary possibility of Salvation.

III. Unto this Catholic Visible Church, Christ has given the Ministry,
Oracles, and Ordinances of God, for the gathering, and perfecting of the
Saints, in this life, to the end of the World: and does by his own presence and
Spirit, according to his promise, make them effectual thereunto.

IV. This Catholic Church has been sometimes more, sometimes less visible. And
particular Churches, which are Members thereof, are more or less pure,
according as the Doctrine of the Gospel is taught and embraced, Ordinances
administered, and Public Worship performed more or less purely in them.

V. The purest Churches under Heaven are subject both to mixture, and error:
and some have so degenerated, as to become no Churches of Christ, but
Synagogues of Satan. Nevertheless, there shall be always a Church on Earth, to
worship God according to his will.

VI. There is no other Head of the Church, but the Lord Jesus Christ; Nor can
the Pope of Rome, in any sense, be head thereof: but is, that Antichrist, that
Man of sin, and Son of Perdition, that exalts himself, in the Church, against
Christ, and all that is called God.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Communion of Saints.
ALl Saints, that are united to Jesus Christ their Head, by his Spirit, and by
faith, have fellowship with him in his graces, sufferings, death, resurrection,
and glory: And, being united to one another in love, they have communion in
each others gifts and graces, and are obliged to the performance of such
duties, public and private, as do conduce to their mutual good, both in the
inward and outward man.

II. Saints by profession, are bound to maintain an holy fellowship and
communion in the worship of God, and in performing such other spiritual
services as tend to their mutual edification; as also, in relieving each other
in outward things, according to their several abilities, and necessities. Which
Communion, as God offers opportunity, is to be extended unto all those, who,
in every place, call upon the name of the Lord Jesus.

III. This Communion which the Saints have with Christ, does not make them, in
any wise, partakers of the substance of his Godhead; or, to be equal with
Christ, in any respect: either of which to affirm, is impious, and blasphemous.
Nor does their Communion one with another, as Saints, take away, or infringe
the title, or propriety which each man has in his goods and possessions.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Sacraments.
SAcraments are holy Signs, and Seals of the Covenant of Grace, immediately
Instituted by God, to represent Christ, and his benefits; and, to confirm our
interest in him; as also, to put a visible difference between those that belong
unto the Church, and the rest of the World; and, solemnly to engage them to the
service of God in Christ, according to his Word.

II. There is in every Sacrament a spiritual relation, or Sacramental union,
between the Sign and the Thing signified: whence it comes to pass, that the
Names, and effects of the one, are attributed to the other.

III. The Grace which is exhibited in, or by the Sacraments rightly used, is
not conferred by any power in them: neither does the efficacy of a Sacrament
depend upon the Piety, or Intention of him that does administer it: but, upon
the work of the Spirit, and the word of Institution, which contains, together
with a Precept authorizing the use thereof, a Promise of benefit to worthy
Receivers.

IV. There be only two Sacraments ordained by Christ our Lord, in the Gospel;
that is to say, Baptism and the Supper of the Lord: neither of which may be
dispensed by any, but by a Minister of the Word lawfully Ordained.

V. The Sacraments of the Old Testament, in regard of the spiritual things
thereby signified, and exhibited, were, for substance, the same with those of
the New.

CHAP XXVIII. Of Baptism.
BAptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, Ordained by Jesus Christ, not
only for the solemn Admission of the Party Baptized, into the Visible Church;
but also, to be unto him a sign, and seal of the Covenant of Grace, of his
ingrafting into Christ, of Regeneration, of Remission of sins, and of his
giving up unto God through Jesus Christ, to walk in newness of life. Which
Sacrament is, by Christ's own appointment, to be continued in his Church until
the end of the World.

II. The outward Element to be used in this Sacrament is Water, wherewith the
Party is to be Baptized, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, by a Minister of the Gospel, lawfully called thereunto.

III. Dipping of the person into the Water, is not necessary: but, Baptism is
rightly administered, by pouring, or Sprinkling water upon the Person.

IV. Not only those that do actually profess faith in, and obedience unto
Christ, but also the Infants of one, or both believing Parents, are to be
Baptized.

V. Although it be a great Sin, to contemn, or neglect this Ordinance, yet
Grace and salvation are not so inseparably annexed unto it, as that no Person
can be regenerated or saved, without it; or, that all that are Baptized, are
undoubtedly regenerated.

VI. The Efficacy of Baptism is not tied to that moment of time, wherein it is
administered; yet, notwithstanding, by the right use of this Ordinance, the
grace promised, is not only offered, but really exhibited, and conferred, by
the Holy Ghost, to such (whether of age, or infants) as that Grace belongs
unto, according to the Council of Gods own Will, in his appointed time.

VII. The Sacrament of Baptism is but once to be administered unto any person.

CHAP XXIX. Of the Lords Supper.
OUr Lord Jesus, in the night wherein he was betrayed, Instituted the Sacrament
of his Body and Blood, called the Lords Super, to be observed in his Church,
unto the end of the World, for the perpetual Remembrance of the sacrifice of
Himself, in his Death; the sealing all benefits thereof unto true Believers,
their Spiritual nourishment and growth in him, their further engagement in, and
to, all duties which they owe unto him; and, to be a bond, and pledge of their
Communion with him, and with each other, as members of his mystical Body.

II. In this Sacrament Christ is not offered up to his Father; nor, any real
Sacrifice made at all, for remission of sins of the quick or dead; but only a
Commemoration of that one offering up of himself, by himself, upon the Cross,
once for all: and, a spiritual Oblation of all possible praise unto God, for
the same: So that, the Popish Sacrifice of the Mass (as they call it) is most
abominably injurious to Christ's one, only Sacrifice, the alone Propitiation for
all the sins of his Elect.

III. The Lord Jesus has, in this Ordinance, appointed his Ministers to
declare his word of Institution to the people; to pray, and bless the Elements
of Bread and Wine, and thereby to set them apart from a Common to an Holy Use;
and, to Take, and Break the Bread, to Take the Cup, and (they communicating
also themselves) to give both to the Communicants; but, to none who are not
then present in the Congregation.

IV. Private Masses or receiving this Sacrament by a Priest or any other,
alone; as likewise, the denial of the Cup to the people, worshipping the
Elements, the lifting them up or carrying them about for adoration, and the
reserving them for any pretended religious use, are all contrary to the nature
of this Sacrament, and to the Institution of Christ.

V. The Outward Elements, in this Sacrament, duly set apart, to the uses
ordained by Christ, have such relation to him crucified, as that, truly, yet
Sacramentally only, they are sometimes called by the name of the things they
represent, to wit, the Body and Blood of Christ; albeit, in substance and
nature, they still remain, truly, and only Bread and Wine, as they were before.

VI. That Doctrine which maintains a change of the substance of Bread and Wine,
into the substance of Christ's Body and Blood (commonly called
Transubstantiation) by Consecration of a Priest, or by any other way, is
repugnant, not to Scripture alone, but even to common Sense and Reason;
overthrows the nature of the Sacrament, and has been, and is, the cause of
manifold Superstitions; yea, of gross Idolatries.

VII. Worthy receivers outwardly partaking of the Visible Elements, in this
Sacrament, do then also, inwardly by faith, really and indeed, yet not carnally
and corporally, but Spiritually, receive, and feed upon Christ crucified, and
all benefits of his death: The Body and Blood of Christ being then, not
corporally or carnally, in, with, or under the Bread and Wine; yet, as really,
but Spiritually, present to the Faith of Believers in that Ordinance, as the
Elements themselves are to their outward senses.

VIII. Although ignorant, and wicked men receive the outward Elements, in this
Sacrament: yet, they receive not the Thing signified thereby; but by their
unworthy coming thereunto, are guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord to
their own damnation. Wherefore, all ignorant, and ungodly persons, as they are
unfit to enjoy communion with him, so are they unworthy of the Lords Table;
and, cannot without great sin against Christ while they remain such, partake of
these Holy Mysteries, or be admitted thereunto.

CHAP. XXX. Of Church Censures.
THe Lord Jesus, as King and Head of his Church, has therein appointed a
Government, in the hand of Church Officers, distinct from the Civil Magistrate.

II. To these Officers, the Keys of the Kingdom of of Heaven are committed: by
virtue whereof, they have power, respectively, to retain, and remit sins; to
shut that Kingdom against the impenitent, both by the Word, and Censures; and
to open it unto penitent sinners, by the Ministry of the Gospel, and by
Absolution from Censures, as occasion shall require.

III. Church Censures are necessary, for the reclaiming and gaining of
offending Brethren, for deterring of others from the like offenses, for purging
out of that Leaven which might infect the whole Lump, for vindicating the
honor of Christ, and the holy profession of the Gospel, and for preventing the
wrath of God, which might justly fall upon the Church, if they should suffer
his Covenant, and the Seals thereof to be profaned by notorious and obstinate
offenders.

IV. For the better attaining of these ends, the Officers of the Church are to
proceed by Admonition; suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for a
season; and, by Excommunication from the Church; according to the nature of the
crime, and demerit of the Person.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Synods and Councels.
FOr the better Government, and further edification of the Church, there ought
to be such Assemblies, as are commonly called Synods or Councels.

II. As Magistrates may lawfully call a Synod of Ministers, and other fit
Persons, to consult and advise with, about matters of Religion; So, if
Magistrates be open Enemies to the Church, the Ministers of Christ, of
themselves, by virtue of their Office; or, they, with other fit persons, upon
delegation from their Churches, may meet together in such Assemblies.

III. It belongs to Synods and Councels, ministerially to determine
Controversies of Faith, and cases of Conscience, to set down Rules and
Directions for the better Ordering of the public Worship of God, and
Government of his Church; to receive Complaints, in Cases of
Maladministration, and, authoritatively, to Determine the same: which
Decrees, and Determinations, if consonant to the Word of God, are to be
received with reverence, and submission; not only, for their agreement with the
Word, but also for the Power, whereby they are made, as being an Ordinance of
God appointed thereunto in his Word.

IV. All Synods or Councels, since the Apostles times, whether general, or
particular, may err; and, many have erred. Therefore, they are not to be made
the Rule of Faith, or practice; but, to be used as an Help in both.

V. Synods and Councels are to handle, or conclude nothing, but that which is
Ecclesiastical: and are not to intermeddle with Civil Affairs which concern the
Commonwealth; unless by way of humble Petition, in cases extraordinary; or, by
way of Advice, for satisfaction of Conscience, if they be thereunto required by
the Civil Magistrate.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the State of men after death, and of the Resurrection of the
dead.
THe Bodies of men, after death, return to dust, and see corruption: but, their
Souls (which neither dye, nor sleep) having an immortal subsistence,
immediately return to God who gave them: the Souls of the Righteous, being then
made perfect in holiness, are received into the highest Heavens, where they
behold the face of God, in light and glory, waiting for the full Redemption of
their Bodies. And the Souls of the wicked are cast into Hell, where they remain
in torments and utter darkness, reserved to the Judgment of the Great Day.
Beside these two Places, for Souls separated from their bodies, the Scripture
acknowledges none.

II. At the Last Day, such as are found alive, shall not dye, but be changed:
and, all the Dead shall be raised up, with the self same bodies, and none
other, although with different qualities, which shall be united again to their
Souls for ever.

III. The Bodies of the unjust, shall, by the power of Christ, be raised to
dishonor: the Bodies of the just by his Spirit, unto honor; and, be made
conformable to his own glorious Body.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the last Judgment.
GOd has appointed a Day, wherein he will judge the World, in righteousness,
by Jesus Christ, to whom, all Power and Judgment is given of the Father. In
which Day, not only the Apostate Angels shall be judged, but likewise all
Persons that have lived upon Earth, shall appear before the Tribunal of Christ,
to give an Account of their Thoughts, Words, and Deeds; and, to receive
according to what they have done in the Body, whether good or evil.

II. The End of Gods appointing this Day, is, for the manifestation of the
Glory, of his Mercy, in the eternal salvation of the Elect; and, of his
Justice, in the damnation of the Reprobate, who are wicked, and disobedient.
For, then, shall the Righteous go into everlasting life, and receive that
fullness of Joy and Refreshing, which shall come from the presence of the Lord:
but, the wicked, who know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
shall be cast into eternal Torments, and be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.

III. As Christ would have us to be certainly persuaded, That there shall be a
Day of Judgment, both to deter all men from Sin, and for the greater
consolation of the Godly in their Adversity; so, will he have that Day unknown
to men, that they may shake off all carnal Security, and be always watchful,
because they know not at what hour the Lord will come; and, may be ever
prepared to say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Amen.

Charles Herle, Prolocutor. Cornelius Burges, Assessor. Herbert Palmer,
Assessor. Henry Robroughe, Scriba. Adoniram Byfield, Scriba.


FINIS.

