THE VVELCH-MANS WARNING-PIECE.

As it was delivered in a Sermon in Shropshire at the Assembly when the
Resolution was agreed upon. AND Now published for the cood of all her
Countrymen in these parts.

By SHON ap MORGAN.

In the Anti-Prelatian Year. 1642. Wherein her gives Kot thanks, that her was no
Beshit.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Wood, and Henry Marsh. 1642.

THE WELCH-MANS WARNING-PIECE.
COot people, it is written in the pook of Kot, I cannot tell well where; put her
was sure it was tere, Vishilata torata, tat is much to to say in her mutter
tongue, Wash and pray, wella go too, ten her must liver you test out of te pook
of Kot, her said pefore her cannot tell where, put her was warrant her, her was
tere. Autam Fater Atam was koot old man was warrant her, must use told
speration pecause acree pest wid te Creek and Eprue, Atam fater Atam was plashe
in Paradise, Kots nown house, prave house, prave plashe; nay her warrant her
it was a sweet plashe, were was all manner of prave tings, all manner prave tree,
Appol-tre, Pum-tre, Fig-tre, Pere-tre, eye all manner tree; yet Atam was fall,
eye and how was Atam fall, Atam was fall upon Heva, and how was Atam fall upon
Heva, for lack of coot take heed; Terefore take heed how you fall upon Heva;
tat is, how you fall on your Vences, your prave Guls, your painted punts; for
take heed to Vishilata torata, wash and pray, was vvarrant her keep her tesht
still. Heva, mother Heva was plasht tere too, Heva mother Heva was spy appol on a
Tree, a pock on her for her lapour, Heva eat appol, Heva gave appol to Atam, to
Fader Atam, to deceive koot old man, a pock on her again for her lapour: Coot
People take heed of Heva, for Heva tid teceive coot Fader Atam, and all woman
do still teceive man.

Terfore her say acain and acain, Vishilata torata, Wash and pray, her warrant
her keep her text still.

Lot old Fader Lot, was coot old man too, had two Wences, two pretty Wences to
her Taughters, Lot made Wine, Lot tid trink Wine, and Lot was trunk; and how
was Lot tunk, why with tinking of Wine: Coot People take heed of trinking of
Wine, tho its sweet; for trunkennesse is a creat sin, what tid Lot peloved
when he was tunke, tid he sleep, no, her tid lie with poth her novvn Taughters,
Opominable ting; nay Lot tid get her two Taughters we shild, which was very
naught; and why tid her so, for want of grace, vishilata torata, Wash and pray,
her vvarrant her keep her Text still.

Taffie, Taffie, her nown Countryman was porn in Monmouth-shire, near te Creek
of te well, was first man played Welsh Harp was prave King, and Saul was a
mighty King, but Taffie was wise King; yet Taffie was fell too, and where
was Taffie fell Taffie was fell upon Persepa: O how was Taffie fell upon
Pershepa, for lack of coot take heed; terfore take heed vishilata torata, wash
and pray, I warrant her keep her text still.

Shobe that holy and shust man, Shob had must Ox, mush Ass, mush sheep, mush
Cow, mush Calfe, mush Camel, creat house, mush shimney, yea mush all things;
yet shust man Shobe was fall too, and how was shust man Shobe fall, te Tiffell
took her threw her town, pressed her, and much shabs mush boil, mush sore, mush
all sickness, a pock on te Tiffell for her lapour, have no cood will remain
for te shust man Shobe; Terfore if te shust man Shobe was fall, her had need
take heed what her do, and what her say, Vishilata torata, wash and pray, I
warrant her keep her text still,

Tus you see good people, how tat Atam was fell, Heva was fell, Lot was fell,
Taffie was fell, shust man Shobe was fell, ye all was fell; And how was all
fell, all was fell from Kot to the Tivell, from Heaven to Hell; from Heaven
tat prave plasse, to Hell tat foul stinking plasse: Terfore Vishilata torata,
Wash and pray, Her warrant her keep her tesht still.

Tere are many more in te pook of Kot tat was fell too, Absolam was fell, and
how was Absolam fell, he was fell upon Damar his nown Sister; Shaul was fell,
and how to Jdolatry a creat deal more was fell too, more was fell too, tat
her cannot tell, put tey pe in te pook of Kot, and her said pefore her cannot
where, put tere tey be hers sure; Vishilata torata, wash and pray, her warrant
her keep her tesht still.

Prethren and Sisters, her hope tat none of you will pe offended at her
preachment and say her speaks well put her words and actions acree not: her
cannot shustifie her self, her was likewise fall too, and her was have creat
many faults, put her cive Kot tanks, her has always pin coverned py a cood
spirit, and my Toctrine has civen cood content unto most of you: Her has not
pin proud tat ye all know, her might have pin (a) beshit, tat her kiffe Kot
tanks her had more crace, and kad rather make a preachment here in a Tub, den
in the Tower: Terefore her shall make use of her test, and Vishilata torata,
wash and pray, tat her come not in tat place, her warrant her keep her Test
still. But her must now come to make some uses.

Peloved People you must first take heed of curosity, or her will pe trown out
of Paradise, out of dat prave plasse, dat sweet plasse. Vishilata torata, wash
and pray her warrant keep her tesht still.

Secondly, Take heed of peing tunk for fear dat te Tiffel catch her, and so her
nev^^ come acain to see her Friends and Cou^trymen. Vishilata torata, wash and
pray her warrant her keep her tesht.

Thirdly, take heed of whoring, for tat i^ a creat sin, and will pring you to
te Tiffell, put Vishilata torata, wash and pray, her warrant her keep her tesht
still.

Terfore cood people take heed, and tim^ of her preachment, and contemn not te
advice of te man of Kot; for if her do, Ko^ will plague her in it is World, and
in t^^ World to come. Vishilata torata, wash and pray, her warrant her keep her
tesht.

Tus peloved her may see wat creat danger it is to pe tunkerds, horemasters, and
inteed to be naught: pe cood fellows, put not tunk; love woman, put not hores;
live honestly and Cot will please ye. So for it is time her has tone; for her tink
tat Tinner is almost ready, to which Kot pring her for mercy sake, Amen.

FINIS

