THE APOLOGY OF COLONEL JOHN WERE,

In vindication of his Proceedings since the beginning of this present
PARLIAMENT.

decorative device

December" 20th LONDON, Printed in the year. 1644.

The Apology of Colonel John Were in vindication of his proceedings, since
the beginning of this present Parliament.
MY Conscience is within me clear, and quiet, and therein I have given
satisfaction to my self my actions were not obscure, nor done in darkness,
and they render me an entire man to all that saw them, or knew me; yet am I so
unhappie as to suffer by the mere guilt of rumor, or by some aspertions cast
upon me by the subtle enemy, whose interest is the discord of friends, wherein
I can claim no privilege above my Savior, who was not free of slanders;
It Is for his cause that I glory I have shed my blood, nor need I repine to be
a sufferer like him: And certainly neither the hardship of mine own
imprisonment, nor the distressed condition of my tender family, could have
induced me to have dained so much to a false rumor, as to have given this open
satisfaction, were there any more noble way left me to vindicate my reputation,
more precious, then my life; But since necessity inforceth me to this Apology,
take it, without gloss or smooth expression, my co^merce is more with the
Soldier then the Orator, and plain truth is to it self a sufficient
countenance. I undertook not this service for private intrest, revenge, or
pay, I had an estate co^petent left by my Anccstors, the office of a Justice of
Peace I long had executed in my Country, and I wanted not solicitations to
adheare to the Kings party, being put into the Commission of Array, but upon
Assembly of the Gentry that were that way affected, hearing some discourse that
tended both to the dishonor of God, and the overthrow of the common liberty, I
totally disavowed the executing that Commission, and fully resolved with my
utmost to promote the purity of Religion, and the public peace, I applied my
self to Sir Peter Prediux a Deputy Leiftenant, and from him received a
Commission in the Militia, being the first, and I suppose the last Gentleman in
Devonshire, that raised and continued a Regement in that County, and since have
raised several Regements at my own charge, at several times all actually
employed in the Parliaments service; the particulars of which employments have
been thus. Upon the Lord Marquest of Hartford and Sir Ralph Hoptons first
surprising Shurburne Castle, a party of the County of Devon were summoned at
Collumpton, whether I brought a considerable number and was desired to march
thither and to persuade that Regement, which I did, and by reason of my
respects and vicinity with them, I got readily their consent, though they had
stood mute to others before, and marched with three companies of them, this was
my first employment. The next Sir Ralph Hopton and the Cornish forces advancing
toward Exon, I brought into that City a good supply of men and maintained it,
until we were relieved by the Earl of Stanford our then General, where, for
that service and keeping Cowley Bridge with much disadvantage against a violent
storm I received a memorial of their loves and thanks, then was Belfore made
by the said Earl my Major, I was commanded to send him with 100. Dragoneares,
to march with the Army, the rest of the Regement to disband which I did: Then
after their defeat in Cornewell, Plymouth being besieged, I was commanded to
bring what force I could to Exon to join with the Regements there, where I
brought a considerable number of my friends and neighbors, and from thence
marched to Modbury, and after a long fight the enemy was beaten thence, and
Plymouth relieved, and a treaty of both Counties Devon and Cornewell assented
to, and my Regement with the rest of the Army was disbanded, the treaty broke
off I was again commanded to bring my Regement to Crediton, whence I marched to
Stratton, where I continued all the fight and came off with my general who
continued to the last, having I suppose not twenty men left with him, when he
fired with our assistance diverse pieces of Ordnance upon the Enemy, the Earl
went to ^iford, thence to Exon, I to mine own house where Sir Ralph Hopton
bei^^ upon his march, I received an other Summon to bring in my Regement, (...)
as many as I could procure to Exon which I did, thence upon a Petition, I was
sent to Tewerton, where I was like to have been betrayed by the Mayor, and was
forced wanting Arms Ammunition and men, to go for Taunton, having got up what
force I could. I marched through the enemies quarters with much hazard, and came
again to Exon, where I continued all the siege: after the surrender of that
City upon composition, I went to my own house, where I could not stay without
I would take up Arms for the King, which rather then I would do, I chose to
leave my wife, children and estate to the mercy of the Enemy, though the
Parliament was then in it is lowest ebb. Then I came to Lym^, thence to London,
where I was again employed by the Parliament, and sent to Lyme with about 200.
men, with them I beat up Bridgport quarters of the Enemy and took 100. good
horse, which so hartened the Inhabitants about Hemlocke, that they generally
rose to free themselves, and sent to me for some assistance of Horse and
Officers, which by a general consent of a Council of War at Lyme was
granted, and Major Butler sent with 60. Horse thither, to bring them to me at
Studcombe House, which order, if it had been observed, I at that instant
beating up Collinten quarters of the Enemy, taking most of that Garrison
prisoners, I desire all Deavonshire men to consider whether I had not been
master of the field as far as Exon, this was done before Leifetenant Colonel
Blakes coming down, these successes drew Prince Morris to leave Plymoth, and
besige Lyme where I continued all the siege being shot, though not governor,
yet commander in chief of most of the forces in the town, in all this time I
believe there was not the least suspicion of infidelity in me, for I was
received into my Country with as much honor as they could give, or I expect
for the good service I had don, witness the great appearance I had at the first
summons, when his Excellency came down, which I think all the Army can testify,
for within a short time I raised two Regements, one of horse, the other of
foot without money; when his Excellency marched into Cornewell, I went with him
never being off my Regement, until our Arms as is well known, were laid
down, and then had not gone from them but upon this occasion, quarters and
good terms being compounded for, by Major General Skippon and the Council
of War, we marched from Castle door to Lostwithiell, where at the Bridge
were many barbarismes used, some killed, others flung into the water, most
plundered, and three of my colors taken away, and I for the safety of my life
was forced to cross the water, and with much speed to recover the hill where
Major General was, I acquainted him with the passages, and there staying
until the Army came up, I met with Major Belfore, sometimes Major of my
Regement by order aforesaid, but then turned to the King, who told me he wished
me well, and saw that I was wet, and heard that I was wounded, and that our
Army was to lie that night upon the hill, where they would be plundered,
advised and persuaded me to go to his quarters, engaging the faith of a
Soldier be would see me safe to our Army again the next morning, then I
finding my self in a wett and sick condition so as that nights cold lodging
might have endangered my life, I took his word, relying some thing upon our
former intimacy of acquaintance, but principally upon that faith, which if
broken, so much dishonoreth a Gentleman or Soldier, and with two of the Convoy
went Master Salway my Chalplaine and Cornet Davis who accompanying me to
Liskard, where we were civily dealt withal that night, the next morning when
we thought to return, the house and town were full of soldiers, where we had
been barbarously used had not the convoy protected us, then sending for
Belfore, I desired him to make good his promise unto me which he basely and
ungentlemanlike denied saying, there had been much inquiry for me that night,
and that I must go to Sir Richard Grendvile, I was not then in a condition to
contest more then with bare words, and so went with him to Grendvile, who lay
in the same town, no sooner came I thither, but I acquinted him with the
passage, desiing him as he was a Soldier to send me to the Army again, which he
refused saying, I had been the most active enemy they had and he was glad he
now had me in his custody, and that he would send me to the King upon breach of
the Articles, in learning the rode way with the Army, I told him it was
Belfores engagement brought me thither, he replied, Belfore was a fool to
promise more then he could perform, and so put me into another room, and
within a short time sent for me again, telling me I must either to the King or
serve him, and then I should not want encouragements; truly this their base
carriages did much amase me, and perceiving I could not avoid going to the
King, of whom by reason of my former actions, I could expect little favor, or
suffer under the hands of an unruly multitude who thronged about me with many
menaces, in this extremity I promised to serve the King, but with a secret
reservation to my self, no further then he complied with his Parliament,
holding it no sin to deceive them that had been twice perfidious to me, then
Grendvile gave me in charge to Major Mohum, who brought me that evening to the
(...) Goring, unto whom upon the same constraint as to Grendvile, I ma^^ the
same promise; then was I carried that night with a sufficient guard to Master
Trefrayes house, the next day to Okehampton, where I met our Army, but was not
suffered to stay there, but by Mohum was carried a mile out of the town, where
my Major came unto me, to him I gave forty shillings for to buy victuals for
my Soldiers, and told him privately and passionately how basely I had been
used by Belfore, desiring him to assure the Major General I would speedily be
with him, for I would never serve against the Parliament, this he is more a
Soldier then to deny, if he do, I can prove his confession of it. Thence I was
carried to Tiverton where Sir John Bearkley lay, unto whom I made the same
promise as to Grenvile and Goring, and got of him a release for diverse
Soldiers there taken up, and brought them to mine own house, where giving
them money and victuals, I sent them to our Army, telling them with as much
assurance as in discretion was thought fit, I would never serve against the
Parliament; this I did to them and others, which I can prove if my own words
in my own cause be not current, the friday after the compossition I came to my
own house, the Sabbath following came Colonel Lindsie and some eight persons
more with him unto me, who demanded in a rough way of me the reason I had not
sent out my warrants, saying, when I was for the Parliament I was daily active,
now I did nothing swearing they would make me do i^ or ^end me to Ex^n, I
replied what I did for the Parliament I had commission for, and quarters for my
men now. I had neither then said Linsey write a letter to the Lord Goring and I
will carry it, and you shall have any thing upon it. I writ a smooth letter to
Goring, and had an order to free (...) from Ha^rton his then quarters* and for
me to quarter there, this Order I showed to M^hum, and so was freed of those
two tormentors, that night I intended to go for Taunton, but before night in
came Cockin and his troop, and Captain M^^^efor^ quartered at my house; then
sent I to Captain K^ to know whether he could not bring me twenty honest men
from Sampf^rd our neighbor Parish, and we would adventure upon that troop,
and bring them away, he said no, it was hard to trust Country follows with so
weighty a secret as concerns our lives, these fell^wes kept so strict a guard
over us as we could not escape without danger and infinite hazard, we wanting
horse and other accommodations for our dispatch; at last God offered a means
the which I took, this Captain Mu^^ifor^ desired me to make him Captain of
Tiverton Company, I pe^ceived by it a company would work much with him, which
I g^anted so he would ass^^t me in bringing in my Regement, he not without
oaths promised it then the next day being Sunday, I took the advantage and
car^ed him to the Constable of Halbertones house, unto whom I did openly before
Muddifor^ and Cockin^ quartermaster deliver a warrant, but before had privily
told him my intentions never to serve against the Parliament; and s^ewed them a
smooth letter that I had writ t^ Sir J^hn Bar^ and desired them to send it*
this bread such a confidence in them that Muddifor^ ride with me and
Quartermaster Baker to one Th^mas Knights house, where I had appointed Captain
Kerslake and his Leiuetenant to meet me where we dined, and after dinner under
pretense of this warrant which M^ddif^r^ had, we brought him in by ways some
seven miles near Milverton Heffeild where we understood of a troop of the
enemies horse not far before us, and Muddifor^ mistrusting by reason of our
whispering rid away, otherwise we had brought him away prisoner, then I and my
company posted to Taunton, where I was heartily welcomed by Leivtenant Colonel
Blake the governor of the Castle: the next day being monday, I sent one
Bartholomew Merson with warrants to countermand them I had delivered the day
before, commanding the C^untry to appear before me at Taunt^n, upon it diverse
came in, who I believe are in actual service now there I stayed aweeke, and
had continued longer as there was need, had not the London Pamphleteeres been
^^^l of the scand^ll of my revolt, which to clear, and to give the world
satisfaction of my integrity, by offering my self ready to wipe off that
aspertion came away, having with me a large testimony under the Governors
hands to Shasbury to Sir William Waller, with whom and Sir Arthur Hasterig I
had some discourse, thence I came to Southampton where I was imprisoned by his
Excellencies Order, otherwise I had come to London of mine own accord. But I
hear a rumor among the multitude that I,

Obj. 1. Suffered the Bridge to be taken by the Kings forces, otherwise they
had never entered Cornwall.

Ans. When the King entered Cornwall our Army was near 20 miles off, and I
then by command was at Lostwithell.

Obj. 2. That I had the keeping of a Bridge near the Lord Roberts house.

Ans. I sent by order a party of Dragoones thither, and kept it until by order
they were drawn off, as Captain Sheeres and other Captains can testify.

Obj. 3. That I had the command of a Castle near Lostwithell which was lost.

An. It Is true, a party of men were sent out of my Regement without my consent
theither by two cashiered Captains formerly under my command, but by what
order they were sent thither, or how discharged of that command I know not, I
believe no general officer will say he gave me the charge of that place,
there being but 18 men in it.

Ob. 4. That I quited the Post at Castledoore being there Commanded by Major
General Skippon.

An. It is true, I marched thither in the rear of my L. Generals Regement
with one part of five of my Regement, and there continued until my Lord
Generals Regement came back and routed mine, then I did my uttermost to
preserve the Ordnance and brought them into a lane nereby, and placed as many
men as I could make stand in a ground at most advantage, this I did of my self
when the Colonel of the other Regement withdrew himself.

Ob. But you have spoken words that do not tend to the honor of the Lord
General.

An. I confess I have spoken that in some passion which might have been well
left unsaid, which I will as nakedly confess as the rest being demanded, and I
hope not of that nature as to extinguish all former merit.

Obj. 6. That I carried my Regement to the King.

An. Let proof be made that I carried one man, or advised any so to do, or
was with the King then let me suffer to the utmost.

Obj. 7. That you were with Colonel Barkley, and did not desire him to demand
you upon the Articles.

Ans. It Is true I met him, but had I acquainted him and desired him to have
demanded me upon the Articles I believe I had never met him again for they
that cared not to break Articles upon no pretense, what would they have done
to me having some color for it, it would have certainly endangered my life.

And thus you have plain punctall Narration of my actions; wherein perhaps may
be some weaknesses; Let him accuse me that has not any; However I was neither
false, or prejudicial to the cause, though perhaps some slander insinuated by
the enemy (to work divisions) have represented such, as also the heat and
passion of a Soldier may carry him to some extravagancies when his heart is
real; I justify my actions, few men can all their cursory casual discourses;
if mine have erred, it has been on the right hand, out of too passionate zeal
to the good success of this cause; the which I so much tender, that I would
rather lie a prisoner, then interupt the proceedings thereof by an unseasonable
petition, though a trial be that which so much above all things I desire; my
present sufferance not so much grieving me as the present scandal I lie under,
and the frequent scoffings of the disaffected, to see me so much
discountenanced by those for whose prosperity I have forsaken wise, children,
house and lands, spilt my blood, having at this instant a wound green, a
bullet in my body, and not expended less then all; scarce having ought left to
yield my self and family a subsistence, especially where the expenses are not
small, But I wait deliverance from God and good men.

John Were.

FINIS.

