A SHORT DECLARATION OF THE Assembly of Divines, By way of Detestation of this
Abominable and Blasphemous OPINION,

That God is, and has an hand in, and is the Author of the Sinfulnesses of his
People;

Mentioned in a Book Entitled, Comfort for Believers, about their Sins and
Troubles.

Together with the Orders of both Houses of Parliament for the Burning of the
said Book by the hand of the common Hangman.

LONDON: Printed by John Field for Ralph Smith, at the Sign of the Bible in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, July 25. 1645.

Die Sabbathi, 12o. Julii, 1645.
COmplaint being this day made to the Lords in Parliament by the Assembly of
Divines, That a certain blasphemous and Heretical Book, Entitled, Comfort for
Believers, about their Sins and Troubles, is printed and published, being
written by John Archer* Mr. of Arts, sometime Preacher at All-Hallowes
Lumbardstreet London, deceased; which unless suppressed, will prove very
mischievous and Deregatory to this Church and State: Their Lordships much
abhorring the said Blasphemies, do award and adjudge: 1. That the said Book
shall be burnt by the hand of the Common-Hangman, in the new Palace
Westminster, in the midst of Cheapside, and in the middle of Smithfield, in the
County of Middl^sex, withal convenient speed. 2. That the Printer shall be
found out, who is to declare to this house by what Authority, and by whose
direction he printed and published the said Book. 3. That all the said Books
shall be called in, and no more to be sold, upon the Displeasure of this House;
And that all such who have any of the said Books in their hands, as well
private persons as Booksellers, shall bring them unto the Sheriffs of London
or one of them, as they will answer the contrary at their perils unto this
House. 4. That the Assembly of Divines are desired to draw up a Detestation of
the said Book, which is publicly to be read by an Officer at the burning
thereof; And that some of the said Assembly be present at the same time.


Io: Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Lunae, 14. Julii, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That a Book Entitled, Comfort
for Believers about their Sins and Troubles, shall be forthwith publicly
burnt by the hand of the common Hangman; Some of them in the Pallace-yard, and
other some in Cheapside, Smithfield, Paul's Churchyard, and the Exchange: And
that the Master and Wardens of the Company of Stationers, and every other
person in whose hands any of them do now remain, do deliver the same to the
Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, who are hereby required to see this Order put
in due execution.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Ordered, etc. That the Assembly of Divines do appoint some of their Members to
be present at the burning of these Books, and to declare to the people, the
Abominablenesse of it; and if there be cause, to vindicate the Author.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



A short Declaration of the Assembly OF DIVINES, Agreed upon Nemine
contradicente.
AS it has pleased the Honorable Houses of Parliament, out of their pious
care for preserving Religion pure, from the leaven of pernicious and
Blasphemous Doctrine, to Order the burning of this most scandalous Book; so
have they further appointed us to declare the abominablenesse thereof unto the
people. And we doubt not but every good Christian, as soon as he shall hear the
scope and contents of it, will, together with us, detest the horrid Blasphemy
therein asserted, and acknowledge the godly zeal, wisdom, and justice of
Authority, in Commanding it, as an execrable thing to be taken away, that it
may not remain amongst us, to provoke Gods wrath, and to produce such perilous
and pernicious fruits, whereby the souls of many may be corrupted to their
everlasting destruction.

For whereas, that most vile and Blasphemous Assertion, whereby God is avowed
to be the Author of sin, has hitherto by the general consent of Christian
Teachers and writers, both Ancient, and Modern, and these as well Papists as
Protestants, been not disclaimed only, but even detested and abhorred: yet in
this book it is, not closely intimated, or occasionally hinted, or i^
consideratly and through inadvertency stumbled upon, but openly, in express
Terms, and in a very foul manner propounded, maintained, and purposely at
large prosecuted, to wit,

Page 37.
That God is, and has an hand in, and is the Author of the sinfulnesses of his
people.

Page 36.
That he is the Author, not of those actions alone, in and with which sin is,
but of the very Pravity, Ataxy, Anomy, Irregularity and sinfulness it self
which is in them.

Page 37.
That God has more hand in men's sinfulness, then they themselves.

Page 38, 39.
That the Creatures sin does produce the greatest good, either in Gods glory,
or in the creatures happiness, as the next cause thereof, and that all that
good is only brought about by sin.

Page 39.
That it is as Incongruous and Inconvenient to make God the Author of the
Afflictions of the creature, as of the sins.

Page 48.
That by sins Believers are as much nurtured and fitted for Heaven as by any
thing else.

Page 48.
That God fits Believers for service in this world, by leading them into sins.

Page 52.
That no course is so full, to remove or prevent sinful or pernicious troubles
for sin, as this looking on God the Author of it, and the good which he brings
about by it; which, because it is rarely done by Believers, and indeed hardly
known, he therefore professes to have enlarged himself upon it.

In these and many other like terms has he set forth this bl^sphemous
Doctrine.

And further, he condemns our Orthodox Writers, for that they have only
granted,

Page 36, 37.
That God is willing sin should be, and that he permits it, and orders
circumstances about its production, and overrules it, and has an hand in, and
is the Author of the physical or moral act, in and with which sin is, saying
that they have herein erred on the other hand, and made sin more of the
Creature, and it self, and less from God then it is.

Besides, the main scope of the Book is to persuade men,

Page 4.
Not to be oppressed or perplexed in heart, for any thing whatsoever befalls
them either in sin or affliction: As if our Savior when he says, Let not your
hearts be troubled (for that is the ground upon which he builds) had intended
to dehort his Disciples from being troubled for their sins.

Very great is both the danger and scandal which would from so detestable a
Position as this arise, if it should be suffered without control to be
published and dispersed abroad, especially in such a time as this, when on the
one hand multitudes make use of the specious name of Liberty for a cloak of
naughtiness, and of admitting, and professing many perverse and corrupt
opinions, exceeding injurious to the Gospel of Christ, and to the power of
godliness: and on the other hand, many watch for our halting, and glory in
nothing more against us, then in those advantages which the weakness and
instability of such as are carried about with every wind of Doctrine, and are
not settled and rooted in the truth, does most unhappily minister unto them, to
the unspeakable prejudice of the Church of Christ, and obstructing of that
blessed Reformation, which is by all good men so earnestly desired.

Exceeding dangerous it is unto the souls of men, both as a means to instill
into them blasphemous and impure conceits of the Majesty of our most holy God,
as also by working them to a slighting, and disregarding of sin; and
consequently letting loose the rains to all corrupt and licentious living (for
by how much the less the trouble is after sin committed, by so much the
greater usually is the boldness in the Committing of it)

And the scandal hence arising is every whit as great, both in regard of the
offense, which is thereby given unto the Reformed Churches, who in their
public Confessions, make Satan, and man himself the only causes or Authors of
sin, and some of them do in those their Confessions by name damn this wicked
Position: And also in regard of the great advantage which it gives to our
Common adversaries the Papists, who have hitherto only calumniously charged the
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches with so odious a crime (in the mean time
confessing that we do in words deny it as well as they themselves) whereas now
should this bo^k be tolerated, they might justly insult over us, and publish to
the world, that now in the Church of England it was openly, and impunely
maintained, That God is the Author of sin, Then which there is not any one
point, whereby they labor in their Sermons and popular Orations, to cast a
greater Odium (though most injuriously) upon the Reformed Churches.

And albeit the person mentioned to be the Author of this Book has been of
good estimation, for Learning and piety: yet since it has so deeply wounded
the honor and truth of God, We ought not at all to be by any such just
consideration withheld, from declaring but just detestation of so odious a
Book: for if any man, yet if an Angel from Heaven Preach any thing contrary to
the Gospel of Christ, the Apostle is not afraid to pronounce him accursed: And
indeed it is a very dangerous thing (and so much the more dangerous, by how
much the more ordinary and usual) to take up new and corrupt opinions upon
trust, only on this inducement, a persuasion which we have of the sanctity of
those persons, who are the Authors of them; for we ought to try the spirits
whether they be of God, and to search the Scriptures, whether the things taught
us be so or no; and having tried all things, to hold fast that which is good,
and upon no pretense whatsoever to depart from the form of sound words in the
Scriptures delivered unto us, or for the reverence or estimation of any man's
person to entertain any such opinions as do in the very words of them asperse
the honor and holiness of God, and are by all the Churches of Christ
rejected. And therefore most justly has Authority appointed execution in this
manner to be done upon this Book.

July 17. 1645. Henry R^brough, Scriba. Adoniram Byfield, Scriba.



