A VINDICATION OF Mercurius Elencticus. (alias) WHARTON. From the false
aspersions of the scandalous, abusive, and blasphemous pen of WILLIAM LILLY.
Our States Mountebanke, the Parliaments Jugler, the natural Astrologian, and
the Devils own ASTRONOMER. Not long since divulged in damnable black
Rhetorik, printed and sent abrord in a senseless Book; styled, The late Story
of Mr. WILL. LILLY. Together, With one word to an unknown Colonel, whom Lilly
feignes to be the Author of the said story; as also another to the Wizzard
himself.

Written by Mercurius Melancholicus well-wisher to the fraternity, and
prosperity of the Mercuries.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

A Vindication of Mercurius Elencticus (alias) WHARTON.
BEcause my weekly writing, is to no other intent or purpose, then to discover,
and manifest the crimes of this nation, the knavery and fraud of the people
therein, and the generality of the abominations committed in it. Think it not
strange if I particularly lay open, and evidently proclaim to each public
view the detestable guile, and politic inventions of that arch Wizzard
William Lilly, with which he seeks to cosen and delude the Commonwealth; as
a thing unobservable, and as though no body took notice of him: For which I
thought it not amiss to separate him by himself, and place him out of the
rank of all honest, nay all manner of men in general, as one not fit to
accompany a Christian. For indeed had I but once began his odious name in my
weekly sheet, I should hardly have writ any thing else, and besides should have
infected my whole discourse with the mere apprehension of his villainy. But not
to trifle away too much time upon so foul a subject, and possess my breast
any longer then needs I must, with his hateful conceits; I will come to the
point or occasion of my publishing this paper.

Not long since my brother Eleneticus in his second or third book (if you be
remembered) makes mention of a notable fraudulent action, committed by this
Wizzard Lilly in betraying a Lady contrary to her will, and causing her to
marry one far below her degree and quality, to the very much dishonor, both of
her self and the whole family of the Scroopes from which she descended, (but
you must be sure to Lilly's great profit and advantage) and so indeed relates
the whole story as it was acted (which I doubt not but you have already heard)
therefore it is to no purpose for me to recite it) thereby to perform his duty,
in informing the people of his base craftiness, and subtle delusions.

Which happened to the hands of the foresaid Wizzard, that he thereupon grew very
much troubled, that his perfidious knavery should be so openly discovered, and
apparently divulged to the whole world: And being through madness ignorant (at
the present) to invent any means to demonstrate his fury, remained very
discontented along time, till at the last about two months after the relation,
when it was almost forgotten* his block head bethought himself of this revenge;
and so composed a subtle piece of nonsensical English, printed it in two
sheets of paper, and guilds it over with a cloak of Th. As thus, To all
Gentlemen Cavailers of this kingdom, a Colonel Th. sends this discourse, etc.
when no such Col. I Will lay my life can be heard of, only a mere forgery of
Lilly: But yet he has another Title for the book it self, which is The late
story of Mr. Will. Lilly etc. Indeed it may well be styled so, it is a mere
story, you may swear it is one of his own penning; truly it is the
quintessence, nay it is the very extract of Nonsense, the only natural
character of simplicity. Do but mark how he begins (as it were) with a
Narration of his detesting or abhorring himself and actions, though in a blind
way, as from the mouth of the foresaid Col. (yet God knows his own words) and
so proceeds in his folly, with an examination of the Gentleman, the Lady, and
all parties whatsoever appertaining either to them or any else, whereby he
might know the truth concerning the said relation of Elencticus: But presently
cries it down, avers it for falsehood, and certainly concludes with himself
(but a satisfaction to no body else) that it is no such matter, only a mere
fable, a scandal reproachfully penned to bring an Odium upon his name, etc.

Thus this states grand Quack-salver flatters himself, and feeds his own
fancy, with mere delusions, thinking to purblind the eyes of the people with
that abominable scandalous Pamphlet, as his own already are with gazing upon
the Stars: but alas! he is much deceived, all this will not serve; noe, nor
can all his infernal black Art absterge, and cleanse his putrified name and
actions from their manifold corruptions, and their merited infamy.

Look next how the Coxcombe, goes on, and presents a few Astrologicall lines in
the shade of a Letter from the said Col. bur I cannot conceive any Cavalier
invented it; for to speak the truth, it carries an excellent style, in faith it
is admirable Rhetorical nonsense, Excellentissimum and supremo gra^u,
pro-fec-to, it is worthy admiration, I do not think but he dived to the very
bottom of his Father Pluto's budget for it; for it is impossible his mossy pate
should produce such a monstrous miraculous piece of Eloquence: well, it shall
escape me narrowly, but that some time or other, when I have nothing else to do,
I Will spend an hour or two to try if I can get it by heart, and so say it by
roat, that I may carry it in my brain with me, up and down wheresoever I go;
For indeed I intend not to oppress my pocket with it, unless it be to perform
that necessary occasion, you know what I mean, for which Lilly himself is
hardly good enough.

Surely, he thought the City had great need of wast Paper, else he would never
have infected the Press with such a mess of ignorance: Truly it is pity that
such a large, long, tall, mighty Hobbyhorse should have no more wit; Lord! how
the villain plays the Ass in the City, like a Fool in a Comedy, that once
wrote a Letter to his Mistress before her face, after sealed it, so presented
and read it to her upon the Stage, in the presence of the whole Multitude; just
so has this Idiot done, goes and writes a Letter, a mere forgery, as from a
Colonel, and directs it to himself, so answers it according to his own
discretion, and after divulged it to the vast world. I pray tell me, which act
containd the more simplicity, and which of these two Idiots was the greater
fool? Truly it is a Question soon to be resolved, for it is a very easy matter
to say Lilly, whom I judge to be the worse of the two, in that he is a very
great, proper Hobgoblin, and one that more deserves, and better beseems the
place then any of his own Art I know. Go, go Lilly, I am ashamed an Astrologer
should commit and be guilty of such deformed actions: the very Boys, could
they but understand thy Eleganticall language, would point, and hoot at thee up
and down the streets; But perge (Lilly) quid sequitur? It Is very well; what!
more nonsense yet?

In faith, here is such a heap of infernal Ignorance, that my eyes never
before beheld; I wonder where Lilly borrowed it: borrowed, there is a word
indeed, truly you are mightily mistaken, it is his own invention, it as
naturally flows from the Conduit of his profound Brain, as does clear water
out of a Spring.

But you shall hear the sequent, which is an answer to his own Letter, which I
mentioned before; I would have you read it (if you can) but I fear it will
puzzle you: for indeed it dazzled my eyes at the first beholding, it was so
glazed over with impudence, and his brazen face had cast forth such a luster
upon each live, that I could not have the patience to read it any more then
once over, and truly thought that too much, for I could scarce tell how to pick
sense out of it, but at lengh understood his meaning; where he strives to
possess the people, that he acted nothing dishonestly, or to the prejudice of
the aforesaid Lady, in the least degree, with many such like subtle
persuasions: But let him believe that will, for my own part I know, Elencticus
to be (contrary to his false definition) an honest, discreet, moderate, wise
Gentleman, one noe ways guilty of what he imputes to him, nor one whit
meriting the infamous (though false) scandals with which this scurvy Lilly has
abused him, and that all who know him can testify.

Well, Reader, I hope I am not to tedious in my writing, neither have I
offenped thy cares with my discourse, truly if I have, I crave thy pardon; if
otherwise, I will yet intrude somewhat more upon thy patience, and tell but a
very little more, and so conclude.

You know a Prophet's not without honor, except in own his country (truly a
very good maxim) wherefore Lilly says himself he is very much esteemed beyond
the Seas (far enough off England you must think) As in Italy, Venice, Paris,
and many other places, but I don't know where; yet this I Am sure, that for my
part I never heard any of his own nation speak well of him. But it is no
wonder, for as long as he is praised, and esteemed so in the places aforesaid,
what needs he be reputed here? I but, how can ye tell he is so regarded? How
can I tell, marry, there is a question withal my heart, why, does not he say so
himself? what greater testimony can you have? Indeed if you expect any other
witness, I must entreat you to be silent, or else e'ne go seek one; for I
conceive it to be a bottomless piece of business, and you may seach till
Doomsday and not find another, unless you meet with Collonell Th. by chance;
indeed I think it must be by the wheel of fortune, for if one went on purpose
to look him, he should find it as hard a task as ever he undertook in his
life: I Would hardly (for Lilly's whole estate) be bound to wear one pair of
shoes till I accomplished it; for should I so engage my self, it is doubt in the
fine I should be glad to run to the Wizzard, and get him to unmask himself,
reassume the name, and metamorphise his rotten carcass (as before) from a
Round-headed jugler, a divelish Negromancer, and a vile Astronomer; to a Civil
Cavalier, a Colonel, etc. which are very unfit (a Hangman rather would have
better becom'd) and should I have faill'd of my hopes there, truly I fear,
that I should continually wandered like a Goose barefoot; but I intend not to
run headlong into that labyrinth.

Therefore you must of necessity believe him, without you make a twelve-months
journey on purpose, to go into the said countries, and so know the truth; but
I think it is as good save that labor, as you should arrive there, to hear no
better of him then you do, or may imagine; this is ^n, opinion, that I believe
what I suppose to be true, you believe what he says (if you can) I will not
strive to diswade any from their good thoughts of him: for indeed I think,
there are very few or none conjecture any at all.

What do you think he says next, The Cavaliers suppose of him? (as he
reports) they esteem him no less then a very wise man: But I must tell you, a
mere Wizzard, a Conjurer, a Sooth-sayer, a certain Sorcerer etc. by reason of
his many predictions and prophesies, which they sound (as he says) too true
to their own grief, loss, and damage* Since now (Reader) thou have heard the
whole discourse from the beginning to this place, and may judge according to
your mind, and because also you have read the opinion of the Cavaliers to the
full; let me presume to ask you one question: What do you conceive of his grand
Idolater? do you think he is a-? or a-? or both? or what (the Devil) do you
think he is? (Hah) truly were I but asked this quest. I would quickly in a word
resolve it; but being there is no necessity for my sentence, I Will bite my tongue
between my tooth, be silent for the present, and conceal it till a more
convenient opportunity, that I may then express my self to the full, to the
eternal infamy of his detestable, insolent, impudent, and brazen-faced name,
till which I will only trouble you with one word to the unknown Colonel, and
another to base Lilly himself, and so in brief finish all.

First let me know, and be acquainted with the (...) name, that I may the
better be satisfied, and mare audaciously speak to him: but can any man tell me
how I may attain to its knowledge? or of whom I (...) enquire to be punctually
resolved about it? It Is a (...) to be looked into, but I doubt very hard to be
answered (...) Do ye hear friend, I can you tell? or you? or you? (...)
what! can no body put in a word of comfort? if it were but a whisper in my ear,
that I might be satisfied I Will promise you I Will reveal it to no body; but I think
there is no fear of that, for I shall scarce come to hear it my self, yet I Will
try once more in a word* and if I am not pleased I will (...) and Cry
throughout the Kingdom, and then it may be I shall speed: surely some body
else besides Lilly must needs know this lousy Colonel; Gentlemen if you know
him, I pray speak that I may not continue in this ecstasy: what! are ye all
mute? not one word spoken? troath, I perceive here is little hopes, not one man
among so many thousand so wise as Lilly? very strange, and a mere paradox to
me, that a man (and a Colonel too) should live so obscurely: well, well, I see
there is no good to be done by this private inquisition, that to tell you the
plain truth, I am almost a weary, and near out of heart to proceed any further
in my inquiry; nevertheless I Will do as I said, and publish the Hue, and Cry I
spoke of, and if that takes not effect, I Will conclude (non est inventus)

The Hue, and Cry.
If there be either man, woman, or child, in city, country, or kingdom; that
can bring or tell any tidings of a reproachful, abusive, scandalous,
detestable, odious, abominable, wicked, insolent, damnable, impudent,
profane, unjust, outrageous, railing, immodest, beggarly, vapouring,
hare-braind, frantic, despicable, mad, envious, villainous coxcomb (Collonell
I mean) I can give no other description of him than you have heard, only this;
that he walks under the style of a civil Cavalier, and the two first letters
of his name be Th. that's all I can say; if therefore any of the aforesaid know
such a person, and where resident; or can tell the residue of his name; let
them repair to Mercurius Melancholicus living at the sign of the
wooden-frying pan, near hundred Ally in Flee^street: where they shall be
really entertained for their news; and receive what reward, or satisfaction
they can get for their pains.

How now my hearts, how do ye like this? do ye think it is not enough to find
him out if he be above ground? unless Lilly has vanished him with a word, I Am
sure it is, but how should I know whether it prospers? I Will wait a little while
longer yet, before I speak to him, and if it fall not out according to my
expectation, I Will presume another enterprise, and ask Lilly himself, but I Will
know this ungracious fellows name and habitation.

What! no news yet? no body come to bring me tidings of his discovery? he is
certainly concealed in some infernal cave, or run and hid his head in the
remotest part of the earth for his safety: but what ever is betide him, I am
fully resolved to know his name, if the Wizzard himself knows it, and
suddenly too (for I intend to be breife) wherefore I Will try all the skill I
have, and use what art I can invent to accomplish my designs. By the virtue of
Hocus pocus, Lilly, Arise, and answer for thy self; will thou not? Jubeo.
What! not yet? so he Mr. Lilly, Mr. Lilly, I say once again Surge. No
apparition yet? I see I am not a tright artist, yet me thinks I hear a noise,
what! William Lilly? you are very welcome, pray sit down, I have have one
question to ask you, and so have done, I Would very faigne know the Collonells
name thou writ'st with Th. in thy late story, that's all my business, prithee
resolve me; ha! what is it? how now, never a word? what* stark mute? why
Lilly, Lilly, what do you call him? -- nothing at all, truly I think so.

Behold the grand arch Wizzard Lillyes dumb,
And for himself can answer naught but mum:
He Is discontented, looks just like an Ass,
And's vexed he cannot invent a name, alas!
He Is mightily d^jected, etc. (vade Lilly)
Well seeing it is so I cannot hear of any name he has, I Will try my self to
invent one for him.

One word to the Coll.
Colonel Th-inchopps (truly it is a little too good) but however it shall serve;
what! good man impudence, art thou a Gentleman, a Scholar, a Cavalier, and
have so brazen fac'tly, and insolently, abused all three; it is well thou have
no being, it is well thou live I know not where, and art I know not what, it is
well I say thy name is written so obscurely, else I had found thee long ere
this, and bin revenged on thee for the wrong committed against my brother
Elenct. well, I Will say no more to thee till I know thee better, then look to
thy self, but I think thou needst not fear.

Another to Lilly himself.
Why how now William Lilly! what is the matter?
That with the people thou thus seek'st to flatter?
Is It cause you are slandered with a tale of truth?
Or is it for their welfare? no forsooth,
So, I believe thee, tell thy mind again,
Is It to deceive them only? tell us plain.
Is it because you are almost out of favor
With all goodmen? or for thy mis-behaviour.
Tell me the reasons moved the to write
This senseless book: was it for to vent thy spite
Against him that published thy deformities?
And so to faigne the lines he is written, lies:
Was It to that purpose? 'twill not serve thy turn,
Alas! it is nothing, for the book I Will burn:
Was it for this, that thou desire thy name
Should be dispierct abroad? Tush I Will proclaim
That often enough: was it lastly for the wit,
And eloquence, that is contained in it,
That thou have thus divulged it? I dare swear,
For that in chief, 'twon't be esteemed rare.
What was it then for? was it only to abuse
One honester than thee? I now my muse
Has found it out, for which she will vent her spleen
And make the wish (perhaps) it near had been.
Fie, out upon thee, for I much admire
Thy haughty mind should to this height aspire;
How could write such a piece of impudence?
Empty of wit or reason, void of sense,
Free from all honesty, full of sedition,
Not any one thing in it makes apparition
Of ought that is truth it is totally compild
Of scandalls, wrongs, abuses, words more vild
Then I can well express; it is truly written
In such a style as though it were besh --
Away, it stinks; I much abhor the thought,
Of its base lines, and him by whom 'twas wrought.
But yet I will so much abase my pen
As write the baseness of (thee) worst of men;
Why have thou so divulged thou puny Elfe
Thy bashlesse lies abroad, was it thy self
Did it alone? or was it the instigation,
Of thy grand Daddy Pluto caused thy passion,
'Twas he that wrought this folly in thy brain,
Which now thou have ejected, but in vain.
Not all thy black infernal Magic spells,
Fetched from Gehenna, where the devil dwells,
Not all thy Figures, Characters, or heart
Of deep Astronomy, nor any part
Contained in thee, nor yet thy cap and staff,
Or ought thou has't else, shall but make us laugh;
Not thy delusive words, nor one of these,
Or thy familiar Mephostophiles,
Shall onght avail thee for the people know
Thee very well, not to believe thee so,
It Is better that against another season
Thoud'st write a line that might but sent of reason;
But that thou can not do, monstrous Wizzard,
That lookst as though thou worest the devils vizzard:
Thou great hobgoblin, and the only imp
Of mighty Lucifer, hells chiefest pimp,
Thou Mountebank thou jugler, sole Magician,
Thou Nigromancer, our States Politician,
Thou scarecrow, bugbear, hobby horse; thou sot,
Thou cunning, crafty fellow, and what not?
Thou Astrologian, false Astronomer,
Depart my thoughts, vade celeriter.
I Am e vexed I have bestowed my pen and ink
On such a subject, to produce a stink
Throughout my Book; but surge once before
Thou go, that I may speak and say no more,
Now I have done, only let me advise
Thee, not to write of ought beneath the skies,
And as thou art a civil Cavalier
Keep thee within the compass of thy sphere
And not transgress again, as thou have done,
And so thy self in further danger run.
Use my directions, and in time repent
Of this with which thous't wronged the innocent;
Do ask forgiveness for thy faults committed,
That thou according to it may be pitied.
So I my self will be, if thou wilt do thus,
Thy friend Mercurius Melancholicus.
FINIS.

