THE NARROW PATH of Divine TRUTH DESCRIBED From Living Practice and Experience
of its three great Steps, viz.

Purgation, Illumination and Union

According to the Testimony of the holy Scriptures; as also of Thomas a Kempis,
the German Divinity, Thauler, and such like.

Of the SAYINGS of MATTHEW WEYER

Reduced into order in Three Books by J. Spee.

Unto which Are subjoyned his Practical Epistles, done above 120 years since in
the Dutch, and after the Author's Death, Printed in the German Language at
Francfort 1579. And in Latin at Amsterdam 1658. and now in English.

London, Printed for Ben. Clark in George-Yard in Lombard street, 1683.

A. D. To the Reader.
If Job and the Psalms (Reader) thou do know
Then the same truth these lines to thee will show.
God thee enlighten to sind the Cross-way out*
Which Christ has trod; thy way to Heaven, no doubt.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have determined to collect and put together some of the more Notable Sayings
of the Holy Scripture, which make for the better understanding of this Book,
that whosoever shall please to consider them, or such like, he may be able
thereby more easily, and without scruple to turn over this small Treatise;
especially if he come to those places, by which the most illuminated Matthew
Wire complained of his Inward Pains and anguish (which throughout the Book he
frequently did) lest the Reader thereby be frighted from them, or should
account such Pangs and Desertions for absurd and fantastical.

Therefore, by means of these, he will remember and consider, that this way of
the Cross (although now adays it be almost utterly unknown and forsaken) was
e'n to Christ, and all his true members always accustomed and trod in. For
this is that narrow way and that straight gate, by which we must enter into
life: yea by this same way, viz. by sorrows, sufferings, streights, and death,
our Forerunner Jesus Christ, thorough the whole course of his life, walked
even to his sepulcher; and has made it plain to and for us all, whom he would
have to be Imitators of himself, for it behooved him to suffer, and so to enter
into his glory. Of him Isaiah says, He had no form nor comeliness, and we saw
him, and he was not of an aspect, so as that we could be delighted in him; a
man despised, and the least of men, a man of sorrows and knowing infirmity,
etc. Observe and consider, O thou devout Reader! together with all those who
truly love Jesus Christ, and desire to be Imitators of him, how narrow, and
sharp, and how many Pangs, and Desertions is this way filled with, which yet
Christ entered into, after his last supper, and has left to us for an ensample.
For then it was, that his Soul was sorrowful even to the death, then it was,
that for very agony he sweat drops of blood, and prayed to his heavenly Father
thrice, that if it were possible, that cup might pass from him; nor yet was he
heard, nor w^^^ any helper present with him. The winepress was to be trodden,
and the cup to be drunk down; the flood was to be waded thorough, and obedience
to be yielded unto the Father, even to the very death of the cross: upon that
he was hanged naked, between two Thieeves, as the incendary and trumpeter of
the seditious: presently after they divided his Garments by lot even before his
eyes; many also shaking their heads at him, so that nothing else encompassed
him round, but Ignominy; and Reproach, and one sorrow trod upon the heels of
another. Then the Waves of afflictons were so many that they entered even into
his soul (because he was deserted of his Father) that out of mere pressures and
dereliction, he cried out with a loud voice; My God, My God, why have thou
forsaken me! All which are found described at large in the Evangelists,
Prophets and in the Psalms, especially in the 22 Psalm, where the Prophet
complains in the person of Christ: My God I called unto thee all the day, but
thou would not hear, I a am worm and no man. Also in Psalm 60. Save me O God,
because the floods have entered into my Soul, I am stuck fast in the deep mire,
and there is no bottom; and so on, to the end of the Psalm. Moreover in Psalm.
88. My soul is filled with evil, and my life approaches unto the grave, or
Hell, etc. By which and the like sayings, expressing the torments of Christ,
the whole Psalter with the Prophets are perfectly filled.

But now if thou shall say, Christ indeed, as the Scriptures do testify, did
suffer all these things, and fulfilled them in his example, yet is it
impossible that any one can imitate him in such streights and desertion; it is
answered, Christ himself has said, He that takes not up his Cross, and comes
after me, cannot be my disciple, nor is he worthy of me. Also Peter has said,
Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we might follow his
steps. Now if this were impossible, would not these and the like Sayings, read
every where, up and down the Scriptures, be in vain? But what does Paul say? I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me; and Christ says, That
that which is impossible with men, is possible with God. For he works in us
both to will and to do. Yield thy self therefore to God, and commit thy cause
unto him, O man, and hope in him, that he will perform and fulfill all things
in thee; for he always, even from the very beginning of the World, even to
this very day has put an end to the combats of his People^ and he is faithful
and suffers no man to be tempted beyond what he is able to bear. Never yet
did such misery touch his Elect, but he still, together with the Temptation,
found out a way to escape. As it is made manifest in the Example of the
Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, who all (as also the Author of these
Sayings) were led through Fire and Water, through miseries and streights, and
through a total desertion (yet every one according to his measure) so as they
became as Gold purified in the fire, and were purged from their sins. Alas, how
vastly great was that micsey, in which David cried out and complained: the
sorrows of death have compassed me about, and the torments of Hell have made me
afraid, the snares of death have laid hold upon me. Also when Jeremiah, for
mere anxiety and desertion, cursed the day of his nativity; as we may read them
in their own places. And who can express in words that both internal and
external misery wherewith Job was afflicted from the Lord. Who will give unto
me this (says he) that thou may cover me in Hell or the Grave: My dwelling
is in Hell or the grave, and I have made my bed in darkness, etc. Also in
another place, by reason of his continual desertion, he openly cursed the day
of his birth, as did Jeremiah, to many more such like may we turn thoroughout
that whole book. And if any one shall yet desire more testimonies, let him
search the holy Scriptures: for it is all every where full of this doctrine,
that Christ and all his members even from Abel down to these times, have always
trod in this path. If therefore any one shall thorough the grace of God,
believe this, to him, I hope, this small treatise will be very serviceable and
profitable. But unless every one himself shall hear and learn this of the
Father, these testimonies nor any others will never help him, no not the whole
Bible with all its quotations. Christ crucified was always a scandal to the
Jews, and foolishness to the Gentiles, but to them that believe, he is the
power of God: Blessed is every one, says Christ, who shall not be offended in
me. Which being said, I shall now put an end to this Preface. O Lord who by thy
grace art able to kill, and to make alive, to lead down into Hell, or the
grave, and to bring forth from thence again; show to us thy mercy, and grant us
freely thy Salvation. Amen

THE SAYINGS OF Mat, VVyer,
The First Book.
CHAP. 1.
SUch as is the state of a Man, so he understands the holy Scripture: if he
be still in nature, he interprets their Meaning to be of natural things: but if
he is ascended Higher, he understands them of things more Sublime: and by how
much the Higher he goes, he finds in the Scriptures so much the more Sublime
Testimonies of things. Things below are the Image and Similitude of things
above: if therefore a Man is still in the lowest degree, the Scripture
propounds to him the lowest Matters: but if he be got up into things above, the
Scriptures shows to him superior Matters.

When Paul says: Not in riotous feastings, and drunkenness, not in chamberings
and wantonness, etc. in the 13 to the Romans 19. That concerns a man according to
the various state of his Life, either literally, or spiritually: if he lives
carnally, it is to be understood of the gross flesh: but if he lives
spiritually, flesh also is thereby meant; but a more refined sort of flesh, to
which also he must die: But before he can die to it, it is Necessary he should
first have lived thereunto; and he cannot first have lived thereunto, unless
first he has died unto the more gross carnallity.

It is impossible for a Man to be able to understand this Sublime way of dying,
before he is come up unto that degree^ Now if any one is come up thither,
rather in a notional understanding thereof, then in the true essence of the
thing, he is in very great danger of wandering into error.

The spiritual Life of flesh is most cleanly expressed in that Rich man who
lived Sumptuously and was clothed in Scarlet: When on the contrary, Lazarus
lay Poor, Hungry, Naked and full of Sores. But what came it too? the highest
riches were brought unto the lowest poverty, and the lowest poverty was changed
into the highest Riches.

Christ says, John 12.32. When I shall be lifted up from the Earth I will
draw all unto me: There the Earth is Purified and Glorified, and made fit for
God: there then a Man abides yielded up to God, and suffers all in God,
whatsoever he shall do in him. Here therefore a Man is in a state of Passion
under God, but not in a state of Action, and God possesses him for his proper
own. And if a Man does not yet possess God as his propriety, viz. whilst he is
yet alive, and not when he is dead; then is not the very bottom of his heart as
yet purged from sin; for the root of sin still is in him, and is not as yet
eradicated: But at length this bottom is made manifest to the Man, and sin is
accounted, and is condemned as sin. When Christ is lifted up from the Earth,
then a man stands in death, and the Judgment of God comes upon him: There the
bottom of his heart is purified, and the root plucked up.

When a Man knows, that he is to omit this or that, and yet Commits it, his
prayers for more Sublime gifts, are not heard, for he lifts not up pure hands.
Because so long as he lays not aside inferior things, he receives no virtue
to omit Higher things. As long as he has not as yet done or omitted, that
which he acknowledges is to be omitted or done by him, so long are hid from
him the doing or omitting of more Sublime things, nor can they be acknowledged
by him: But if he has been Faithful in lower matters he shall be advanced to
higher, if somethings are to be renounced by a Man, and yet he will not
renounce them, then although he prays yet is he not heard, but is forced to
depart empty handed.

CHAP. II.
IF a Man abstaineth from external Idolatry, as also from the Company-keepings,
Feastings, Merry-meetings, and Drinkings, from the proud Apparel, and from all
such like, that spring out of sin, yet is he not so to rest satisfied: it is
true indeed, that these ought to be so, that every one should omit what are to
be omitted: yet this I say, that however, he is not to be at rest, or to
content himself thus. For just as he who is to go to ^olen, is not content to
pass over the Rhine only, nor stops he there, but continues on his journey,
until he comes to Colen: So also we must always be going forward, and looking
still further on to internal Purification, that as the external Conversation is
purged, so also must the inward Foundation be purged. Now Christ alone affects
that, he cleanses the Foundation, and takes away sin, and beyond all our
endeavor, or workings, expells it by Faith only.

If Satan was so powerful, that he could bring in sin, then is Christ much more
powerful, and can both conquer and expel it. He that experienceth the thing it
self, how Christ expels sins, and purifieth a Man, he only truly feels the
effect thereof.

Before purgation sin may indeed be supposed, that it shall not break forth
into fruits, yet is it still present, viz. in the bottom, and thence it must be
removed and cast out, if a Man would arrive at Regeneration, and Righteousness
be advanced in him, which renders a Man inclinable and cheerful to all good
whatsoever, but loath and heavy to all that is evil: Even as before sin made
the Man loath and heavy to good, but ready and cheerful to evil.

If evil is not omitted by and through Regeneration, nor good by and through
the same Regeneration performed, all things are done forcibly, with regret,
against our wills, whatever of evil is thus omited, or whatever of good is thus
performed: for there in that case is as yet no renewing, but the old evil stock
still remains, which endeavors to effect its proper works, and to produce
them into act, and is quite contrary to the new Creature. But when the Victory
and Regeneration is obtained, the Man then is prone to all good which he
performs, and slow to every evil which he omitteth: For whatsoever is proceeded
and performed from Regeneration, that is done with delight, and if it be
hindered, it breeds Sorrow or Grief.

CHAP. III.
NOw arises a queston, viz. whether a Man has also the Motions of sin after
he is purified from sin, and Regenerated? The answer is this: In the mind or
Foundation it self a Man has not the Motions of sin: for if the Motions of sin
were still there, then were not sin yet thoroughly taken away. But after that
sin is cast out of the Mind, then it betakes it self to the Members: therefore
all the Motions of sin whatsoever, that are then excited, are only done in the
Members, but not in the Mind: For sin can no longer enter into the Mind, and
because that Christ has suppressed it, and cast it out thence, it must remain
suppressed and rejected, else his action and work would not be constant and
firm: But now Righteousness planted in the place of sin, which Righteousness is
Christ, who now has taken up the Man, and works and performs all the man's
Commissions of good and Omissions of evil, but the man only yields up himself
quietly to Christ, and he himself is at rest, and takes care of none of them
which Christ both is and acts in him, but he leaves all to Christ, to whom
they belong: Moreover what praise soever or glory Springs from hence, he
ascrib^s all of it to Christ, but attributes nothing to himself, because that
nothing thereof did indeed belong to this performance.

Before Christ has borne upon himself the sin of Man, and planteth himself
into Man, and takes up the Man, it is necessary, that a man should account of
himself to be yet but a sinner, and an unjust person, yea even in a pious Life,
and holy conversation, although nothing should appear in him that is
reprehensible, and that, he by his own study shall be ascended so far, as he
can ascend, even as far as it is possible for a man, by his own endeavors to
come: yet that which is the most material point remains still behind, in which
are placed all, viz. Internal Purification, and Regeneration: and this inward
Purgation without all labor or endeavor of man, is completed only by Christ
our Lord, so that the glory then belongs only to God, but not to Man: For
otherwise, if that was not done above all power or operation of ours, it would
not be done by Faith, ^or would it be the work of God, nor would our Salvation
consist in the Lord and by his hand, but all this would stand upon us, and in
our hands; whence it would follow, that the glory was not to be attributed to
God, but to our own selves. But all such opinions are removed far from, a
Christian; in that all these are manifested to him, viz. how the matter
proceeds, and whence it arises, for which cause also he remains in his
humility, without having any Gall of Bitterness; or judgment to pass upon his
Neighbor. Also concerning his own experience, he speaks not with Joy, but with
great grief. Therefore our Purgation, Regeneration, Exercitation, Adoration,
Salvation, Wisdom; and all the rest are placed only in the hand of God; but not
in our hand, and we cannot take them up when we will, but when God freely
bestows them on us.

CHAP. IIII.
IN a man who is purged from sin there no longer remains Complaint, nor
Murmuring, nor Anger, nor Hatred, nor Exacerbation upon the account or any
whatsoever adversity, persecution, suffering or defect: and these good
qualities proceed not out of any force, but from Regeneration; and a man does
them willingly, for such is his property, nor can he do otherwise: Just as a
living man must live, so that he cannot do otherwise, but lives willingly: so
also the Regenerate cannot do otherwise, then fulfill the Law of God; and do
his will. Nor is there any need that they should use any force to them upon
this account, but all such are pleasant to them, and are performed by them with
a willing mind; for this is the Property of these Persons: Just as the
Hungry-man is prone to Eat, and the Thirsty to Drink, and the Sleepy to Sleep;
for as much as they do all these as uncommanded and without coaction. The Lord
has no unwilling Servants, to whom his will is nor pleasant: it is written in
the Psalter, Psalm. 110.3. Thy People is a willing People, and Psalm. 40.10. In
the volum of thy Book it is written of me, that I would do thy will O my God: I
am delighted because thy Law is in the midst of my heart: And Christ says,
John 4.34. My meat it to do the will of him that sent me.

Continency and the repulse of sins, and of the wickedness of the world, when
done with a mind that is yet polluted, is not so bitter as afterward it is
pleasant and affects with joy, when performed with a mind purified.

In a just and righteous man there is always a desire of going forwards, yea
he always gets further and further on, and though he should live long, and his
days should be almost without Number, yet would his Life, be always in a
prof^^iency, and the man would always be more and more elevated in God. Now
they that come up thither where they think they can abide and rest, let them
esteem that for a bad sign. For by how much the more subtle or Spiritual
Christians do become, by so much also they become more Sublime: and by how much
the more Sublime they are, by so much the more Subtle and Sublime is their
sufferings, which point is altogether unknown to them, who are yet but in some
lower degree or step.

Unless God should more put a man forwards, then he does put himself, he would
never be saved, nor indeed be able to come to Regeneration. Now God hedgeth up
on all sides, to an elect man, his way, that when he deviates from the right
Path to his own destruction he hinders him, and sets to him his bonds, and then
a man comes to acknowledge, that that was nothing but the work and
Commiseration of God: and then he becomes really humble and Judges no man, but
has and bears himself with a Benevolent and Merciful mind toward all men,
when he can clearly discern, how much misery hung over his head, from which
notwithstanding he apprehends himself quite freed through the wonderful mercy
of God: therefore he cannot boast himself against them, being mindful always
of his own self: for if God has not spared them, nor perhaps will he spare
thee. And because lie Shines forth with a greater grace above others, he is not
lifted up above others, but rather is touched with a Commiseration and
compassion toward them. So that if upon very urgent Necessity he must say some
what of others, he does it with fear and trembling, and but that the Necessity
of his Neighbor should require it, he would more gladly hold his peace. Yea
oftentimes he purposes with himself for his part, to be silent but when time
and causes do drive, then in truth he is forced to speak, seeing the thing now
urges him. And that too, not out of Envy, Hatred, or Exacerbation, but is only
performed through the moving cause at least of his Neighbor. Now before this,
a man did not behold others with a benign mind, but was unmerciful, and full
of taxations against others: so that if also he now sees any one that does so,
yet does he bear all this with a willing mind.

Alas! how miserable do those men live, who seek not after God: When they have
lived Thirty, Forty, Fifty, yea an Hundred Years, yet are all these passed away
as it were by a blast, and so many years have slipped away in vain. It
behooveth a man to be Faithful and Serious in that degree in which he is set,
and the Lord will advance him yet Higher.

CHAP. V.
WE must study to conform, ourselves to what we hear or read* and if we cannot
get Higher beyond that, then comes God, and effects by himself that which
was impossible for us; and above our strength, and through Faith, he raises
up, and also infuseth into us the Righteousness which avails in his sight.
All this is done by God for that Man, who has labored so far, as he can get
no Further on; and should this Man live yet a Thousand Years; yet he could
never be able to go beyond that, except God should come, and quite above his
own Power, through Faith, should effectually work it, and should accomplish all
things in him, which the Law requires of him, and unto which he could not
come, nor of himself attain to, until God himself should set these things
before him, and in the Manner abovesaid put or help him forwards. But that God
may lead a Man up thither, where the Man may despair ever by his own procedure
to arrive (when as before he thought, that by his own endeavor he could go so
far, as to become conformable to the Law) God proposes to him something for to
try him, whether it be possible to come thither, as if he should say: Go too!
If thou think that thou art able by thy own Industry to come up thus far, I
will teach thee, that it is impossible for thee: and then he shows him another
Light to which a Man cannot be conformable, although his Age should extend it
self till it be equal to all Ages of the World, except God should come and
render him conformable to the abovesaid Light, and that above and beyond all
Study, and all working or Power of his own. Now these things are to be expected
from God and to be done through Faith, and then the Glory is from the Lord, but
man has nothing to boast off but in God.

That which Conscience exhibiteth to a Man, he must Satisfy it, and then his
Conscience will show unto him yet more, and so onwards until he comes into God,
and is manifestly made spiritual. How

How far and High soever any one goes forwards, yet he always sees before him
yet Higher and Farther, whether he thinks he may come, and where he willingly
would be: for as whilst he is below he sees that above, which he is to break
thorough, so also when he is Higher he sees that that is yet Higher, which he
would willingly break through: and if that was done, yet always appears
another, and again another; and he never comes to the end of them.

He who would never be at rest, but is still intent upon the destruction of his
will, God does not leave that Man without proficiency and advancement. A fairer
Similitude there is not, then that of the Grain of Wheat, which grows not
forth out of the Earth, unless it first be corrupted and dye.

What was contrary to nature, that did I: And if I had not done it, I had not
been thus advanced by the Lord.

God has advanced me by force, wherefore it is not lawful for me to judge any
one, but Mercy is to be exercised by me.

The most desirable advancement that excels all others, Consists in
Prayers, if together therewith any one will bid farewell to lust, and will
renounce wicked Cogitations.

To a young beginner all defects are laid open, out of the Scriptures and then
he falls diligently to his Prayers.

The difference betwixt those who are led through Death, and those who are not
yet led thorough it (neither of whom yet is contented) is this: They who are
led thorough Death, have a certain bottomless pit before there eyes, by the
sight of which, all that they possess, they little Esteem off, always tending
to farther things: yet are they contented thus, that they deliver themselves up
wholly to the will of God, so as they acquiesce therein, and commit all to him
only, so long as he is pleased to lead them thereinto, otherwise not. But they
who are not yet led thorough Death, in what State or Condition soever they are,
they are always full of fear and terror and as yet have not yielded up their
whole cause to God, so as to ^^^uiesce therein, in what State soever it is his
w^^^ that they remain in, but always d^^ to be put forwards, which also is
(...) which the Lord will do for them, if (...) desist not from Prayers.

The Philosophers were Spectators (...) the Israelites, and would strive to
hint (...) Mark with their arrows, but the rewa^^^ was not given, but only to
those th^^ strove.

CHAP. VI.
THere were many Commandme^^ given to the Israelites, which w^^^ not commanded
to the Gentiles: so a^^ when Moses, that is, the Light of L^^^ is come in us,
many depravities are (...) covered in us, and made manifest, whi^^ the Gentiles
were Ignorant off, and d^^ not think them for sin. Now as ma^^^ sins were then
detected, so also do (...) we want expiation, Sacrifice, and Spri^^ling, by
means of which we may (...) purified, expiated and corrected. A^^ as those
things were Typically and Fi^^ratively amongst the Israelites so also (...)
they really and essentially among us.

(...) is necessary that a Man be ingrafte^ ^^o the stock of the Israelites if
he would ^^ve at Regeneration, which Genea^^y, stock or lineage is derived from
A^^ through all Generations. Adam is the ^^^l: Noah is zeal, by which every one
^^deavours to lift himself up out of the (...); where also is the Original of
the at Giants. The zeal of Noah is that, ^^ich a Man can effect by his own
pro^^* Operation, making account, that ^^se conduce to his Righteousness and
^^vation. But then that is very dis^^asing to God, so that by a certain ^^od
poured out in Man, all these his ^^orks are drowned: This is the case ^^ich
produces so much Misery, and (...) great streights, as they only know, who
^^ve experienced the thing. And then (...) things perish, except Noah, that is,
the ^^al of man, whom God preserves, and ^^kes up unto himself. This man
there^^re sought first to set up his own proper ^^ighteousness, Faith, and
Wisdom: But ^^esently God comes, and all these are ^^owned in a Flood, and
after that the ^^an comes to true Righteousness, Faith, Charity and Wisdom.
And these ar^ ^one in man by God above all human^ ^trength. For if
Righteousness shou^^ ^onsist in humane strength and work (...) the glory would
not be of God, but (...) Man, nor would it be of Faith, abov^ nature. But now
Righteousness is set (...) above Nature by God, thorough Fait^ which Faith also
is allowed to be abov^ the strength of man.

Zeal, which is Noah, then receive^ the blessing of God, above humane streng^^
thorough the promise, after that all a^^ perished in the Flood, which the man
(...) means of that Zeal seemed to have gott^^ to himself by his own proper
works a^^ strength.

These things also are found in Abrah^^ when he Boiled with too much Z^^^ nor
would not wait for the promise, (...) which God had promised Isaac (...) him,
(that is, that Spiritual operat^^ granted to him out of grace above ^^^per
strength) he produced Ishmael, (...) was according to the flesh. But be^^^ he
could come to that Spiritual prod^^^on, it was first necessary, that the
de^^^ion of Sodom and Gomorrha should be (...) ^ught to pass: for between the
births (...) ^^^mael, and Isaac those Cities were (...) ^^ed.

CHAP. VII.
BEfore sin in the very mind it self be overcome, and plainly eradicated, it
must be violently suppressed always, least it break out in words, deeds or in
thoughts. For sin remaining in the mind, is as it were a kind of Conception,
which conceives and takes hold of objects that move outwardly. For that which a
man enjoys with any delight by Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, etc. and frames to
himself many Ideas and Cogitations concerning outward things, all that
produces sin, which sits upon the mind: Now (...) this should be rooted out,
these For^^^gn outward objects would have in man no more any Lover.

That man forms to himself so ma^y Cogitations of things Foreign Concerning
either Love, or Hatred, or Honor, or disgrace, or Loss, or Gain, or Eating, or
Drinking, Friendship, or Enmity, all that makes sin, which dwells in the Soul:
if this were overcome, such Imaginations could not stick in the mind, for they
would have no Lover, or Receiver, and therefore they would Flow out, and would
not return again, for as much as they would want reception: Even as he that is
neither Hungry nor Thirsty, never thinks of Meat and Drink.

When a man seeks and loves nothing but God, and not himself, his Concerns are
much more pleasant, and better then they were formerly, when he could love and
seek himself in God.

CHAP. VIII.
IF one sees Worldly men in their joy and delights, he ought to bewail them,
and consider: Alas! in how small and pitiful things do they build their rest:
But before a Man arrives at that Humility and Meekness, he does but still Judge
or Censure, reproach, and revile, saying: Behold those wicked Wretches, and
other such like are his words: Now we are to abstain from these, using upon all
occasins Commiseration in Meekness.

He which judges another, does the same thing, as he which throws a Stone
against some Wall, which Reboundeth and leapeth back upon himself: He that
Judges others and presently Says, he i^ sorry for it, is not to be believed.

There can be no Judgment passed upon Spiritual things, unless one can ascend
above reason. Now there is no ascending above reason, but by dying.

By this is meant, that a man understands not any thing, if he explicateth
(...) wickedly or wrongly. There is no need i^ the Daytime to dispute, what
the day is because the day Manifests what it self is without the noise of
Arguments: the^ therefore that are still in Darkness, oug^^ not to Judge
Concerning the Day, ti^^ they themselves also come out of the Darkness into the
Day, and then the Da^ it self will declare it self, that there is (...) longer
any need of disputing concerni^^ it. He who possesses the thing it se^^ and
beholds it with his Eyes, wants not the explication of that thing.

A man ought to turn his Eyes inward upon himself, so that leaving all things
else, he might look only upon himself* whatever therefore he hears or sees
concerning others, yet he ought to prefer them before his own works, and to
interpret them to be the better, and consequently to Judge himself only, but
not others. And though he be injured by others, so as they detract from his
Reputation, or offend him in his Body, yet is he to look back to God alone, and
all these evils are to be accepted from the hands of God, nor must he speak any
thing of trouble against others, as if perhaps he should say: But this is not
just: But this is not Christian, we must always do rightly, etc. I say, we must
not plainly say so, nor must any injury come from him, but it becomes him to
be of a good will toward all, and it behooveth him to look upon all with
Commiseration, and a pleasant countenance nor is he to think, that an injury is
done to him, and therefore no man is to be hated, nor judged by him. And if any
one takes away his goods, he ought to think, that perhaps they belonged rather
to that other Man, then to himself.

When a Man thus turns away his eyes from all things, that he (no longer, like
an Eagle (neglecting himself) looks down round about on all others,) but
Contemplates himself with an acknowledgment of His own proper defects, and his
own Wickedness, then is that state a secure one, and a sign of true humility:
But before a man comes thus far, how many errors (I pray) is he involved in,
and with how much difficulty must he be set perfectly loose from thence.

It does not usually happen, that one thief does easily let go another: But he
who is willing to be touched with a true Pity toward sinners, it behooveth him
first of all to be purged from sins, and to be come unto Regeneration. Let
therefore a man restrain his tongue by all means, and let him abstain from the
praise, and from the dispraise of others, always beholding his own depravity,
and desiring his own purgation: Then truly he will not Observe, what is to be
Done, or omitted by Others, but he shall Judge all these in himself only. And
if he shall see or hear of any unjust Matter done by others, then shall he
first think thus: Alas for me! Who am I! And so let him turn from Judging of
others to Judge his own self. For until any one is come up hither, he cannot
indeed get forwards, but he must remain Foolis^ and Rude as long as he
desisteth not from them.

A Man must be touched with Pity toward his Neighbors, as the Lord ^ook Pity
on him: for the Mercy of God ^s stretched out over all his works.

He who is an Elect one, knows with how Long-suffering and Mercy the Lord has
^orn with him, and with how much ado he ^edged up his way; And his returning
back unto Egypt, and how, as it were, forced and compelled him, and
consequently ^ith a certain kind of violence (as I may ^y) he was brought unto
God. Nor is ^e Ignorant of such Means applied to him ^y the Lord, and therefore
he also never ^veigheth with Sharpness against others, ^or judges Sinners, but
is) Gentle and Merciful toward them, and desires not their Deaths, but rather
that God may convert them. If this is to be done toward the Viler and Harder
fore of Sinners, whom no repentance touches, much more Gently will He act with
his weak Neighbor, who being in the state of repentance, seeks the Lord:
This person surely, he deservedly bears with in all his defects and
Infirmities, and Sustaineth him, even as the Lord Sustained him, when he
endured much about his Conversion: yea even as also that very Neighbor himself
has formerly Sustained and born with his errors. He that does this, he meteth
to his Neighbor in the same Measure, which was not only from the Lord, but
from his Neighbor also measured to him. He who will not bear, deserves not to
be born with: And he who will always show himself unmerciful, and Judge and
reject others, he ought in like Manner to expect from God Indignation,
Judgment, and Rejection.

CHAP. IX.
THe person of any one is not to be respected, but he who is in the Person, and
operateth from it, that is, God whose only is the Glory. Respect of persons is
the worst of things, as if the person it self should be that, that should know
and do any thing, when yet it is not the Man, but God in the Man, and therefore
to him alone is due the glory of Wisdom, Justice, Virtue, Strength, Triumph,
and Victory; and all these are not to be attributed unto us, but to God alone
in us, and in our Neighbor: For in us nothing is to be respected, but our
empty nothingness, for this only is proper to us, otherwise nothing belongs to
us, neither God, nor the Creature.

Consequently also no injury can be done to us by any Man, although they should
take away from us our goods and Life, yet is not that which is ours, taken from
us, but that which is God's: for our Life, Spirit, Soul, Body, and all goods
are God's and not ours: Wherefore we are not to be angry, but whatever God has
ordered to Fall upon us, we must always acknowledge to be well and Rightly
done: Hence also no Man is to be Hated, nor are we to envy any one nor to
detract from any man's reputaion, but we must rather exercise mercy. Furthermore
a Regenerate Man cannot be provoked to be Angry, nor to be Proud, or of a
Haughty Mind, seeing he himself is purged from such like vices, and is become a
New Creature, and is detained in the Regeneration, every ways given up to God,
and is contented with whatsoever God shall do with him, or determine to come
upon him, either in time, or in eternity, either inwardly or outwardly, either
by Means, or without Means, he receives all these from the Hand of God; and
yields the whole direction of himself up to God.

God (as is above said) who inhabiteth in the person, is to be respected, but
not the person himself, else when the person fails, he also would fail, who
should respect the person. Nor is God's honor attributed to him, if respect of
persons should be applied: letting therefore the person go, nothing but God
only is to be looked at.

CHAP. X.
WHether a Man be freed from the Creature, is then at length acknowledged, when
he Seems to be willing that it should be taken from him.

A Man gives up himself to every Creature, and to every other thing, and
desires it so, as that without it he cannot live: And if so be he cannot at
length obtain it, then is nature enraged, and sometimes Falls into a Disease,
and the Mind is vexed with many other Cares. Let us therefore renounce all
things thorough Death, and give our selves up to the dispose of God, and
possess our Souls in Calmness, and true peace, and we shall have Eternal Life.

So long as a Man has not plainly yielded up to the Creature, and renounced
it, the Ideas of that Creature always enter in upon the Mind, but when that
Creatrue is, perfectly denied, then the Ideas thereof vanish away.

So soon as ever any thing is yielded up, it loses that strength it had to
force a Man, and then it is an easy thing for a Man to pass it by, which
before to do, did seem difficult, yea impossible.

When a Man gives up his will to God, then he belongs to God, and if so be a
Man is sometimes willing to put this in Practice; and to abide by it, God does
otherwise order it for him, and will have him enjoy that which is his. Behold
this comes of that free yielding up, as a Man may clearly perceive in himself,
now God detains him least he should slip into worser things.

They who are lead, have not any longer any will, nor Desire; nor Choice, but
God wills, desires, and chooses in them.

By how much the more a Man is fixed in the Old Adam, by so much the more it
seems Impossible to him, and by so much the less can he believe, that he can
become Righteous. So long as a Man does any thing Violently against his own
Conscience, whether it be of Small, or of great Moment, yet he cannot get
forwards. He that is a Transgressour in one sin, is guilty of all sins. If any
one consents to one Temptation, all the rest present themselves, and desire
to Gain that Man, as being him, upon whom they have gotten a new right or claim.

CHAP. XI.
A Man ought not to pass over that which stirs up in him some secret
Impediment, if he will be Sollicitously concerned for God: or else that same
secret Impediment may still remain Separated from God: and when the Man shall
come to Examination, that secret of his heart shall come forth, and show that
it still has been alive in him. Therefore is he to bear an Examination, and in
the Examination this secret of his heart is to be struck out, and to be
mortified that so he may come unto God; no^ must we at this time Fly away, but
search thoroughly; and then a Man may b^ truly Sollicitous in God, and so
exercis^ himself, viz. by laying aside all Impediments that are by Means of
that Examination Detected and Manifested. And then the Man comes to a certain
liberty, when thorough Examination he is proved and tried, he can no longer be
terrified at any thing. If yet somewhat remains, that without his knowledge
has lurked in his Mind, that also shall be manifested, when he repeats the
Examination. Nor can a Man more rightly know, whether he be free or a Captive,
then when he is thus touched; and therefore this Trial is not an evil thing,
nor also is it to be avoided, because by the help of it, occult defects, are
discovered, and the Man confesses them to the Lord with Contrition, who also
is able to purge him from them.

As long as a Man lives, he is under the Law: and when by his own Endeavors he
is come so far, that he cannot ascend higher, yet he shall get higher, and be
advanced: But it is necessary he should put forth his hand, that another may
closely take hold of him, and lead him into the way, which else he will not
find: that is, he must give himself up to God, so, as that he suffers him only
to operate, he himself only sitting still, and Submitting himself unto God.
Whatever then is performed, that is no longer done by Man, but God himself
works above all actions of Man, or his knowledge, or Power: God acts, and Man
suffers: if this be done, God by such sufferings and dyings, leads and
exercises the Man, which are matters far surpassing his strength and
knowledge, even as before also the thing was utterly unknown to him, nor was it
possible for him to undertake such a thing, or exercise himself in it. And in
this death it is that a Man is purged, and all things are taken from him, all
Whatever were able to hinder in him the undertaking of the true essence. Then
is all propriety and Nature renounced, for in God is no propriety, but all
things ought to be of a Divine Nature nor can any other Nature be brought into
God. In that death the Soul is lost: and when ever this is done, then a Man
comes to the true essential Life of God, and there Christ reveals himself
most Evidently in Man, and then there is no need to search many things
concerning the Place, wherein Christ is to be worshipped, or any other such
Particulars, because all these will be very perspicuous, or known, to our eyes.

The Law is fulfiled by the new Man without all dispute or Imagination, Jesus
has strength enough to be able to save and Purify a Man from sin: but Christ
does also anoint the Man thus purified with his Holy Spirit.

CHAP. XII.
MOre does not belong to a Man, then that by God's help, he may abstain from
sin, and that he may have the Law for a Schoolmaster: for to enter into Death,
Darkness, the Pit, and destruction, and to be brought from hence again, and to
rise again into a new Life, and a new Heaven, and Light belongs only to the
Lord, who himself works that in Man, without all action of the man, and that
out of mere grace, which a man at the time of his Resurrection, when that New
Daybreak Shines first upon him, most clearly acknowledges. For he
acknowledges it was the alone Mercy of God, which so exercises him, and
brought him back from Death to Life, which Mercy he could not acknowledge, when
he was still under the Law, for there his Propriety, and his selfness was yet
present, but the Commiseration of the Lord was hitherto unknown to him, because
he had not as yet been thus exercised by God, above all Operation and Power of
his own, that he might come to the Denial of himself, but he stood as yet under
the Law, being touched by no Death, when he thought that a reward ought to be
Given him out of Desert, but not out of Grace; and then it was, that he sought
to Establish his own Righteousness, but such a Righteousness was unknown to
him, which above and beyond all his own Operation and Power was settled only by
Faith in Christ, which Faith is acquired only in Death, Darkness, and Hell or
the Grave.

A Man, in whom the Law has exercised all its Power, and has slain him,
remains not in Death, but by the Resurrection of Christ is raised up again into
a New Life, but is not raised up again into the Old Life: for when he should
hang with Christ upon the Cross, and beg to be Freed, that he might return
again into that Life, he is not Heard, but he must dye then, not can he ever be
thus made alive again: but by the Resurrection of Christ, rises into a New
Life.

Here the matter is so carried, as if the Thief on the right Hand, and the
other on the Left, and Christ also, did Hang Naked on the Cross in one Man, and
as if he was reviled by both of them; for faith the Evengelist: Which very
thing also did the Thieves, who were crucified with Him, reproach him withal.
The same is here also, as if the Left hand Thief was not willing to Dye, yet he
must Dye, but the Right Hand; Thie^ yielded himself up unto Death. Also a^ if
the legs of the Thieves were broken, but not of Christ: and here it should be
considered, how Christ received the Thief on his Right Hand, but the; left
(which denotes Nature) also Perished unwillingly, and shall abide Eternally in
Death; also how the Right Hand Thief willingly gave up himself to Death, and
how he shall be Raised together with Christ unto Eternal Life. Christ said upon
his Cross to the Thief on his Right Hand: To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. He did not say, Thou art with me in Paradise, for this could not be,
so long as he had not yet dyed: but he said thus, Thou shall he with me in
Paradise, viz. When thou have suffered Death: for it is as equally Impossible
that a Man who is not yet dead, can be exalted in God, as it is Impossible,
that a Hundred Pound Weight of Lead should Fly upwards unto the Sky.

The Thieves did not Nail themselves to the Cross; but they were Nailed, the
Trees upon which the Thieves Hung, were cut Trees, and do signify the Old Man
or Nature in us: for we must die in this cut Nature, and afterward be revived
again in Christ. All the promises of God do respect Christ: but Christ denotes
all Christians, of all whom, there is one only Head, which is Christ, who is
all in all.

CHAP. XIII.
GOd comes and opens to a Man the sense of Scripture, as it were in one
Moment, like lightning, which comes, as it were in one moment, and goes away
again in another, and then a Man acknowledges the sense of Scripture to be far
otherwise, then before, when he had considered it in his own strength. And thus
God can effect more in one only Moment for the truer understanding of the sense
of Scripture, then all the Epistles which some can write to others. When the
Light comes, in process of time it becomes clearer and clearer, and again also
it is wont to return again yet more clear, so that more is still discovered and
Manifested to a man, which before now lay hid from him. If this first Claritude
comes into a man as if it were Angelical, but then forward it rusheth in, much
clearer, and so a Man gets from one degree of Angelical Claritude to another
Higher degree of the same, and then presently he ascends yet Higher, until he
arriveth at the Claritude or Light, which is God himself, without the
Interposition of the light Angelical: and then God co-uniteth all the foregoing
Lights in his own Light (which is nothing else but himself) and a man is made
so sure and Certain from God, who is that very Light, that this degree of his
Light is God himself, and not Angelical Claritude, that he needs not ask
others, who have experienced it: for God brings with him that certainty when he
comes. But before this Light comes, which is God himself, those Angelical
Lights do first appear, and do as it were prepare the way for the true Light:
for if this true Light should come without sending before it those
enlightenings, a Man could not bear it. But the Angelical Light is such,
whereby a Man rejoices for a short time, Just as Christ said of John: Yea were
willing to be exalted in h^^ Light for an hour. But when Christ that Eternal
Light comes, the joy i^ him is not for an hour, but to all Eternity. When the
Angelick Light comes, many mistake, thinking it to be that Eternal Light,
which is God himself; yet is it not so, the reason of which may be observed to
be this, if one comes up to a greater Light, the foregoing is not cared for:
and if yet he gets up to a Higher Light, also that that went before it, is no
more accounted of. If therefore those Lights were God himself in his own
Claritude, without the Interposition of the Angelick Light, it could not be
otherwise, but they would be always Highly esteemed of, and would never be
deprived of their Estimation.

A man who is arrived at God, is above the Angels, for he passed thorough all
the Angels into the Son. A man must pass thorough a Combat, a Death, and the
Grave to come unto God, wherein is no need of the Angels, in as much as they do
Contemplate and use, without a Death, that Eternal good. Now the Angels were
appointed unto the Service of Men. When therefore a Man does Contemplate on
these Lights, and Revelations, he must Sedulously beware, lest he break out by
speaking or teaching thereof, but to wait with Silence and Calmness for his
Advancement, and be Internally Sollicitous concerning those Gifts. But if he do
break forth, he miserably hinders himself, and renders himself unworthy of
these Gifts, and abuses them, and as it were Prodigally throws all away with
Pleasure, Singularity and Pride. There are also false Lights which shine in a
Man, and give him an understanding, and do unfold the sayings of Scripture. Yea
even Satan is wont to appear under the Shape of an Angel of Light: and all
these are done in a Man. Here therefore a Man is to have a care, least he
mistake these for Divine Lights, and if he be in doubt, whether they be Divine
or not, there is need only of Silence, for he cannot err by being Silent,
whether that Light be Divine, or whether it be false. But by how much the purer
is the Zeal of a Man, by so much the less do false Lights vex him. For the evil
Spi^^ has in our times appeared in many wi^^ false Revelations. As Lucifer
that fi^^ Light fell, so also the first Light whi^^ comes into a Man ought to
fall and dy^^ for by that a Man may sin by loftiness (...) Mind thorough Pride
not yet eradicate^ Now in that Death sin is plucked up b^^ the Root; and then
the true essen^^ enters into a Man as it is in it self, and Man is
transplanted into it, and it can nev^^ more be extripated, as it is promised
(...) the Prophet: The time comes, sait^ the Lord, where in no more, etc. The
Angelical Claritude, which a Man, g^^teth, shows to him his Prison, and (...)
the Impurity in which he idly tumbleth but it does not bring him out of Prison
nor takes away his Impurity from him But this Christ only does, who dra^^ him
out of Prison, and frees him from his impurity: nor is that done but by
^^cending into Hell or the Grave. An^ before this state of the Grave, a Man ca^
not bear that Light which is Christ himself, nor receive it, therefore Christ
comes (after that that Angelical Light ha^^ first enlightened his Prison, and
discovered to Man his sin) and casts the Man unto Hell. And then all are
taken from ^im thorough the Fire, which made him before unfit or incapable of
the Eternal ^ight of Christ. But the Man is thus led ^horough the Fire, that he
may be purified, so, as all the Wood, the Straw, and ^he Chaff in him are
burned in the Fire, and he himself being purged by this Fire, shall be saved.
He himself perishes not in the Fire, but sin only perishes and is rooted out,
so as it can never grow out again, but the Man is brought out and made alive
again in God. He indeed also perishes by the Fire; as to his own former Life,
so as that he is no more revived to the world, and to sin: for he is brought
out thorough a Back-gate and is vivified, that is, he rises again in God, and
is revived in Righteousness.

As we spoke of an Angelick Claritude, that it shows to a Man his Prison,
together with his Impurities, which then are to be purified by Fire, that he
himself may by this means be made Capable of the Eternal Light, which is
Christ: so some there be who do not rightly understand that Matter: for when
that Angelick Claritude first show to them their Prison with the. Impurity,
presently they think, that this lesser Light is God himself, nor do they take
care, that they should first be freed from their Impurities, but with an impure
Nature, they presently apprehend that Claritude, and arrogate to themselves
great knowledge of Spiritual Matters, which also they do diverse ways abuse by
Speaking, Writing, or Teaching, for their own Advantage, Pleasure, Glory, and
Ambition: but their impurity, and their sin they account not off for sin, but
for a thing Lawful; wherefore neither do their Consciences accuse them, until
God himself smites them: for they ought not to abuse Claritude, but it should
have served them for that end for which it was given to them, viz. For the
acknowledgment of their sins, from which they are afterward to be Purified by
Hell or the Grave: and then at length they should have been made Capable and
fit, that that Eternal Light, viz. God himself might have been received of
them, nor ought ^^ey to have broke out into acts of speacke ^^g, writing, or
teaching, nor to sup^^se themselves to be made perfect.

CHAP. XIIII.
ALl the understanding of those, who abused the first Claritude, is alone
derived from that Claritude, which by us termed Angelical: and indeed it above
Nature, but is by them applied Nature, so, as that they utter things range,
which cannot be Comprehend^^ by Natural Men: nor can any Man, by ^^s own reason
arrive at this understand^^g. But such are very prone to do harm, ^^cause they
can move all those, who ^^ve not a true light (although they have (...)
understanding very Subtle) as also ^^ose who are tired out from Continuing
(...) the way of the true light. And these ^^en stand in a false liberty, nor
are wil^^g to pay Tithes to the Lord, but only ^^e Thousand parts, and yet make
no ^^l payment of either: (by Tithes is meant the outward Conversation) in the
same manner they lay down one load, and are willing to take up another, and yet
carry neither. But he that walks the true Path, does not thus urge one thing
that he may neglect another, but be brings forth both into use, and studieth
how to render both to the Lord. But they, who are described above, are those
false Men who admit of a false Liberty, not can any one gain any Victory over
them, or resist them, except he be one that is come to Regeneration; for such
have the true essence of the thing, and in the true Light, the errors of these
Libertine are heheld, and they seen wherein they err, and how they go beyond
al^ due bounds, nor do Rightly persevere Otherwise they are above every ones
understanding, and make nothing of tho^^ who would resist them, because they
have a sort of Supernatural understandin^ which they derived from that
Claritu^^ which formerly had shined in them. (...) therefore that is still a
Natural Man, (...) not reach, nor understand them, an^ much less oppose himself
against them, y^^ though he be a Famous Learned Man. But he that would reach
them, and oppose himself to them, and get the Victory over them, it behooveth
him to be, not an Animal Man, but a Spiritual, born of God, of whom Paul says:
The Spiritual Man judges all things, etc. else ^et him let all disputings
alone, unless he will be made a Laughing Stock: Because ^hey are made yet more
Angry and Provoked by his weak Argumentations.

We must know, that Righteousness and Unrighteousness are so alike one to ^he
other, as are two Hairs of the same Head, but God can divide those Hairs and
expose their insides to be beheld of Men. The way of happiness and the ^ay of
Unrighteousness are gone in, by ^he same steps, and the one leads to
^ighteousness, but the other to Unrigh^eousness. We have a Similitude in a
^reat heap of Money that makes up one ^ertain Sum. Now if an honest just man
(...) to count it, and to give the total Sum, ^^though he may not rightly know
some ^^eces thereof, yet if he counts them ho^^estly, and keeps back none of
them for his own use, but compleateth the full Sum, God does not therefore
reprove him for his ingenious mind: but he who takes any piece from them, is a
Thief, and must expect the Judgment. Now he is the man who takes some from
them, who would excuse his Carnality by the help of the Scriptures.

In every Illumination, Revelation, and understanding, the essence only (...) a
thing is to be expected. A man had need to have diligent care about all that he
meets with, lest he admit that which is a fault.

CHAP. XV.
A Man must Endeavor to lead (...) innocent and unblamable Life, (...) which
if he shall arrive, God w^ call him into Judgment, and will purg^ his floor
from Sin at the bottom, the budding forth of which did formerly (...) much hurt
to the works and though^ of a man, thorough the Law of sin (...) the mind. But
when sin is perished (...) Judgment, and is Condemned, and wholly cast out;
Then indeed the mind is no longer Subject unto the Law of sin, but is free both
from it, and its slavery, and is now become subject to the Law of God.
Concerning which Paul says: Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus has set me free from the Law of sin, and of death. To this belongs
also that saying in Romans 7. A man therefore is no longer a Servant of sin in
his mind, but is set free from that Law of sin in his mind unto the Law of God:
although he still serves in his members the Law of sin. Sin is cast out of the
house, nor is it any more moved from the internal root, but it comes
extrinsecally into the house: Wherefore it behooves to place the Law of sin
near to the gate, that the man inwardly may have converse with God, without
impediment.

CHAP. XVI.
NO man ought to utter forth his words in vain. All men cannot be called by the
same terms, but it must be governed according to the quality of every one. To
them who are rude as yet, nothing of the more Sublime Mysteries may be talked
of, but they are first to be admonished, to put off their thicker outside
barks: and if they accept that counsel, they may be admitted to discourses of
Higher matters, and so by degrees may be yet farther proceeded with, until no
Root of sin any more appears. But he who is not Faithful in lower matters,
the more Sublime may not be proposed to him, or else the discourse would be
holden to no purpose: Now no wise man does prodigally throw away his rich
Merchandise, or his Money. He who has purchased his words at an easy Rate, that
is, who has by no experience, apprehended the Truth in himself, he easily
bolteth them Forth: which another can never do, to whom what he says, cost him
more dear; upon which account it is, that he utters them in such a manner as if
they were cut out of his very Heart, and this he does indeed, when he certainly
sees that they are not spoken in Vain, nor does beat the Air: for words are
extorted from him with difficulty and pain also.

And this is the difference betwixt those who speak out of Illumination or
Revelation, and those who speak out of the Essence, Substance, or Truth of the
Thing: they speak with Joy and Delight, but these with Grief and Sorrow. They
are defiled with Pride, but these speak out of Humility to the Glory of God
alone, and the amendment of their Neighbor.

Great also is the difference betwixt those who have their knowledge and
understanding only from Reading, or Hearing, and those to whom it is revealed,
whose understanding is endowed by Illumination. Moreover there is another and
great difference (as is abovesaid) betwixt those who have Revelation, and
internal Illumination, and those who are come to the essence or Substance it
self of the thing, and do apprehend the Truth thereof: for they have their
knowledge acquired only by Illumination, and therefore understand not, what
God, the Truth and Essence is by it self, unti^ they arrive thereat themselves.
They know by Illumination that the thing is, but not what the thing is, until
God by his grace leads them so far, by and thorough Death.

CHAP. XVII.
IF any ones Heart is on the sudden pierced quite thorough, that man indeed
perceives nothing of the true order of Death: but if first his Hands were cut
off, next his Arms, and his Feet, and then his Thighs, and so all the Rest of
his particular Members, until they come to his heart, then indeed is he made to
know all degrees and the whole order of dying

The Judgment of God reaches all the Creatures that exist in Man, and many,
whilst all is well with them, would rush into various Errors, unless the
Judgment of God did hang over the Head of Man.

For every particular iniquity the Judgment of God is to be expected, for the
Just God hears and sees all, and observes every word, and will punish for it:
Let therefore a man fear and beware of God. Even as Christ will exercise
Judgment on the Earth: so also is there a Spiritual signification of that
particular, viz. That the very same shall be done in a man, and there also will
he punish and suppress all iniquity. We have a Similitude of this in Wax. Soft
wax is capable to receive all Impressions: but that which is hard must be put
into the Fire. For as the Earth is reserved last for the Fire; so in like
manner is the Heart of man.

If there happen to a man Reproach, Disgrace, Loss, Revilings, and other
Adversities, all these are, according to Christ's Example, to be endured with
Patience, nor must such Complain, or Murmur, or Judge. Many are much troubled,
if they be injured, but if they could bear it Patiently, they would do better,
and please God. When a man can by his own lost, turn away the loss of another,
he ought to suffer his own proper loss, that that others loss may be prevented.
And this point is to be learned thorough Tribulation and Griefs, otherwise it
will never bring forth fruit: They who thus desire the inward Cross, that so
they may be freed from the Eternal, they also have not the inward one: and
although they seek it, yet they cannot find it. They reject the external, and
therefore the internal cannot be taken up by them.

The state of Christians is of all men in the Earth, the most miserable Estate,
and the most Subject to sufferings. If a Christian's inside could be beheld, no
man would desire his Condition. If any of the Sons of men in the whole world,
is made subject to afflictions, certainly tha^ happens to a Christian, and yet
notwithstanding, he seeks not how he may be freed from Death and the Cross,
which belong unto him. On the other hand also, if any man amongst all those who
live in the World, is found to be cheerful and merry, certainly that also does
belong to the Christian. The countenance of Christ is so dejected and Harsh,
that he who sees him, will refuse him.

It is certainly no small affliction to have all that cast away, which we have
wrought for with all our Labor: yet after that, God on a Sudden raises up
somewhat, which can stand in his Sight: and then it is, that God works in a
man, but the man himself is at Rest from work: whatsoever then is in the man,
and shines forth from him, all that is God, and the man himself belongs to
God, and therefore we are not to look at the Person which is the man, but God
who is in him, (as I may say) is made man in him, and puts him on, and is
and works all things in him, and Shines forth thorough him.

A man that adhereth to the Earth, has joy: and he that adheres to Heaven
also, has joy: but he that is between both these, and touches neither of
them, is affected with great Dolours, and has nothing that may uphold him.

A man always has somewhat, which he thinks is yet to come hereafter, and he
waits for it with joy: but where there is no such Expectation, there is nothing
but Affliction: and even this must be sent from God into the man, if it is to
beget in him any breathings. A man must come so far, that all things do forsake
him, before he can be promoted further. And if this case is brought forth, as
in Relation to the Grosser Creature, it afterward returns also more subtle,
as to that Claritude called Angelick: yea and more subtle as to God himself,
if he can be enjoyed without Angels.

Although we must thus stand in desertion, perish so often, and loose our
selves as to the Creature, Angels, and God, and so every one ought by and
thorough desertion to be Sown, Corrupted, and to conceive Fruit, and again to
be Sown yet in the conclusion the buisiness will come to the best Issue and the
man shall be everlastingly preserved and quieted in God, when he shall bring
forth Frui^ out of his Seed with wonderful profit and increase, and shall have
an External harvest.

That the Claritude of the Apostles was so excellent and that thy did discern
all much clearer then others, even that was to be Gained by them thorough many
Sufferings: and their condition was conjoined with so much bitterness, that
they could not for that reason deliver themselves. An elect: man lives in
affliction as a Fish lives in Water. He that is not Dead, cannot exercise
himself in the Resurrection of Christ, but before that, he must suffer
Patiently, that he may be Exercised in the Passion and Death of Christ. If the
Magistrate can so punish a Malefactor, that he shall transgress no more, how
much more shall God do the same.

CHAP. XVIII.
WE may observe a Similitude from a House which is delineated in Paper: for
many goes away with their Paper-house, and cry, this is that very House, and
esteem of the Portraicture of the thing, for the very thing it self, and
whosoever will not esteem the figure of the House for the House it self, we
must hate such, and press them down with Persecution. Moreover all that
followed in succeeding Generations have added somewhat to this Figure (by the
Figure is meant the Life of Christ delineated in the Scripture by the House,
that very Life expressed in a man by the Imitation of Christ.)

Whatsoever is in the World, viz. Emperors, Kings, Princes, Lords, with all
their Hight, Riches, Pleasure, Feastings, Drinking, Drums, Dances, etc. and all
whatever can be thought of for Delight and pleasure; Yea so also that which is
lost of all, yea whatever else can be found out, are all but the Image of true
things, and of the true Essence or Substance. Wherefore be ye turned from the
Shadow to the Truth, whoever you be that desire to live, and to have both true
Peace and true Joy to all Eternity. The whole world, and all Creatures are but
the Image only of the Essence, and of the inward Truth of things: Yea, God also
has Created the Creatures in their order, so, as they may rejoice in their
corporal order, and so likewise are they the Image of the internal Truth, even
as that also has its own Spiritual order. All creatures are a type of the
internal Truth, and of the true Substance, and are, as it were, the Image of a
man in a Glass.

At length there arises in man so great an understanding, that in fine even
that also is no longer desired, when viz. any one desires to arrive at the true
Substance or essence. There is a Claritude given, which foretells to a man
that essence of the thing, in which he is not yet got, and to which he at last
comes. Just as a flower is a certain demonstration of the Fruit that is to
come in the future.

CHAP. XIX.
WHen the Lord said to the younger Son, My Son, go and Work in the Vineyard to
day, and he answered: I go Lord: but coming unto the Elder, he also said, Go
Work in the Vineyard: and he answered, I will not: Those two Sons are but one
Man. For when a man begins, he will do all, he will Suppress sin, purify
himself, he will Worship, Love, and adore God, and adhere unto him, etc. He
thinks that he is able to perform all this. But when the Business comes to
Trial, then a man at last apprehends, that he can scarcely observe the
outward show of Virtue or Righteousness, and that also with much indignation
and reluctance, because he has not that true essential Righteousness and
Virtue, whence true desire springs.

For it is essential virtue only that makes a man pleasant, and willing to do
whatsoever he is to do, and to omit, whatsoever he is to omit: and if this
Virtue be essentially in him, then is he more backward and full of loathing
against Vice, then he was before against Virtue, when Vice was yet in the
Throne. Therefore unless the very root of Vices and of Unrighteousness, whence
external wickednesses do Spring, as the Fruits of a corrupt Tree, be purged
out, no true Virtue, or real and Substantial Righteousness can grow forth in a
man. And therefore all men are Liars, and have only the outside-shew of
Righteousness, without the true essence of the thing: for the thing comes not
forth out of the mind, because the mind has not received it: For the Heart of
that man that is full of any thing, the man himself is the most Subjected
servant to that thing. Also sin is not heartily or from the mind omitted (as
being yet in the mind) though as to show it may be omitted. I say not all this
for this Purpose, that a man ought to wait so long to omit the show of the
Vices, and perform a show of virtue, till Vice inwardly also be extirpated, and
essential virtue Implanted: but that none should remain contented, if, as to
the show only, he omitteth Vice and have the Possession of Virtue; nor that
then he account of himself for a Just man, or should think, that he has then
so fulfilled Righteousness, and to have departed from sin: For we must
Earnestly Pray both by Night and by Day, that it be omitted Heartily or out of
the Mind, which externally is omitted as to the show thereof. But the truth is,
that is not the work of man, but of God only: for it is not Possible for any
man to extirpate sin from the Root it self, but a man can suffer only, that God
may do that according to his faithful Promises. If a man could perform that
thing, it would not be a constant or an abiding thing, because whatsoever a man
does, is inconstant, and is annihilated again by man: If therefore a man should
suppress sin, it would again Bud forth, for the work of a man is not Permanent,
or lasting, but may be broke off by others. But that which God works, is
Subject to no Destruction.

When he Suppresseth sin, and extirpates it, it must remain Suppressed for
Evermore, and Righteousness, implanted in its stead, must abide the same to all
Eternity.

CHAP. XX.
THis is the meaning of the Parable of the two Sons, who should go and labor
in the Vineyard, he that would not do it, he did it, that is, he came so far as
to confess: that it was impossible for him to extirpate sin, and to implant
Righteousness. And when he thus became deficient in himself, and despaired
thereof, he waited for the Gracious promises of God, viz. that God himself
would do that, when it proved Impossible for man to do it. And that same will,
to perform, of the first Son and all his other Actions and Omissions exercised
(as to show) are prefigured by Abraham's begetting Ishmael, for he brought him
forth by working, he himself doing it: but he was according to the flesh: But
he could not produce Isaac by working; for as to him, he was to wait on the
Promise of God, viz. That God himself should work it, and he be born after the
Spirit. And when these things are fulfilled, whatever is to be omitted, is
omitted without labor; and whatever is done, is done without labor, for the
Lord has willing Servants, who do all willingly and omit also, because that
which at first made a man backward and loath, is extirpated, and in its room
righteousness is implanted.

To resist the breaking out of sins by the law of sin, and to have a show of
virtue, cannot be done with man's working, but the extirpation of sins, and the
implantation of righteousness is done without man's working, according to the
word of promise which is to be expected with desire: if this shall once come upon
us, it cannot be again suppressed, but must remain eternally. Before Christ,
comes the Law and makes a man contrite and and sorrowful, so as if a Man will
submit unto it, he will desire Christ.

That which the Law shows, it does not take away; and that which it commands,
it does not give. But at length Christ comes and takes away what the Law had
discovered, viz. Sin, and he implaneth what the Law had commanded, viz.
Righteousness, therefore Christ comes at last, and he does all this: and then
begins in man the time of the New Testament, that in him all things may be
fulfilled and confirmed, which had been promised of Christ; but before this, he
lived under the Law, viz. in the time of the Old Testament, and wanted Christ.

The Friends of God live in the continual death of the flesh, but in mind they
live, and are free. To rejoice in sorrow, and to live in death, is to take
safety from ones enemies. For what enemy is greater than Death, and yet out of
it how much Health springs? for by Death we are separated from that, which
came into us by the Fall of Adam. Before Death a man has a Kingdom in God, but
in death God has, or gives a Kingdom in man. Man is led against his will into
this death, as Christ said unto Peter, When thou were young, thou did Gird
thy self, and went whither thou would: but when thou shall be old, tho^ shall
stretch out thy hands, and another shall bind thee, and lead thee whither thou
would^^ not. A man ought not to depart from men that are his Adversaries, for
being with them he is prepared, and his foundation is uncovered to him: but let
him depart from those who esteem highly of him, lest perhaps he fall into
Pride: to gross works, there is need of gross Instruments.

Christ says, Except a man leaves, etc. If a man must leave any thing, he
ought first to have it. Thus therefore a man first has Father, Mother,
Friends, Riches, Honors of this World, and Learning. Now this forsaking is the
image of those things, which also must, besides these be forsaken: for all that
is gotten out of them, viz. those fruits which are sprung forth out of the
corruption of earthly things, are also to be corrupted, and consequently those
good things also are to be forsaken; but out of that forsaking are still gotten
other greater goods, and more high fruits, which again must be subjected to
corruption, whence afterward other fruits do come forth augmented a hundred
fold. And thus Death and Corruptions, do always ascend Higher and Higher, as
also do the fruits, and the Life Springing from thence.

No man can apply the Craetures to that Parable, unless he himself become above
the Creature. Paul says, Unhappy man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death? Here is to be noted, that Paul had not any Body of Death in
that state, in which we have some such like, for as to this state, he was
already Dead, nor was there need, as to that, that he should dye yet further,
and the lowest of these did no longer belong unto him: for out of many Deaths,
he always ascended to a more Sublime Life, and as to that Life, he was again
to dye, and upon this account it was, that he wore a Body of Death. And by how
much the Higher he ascended into this Life, so much the Higher also was he
elevated, as to new Deaths.

We forsake the Body, because we found it before in Adam: if also we must
forsake our Soul, that also must first be found of us: but we find it, when we
leave the Body.

A man never found himself in that which he once has lost, but that loss,
dying, and Condemnation is Eternal without Redemption: But in God that is
found; in God also is Redemption; but not in that, which has Perished: Else
man should stand in time, and not in Eternity, and with him would be found
nothing but the old stock.

Before an elect Man comes into Hell or the Grave (of which he does not yet
know, whither he shall come thither or not) if he be then asked to renounce the
Creature, he says, yes, and does renounce it, so, as he will never more touch
it, or desire it: for God in that renounciation takes away also the desire, so
that such a one cannot and will not desire any thing more. God leads a man by
unknown ways; just as when one comes into a strange Country, where he knows
not the way, nor understands the Language, nor has any Money, and yet he goes
on still.

As long as a Man has still left any things to fly to, so as all things have
not renounced him, faith has not yet found ^oom in him.

CHAP. XXI.
THe difference betwixt those who are in the Hell of the happy, and those who
are in the Hell of the Damned, is ^his, they who live in the Hell of the
Blessed, bear a pure Heart and a clean Conscience, nor is there any accusation
^n them: O that I had done this! O that (...) had omitted that, etc. if one
says: Those that complain not of such things, have not been Subjected to any
sufferings: ^t is answered to him: Ask any one who ^s Condemned to Death,
whether or no ^^e be not subjected to misery and sufferings, though he should
confess the Judgment which he suffers to be Just, and that he is ^eservedly put
to all Torture and Punishment, nor would he desire otherwise, then that he
might Suffer: Yet neverthe^ess he is in Misery, and suffers the anguish and
pains of Death. But happy are these Condemned ones, who then at last go down
into their Hell, when first they have contended Rightly with all their might or
strength applied: all which particulars must precede, if any one expects to be
put forwards by God. But we must labor to attain to the very Top, so as that
we cannot go Higher: and then at length it is propounded to a man, that all
whatsoever he has hitherto Labored for, and his own proper Righteousness (of
which Paul says 10 to the Romans 3. They seeking to Establish their own
Righteousness, are not Subject to the Righteousness of God) cannot possibly
stand in the sight of God; also he must confess, that he deservedly suffers the
Judgment of God, and to be cast into this Hell. And then is he Subjected to
those Pains, and is filled with so many Anguishes, though his Conscience be
pure, because he has applied all his strength, that he might live according to
the will of God. Which they who are in the Hell of the damned have not done,
and therefore they have not this Glory, but Conscience always accuses them,
that they are Impure: besides these sit down in the lower-most Hell, when the
elect may sit in the Uppermost Hell, and suffer the Torments of this Judgment,
finding refreshment neither in God, nor in the Creatures. Between the
Creatures, and those who sit in the uppermost Hell, is a great Gulf, so that
they can come no more unto them, nor do they desire it, because they have been
renounced of the Creatures: and when that Renounciation is Past, then is the
last farewell taken, that they can never more touch them, and therefore they are
Separated from the Creature, and from God also. Yet they very well know, that
God lives, and that they are to be kept bound in this dark prison, which is
enlightened neither by God, nor by any creature, where also they hope for no
Redemption, either from God, or from the creature, ^or have they any faith, but
afterward, when they have endured all this for some time, then faith begins to
come, and the man thus sighs and breaths out; (...) that I might embrace Christ
with these my arms; O that I might see the Salvation of Israel! and then Christ
come always nearer, till he stands just nex^ unto him; and frees him from out
of thi^ darksome prison, Death, and Hell, and transplanteth him into life,
Heaven, and true Light. It is then indeed that a man apprehends, what that
was, that Christ descended into hell, as also that he wen^ down to the
lowermost places. Forth^ lowest places of the Earth do denote the most remote
separation from God, i^ which a man lives in his ownness, and in which Christ
comes unto him, and leads him out thence together wi^^ himself. The Ancients
did thus pain^ out the nearest hell, that a certain man sat upon him whose name
was US, b^ held a Cup in his hand, offering it to a^^ that came, that they
might Drink. The same US, is in us, when we glow wi^^ the highest zeal we
possible can, un^^ we come into the hell of Trials, and the all whatsoever is
ours, is consumed, a^^ all Egoity, and Meity, etc. and wh^^ ever else is flesh.
And then Christ takes this purified Man, for Christ took (...) him the pure
humanity: so also a man ought to be pure (which state he comes to in hell)
before Christ takes him up, and is united with him.

Before death is suffered, glory is not given to God, but after that, it is
given to him. After death man is in the truth, but before death he is in a lie.
Before death a man appropriates all things to himself, viz. life, substance,
and all: and he thinks that these are due to him of right, nor that any of them
can be taken from him, but by injustice. Yet he possesses all in a lie, and by
injustice, though he thinks that he does possess them by right and in truth,
until death ^vercomes him. And then at last all ^^re acknowledged, and looked
upon o^herwise, and all are yielded and ascrib^d to God, and to him alone is
glory in Man given. And a man is delivered ^om all his own propriety, and is
made ^oper to God, who possesses him, and ^^cteth him. And thus Hell is made
Heaven at last, by reason of his yielding ^p.

When the elect do come into hell, they willingly endure it, out of Love,
although it be a great torment to them Just like him who subjects himself to
sufferings for the sake of some other, who he most dearly loves, and desires
not to be freed from those pains, although they by not small ones, so that that
other may but be freed from that evil. Or else, (...) one should submit himself
to poverty an^ want for the sake of his beloved, that (...) his beloved my be
relieved from wa^^ or indigency: and although those sufferings are great
enough, yet Love rende^ them easiy and lovely.

By how much the greater is the Death Hell, and condemnation, by so mu^^ the
greater is the Life, Heaven, an^ Salvation: by how much the greater the Death,
Hell, and anguish, so mu^^ the greater, and more sublime bi^^ Heaven, and life
follows thereupon. man possesses himself, therefore he al^ loves, seeks,
and in all things defen^eth himself. But when he is given (...) to God, he is
not his own, but God and as before he possessed himself, now God is in the room
of himself a^ possesses him. This man therefore, with all his accidents, is
God's; and has nothing no more, but all things of his are God's, yea so fully
or absolutely, that if one should give to, or take away any thing from this
man, or do good or evil to him, or love or hate him, all these are done to God
and not to man: Moreover this man applies not these things to himself, and
therefore also cannot be angry, nor hate his adversaries, seeing that all is
done, not to him, but to God. But it is proper to God, to Love, and to do good,
which now do ^hine forth thorough this man.

CHAP. XXII.
WHen a Man turns his eyes inwards, he will behold sin so great within
himself, that all he defects and spots of his Neighbor will appear to him
small and few: yea that which belongs to others, will in respect of his sin,
by him be accounted ^ather for good, then for evil. But if any one weighs the
sins of others in a too strict balance, and judges too rigourously of them, it
is a certain sign, that this man does not know himself, nor is come unto
Regeneration.

How much that, which we hitherto seek, is contrary to that thing, which i^
truly obtained, then at length appears when God snatcheth us away from thence
and together with Paul, overturns, all our understanding, knowledge, and will
and whatever we have wrought, he so breaks it to pieces, that all dies with the
man, and remains confounded.

Alas, how great is the misery, and how much the anguish in that same death and
corruption! There flesh and blood, (which cannot attain to the inheritance of
the Kingdom of God) a^^ consumed, and all things perish, which a man thought to
have been somewhat But afterward, when a man is we^^ purged, and purified in
this purgatory then he comes to the truth of the matter and then at length
acknowledges, the whatever he thought to have had (...) possession of, (before
death) to be nothing; and that he was (before this death) in a lie: Just as it
is commonly said of him, who is Dead, that he is in the truth, but we, whilst
we yet live, are in a lie. All things in death proceed otherwise then before,
even as if the Sun should go backwards. When Paul was overwhelmed, all things
which before he had thought to be in being, were now perished together with his
pleasure, knowledge and understanding: God rejected all, but he, ^gnorant of
all, cried out; Lord, what will thou have me to do?

CHAP. XXIII.
A Man must go as far as it is possible for him to go, and when he shall ^trive
at that point, that is impossible for ^im, he must join his hands, and bend is
knees, and stretch our his arms, that ^od may do with him what he pleases;
with whom that is possible, that is im^ossible with man.

A similitude we have in a Beggar: Just (...) when one seeks an Alms from
door to door, and it is still said to him; God look upon thee; so also is it
done with a man, who falls into this misery, all creatures, to which soever he
approaches, refuse him; so that at length God only must help and save him.
When all things stand at great distance, that there remains no more
underpropping, or refuge, then is the Lord urged to come in: for God comes
not; unless he be urged. A man must be left naked, and stripped of all things, if
God only must be made his essential life and prop. Also in desertion it cannot
be but God will come. When God begins to purge the floor of sin, and to root it
up from the bottom, then it is, that, at last, a man begins to know himself;
and he is in his own sight, what he is in truth, and what he was both before,
and after that; and that which now is required is plainly another thing, then
what he thought formerly, when he was still under the works of the Law: and it
repents him much, that he ever had esteemed himself for a Godly man, because
he acknowledges the contrary now, viz. that he has been a sinner and an
unrighteous man, but not a good man. And now God takes violent hold on the
root it self, to pluck it up. But what a stroke this is, any one may know, who
will experience the very thing it self. When a man burns with zeal, and is
willing to purify himself, then in the end is he become impure and unrighteous,
for then God discovers to him the very foundation it self of wickedness, and
sets before his eyes that which was from the beginning. There therefore must
the man abide, and stand in the examination. In that exercise of the Cross,
nothing can relieve a man, and what was before told him of that cross, he can
not now own it, that this is that very case: True indeed he wishes: O that
this were it! and yet he judges that this his suffering is plainly some other
thing, till God brings him forth, as purged, or cleansed. And then he is
clothed with Righteousness, and is translated into the true essence: then also
he has utterly lost himself, yea and all that also wherein he sought himself,
and is made one with God, who is made unto him all things. Formerly he sought
to save his Soul, always fearing lest he should lose it: but now he stands in
the hand of God, given up to God, and with him, and out of him, God does what
he pleases, both in time, and in eternity; for he acquiesceth in all things
and desires nothing, but that the will of God may be done in him.

CHAP. XXIIII.
WHen sin is discovered to a man, then it seems to him to be as it were a
Sword, at which he is frighted, and flees to God; and so Satan is killed by
his own Sword. Paul says: From out of many sins, Righteousness is manifested:
when sins are multiplied, that is, when the multitude and magnitude of sins
become known to a man, then he turns his back at last upon sin, and goes to
God, who delivers him from it, and in the place of sin, manifests to him his
own Righteousness; for as sometimes many Hounds pursue after one Hare, when the
Dogs are taken off, the Beast is freed and remains alone, so also God does with
the multitude of sins, so as they all at last leave following a man. Therefore
it is written in the Psalms: A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten
thousand at thy right hand, and they shall not come near thee. This falling of
thousands and ten thousands is done in man, but it approaches not unto a man,
but he is kept upright in God, and is taken into his glory. And then he becomes
as if he were not; he is, as it were, so wholly deified, that he can find
nothing but God, neither himself, nor any creature. And when he is thus in an
exstasie and in a rapture above, then is he void of discretion and without
reason. Not as though they were not still in being in him, but that he is not
sensible of them, until he returns into his mind again: but it is a pain to
him, that he is forced to descend again into discretion. For it was a great
bitterness to Paul, that he was forced to return back into discretion for the
sake of his Brethren.

No man understands those places of Paul's sin. Experience is the mother of
understanding. If one has once tasted Honey, he needs not to be told, that Honey
is Sweet. He that sees a white thing, there is no need to say unto him, that
thing is white, for he will answer, what need is there to tell me that, when I
my self both see, and understand the very thing. He that has the very thing it
self stands in no need of the type or shadow of that thing.

CHAP. XXV.
CHrist descended so low, as we also are to come down: he went no lower, but he
arises much higher then we can: Now can we also possibly come into that depth,
unless first we shall arrive at exaltation. Man has Christ first in Nature,
and always receives him more sublime, yet so, as what has gone before, is
still sown again, to spring up into a more noble plant, so that at length man
receives Christ without all or any creature. Thus man is always ascending by
and thorough the creatures, until he has found Christ without the creatures. A
man ascends by the Angels unto the Son, who gives him up unto the Father.
Generation proceeds from one degree unto another, until one climeth above all
things into Eternity: and there generation ends, for there is the eternal
abyss, in which he is wholly swallowed up: and he who arrives so far, knows all
things in a constant Idea, out of which God snatcheth him, and he always sees
most clearly, by what degrees God was present with him, and therefore he
persisteth in a perpetual giving of thanks. Also in such a claritude and vision
of God, he is in a perpetual death, and is, as it were, some hungring Soul to
whom it is not lawful to eat of Meats set before him. But if he does throw his
life into danger and does eat, then must he again dye a new death: therefore
such kind of men are both poor and rich: for though they are in the bosom of
all comfort, yet they want all comfort, so also they, in jo^s, want joy, and in
pleasures, want pleasure. And these are they, who are poor in spirit, who have
not whereon to lay their heads, and dare touch nothing, and stand they do, as
it were, upon a round Globe; yet they have wings, but know it not. As to
themselves, they are altogether distitute of all security: but in God's sight
they are secure. Whereas they, who are secure in themselves, want security
before God. This state is not the state of Esau, but of Jacob: for Esau has
God for his propriety, but God has Jacob for his own propriety, who stands in
being given up to God, because God has made him fit, and capable, and has
reduced him to obedience, and therefore the man possesses God with
acquiescence and in the midst of all riches, and glory, he accounts himself a
poor wretch, he is quietly satisfied in all things which God shall do: If he
gives him Heaven, he is quetly pleased: if he cast him into hell it self, he
bears it patiently, and still continues resigned up to the will of God: also
what things soever God puts upon him by other men, he receives them all as from
God, and has nothing to do with men, but with God, who does all these things
by means of men: therefore is he at peace with all men, and can hate no man,
for any adversity done unto him: for he takes it from God, and not from Man,
whom he still looks upon, but as on instruments, by which God works, as when
a trumpet sounds, it is not the trumpet makes the sound, but the Trumpeter.
Hence it follows, that he stands in a willing patience against all, that can
happen unto him by men: so that if they hate him, blaspheme him, injury him,
hinder him, punish him, revile him, detract from his reputation, take away his
goods, his friends, his house, and do persecute him, captivate him, bind him on
wracks, torment and kill him, he takes all these from the hand of God alone,
and has no business with men, and in all these he looks upon God only, and not
upon Men; he renounceth to all persons and can take all in good part. So also
on the contrary, if any one good happens to him from men, he takes all that
also from God, because he has taken off his eyes from all means, and has
fixed them upon God alone, he also has no respect of persons, which God has
withdrawn from him, and has given him the Wisdom, that he can behold God in
the person of man, and can take all things from his hands. And so he can give
all glory to God, and is a true worshipper of him.

CHAP. XXVI.
ALl fear of God which any one has, before the birth of Jacob, is a servile
fear: and the filial fear comes not at first, but when there is a new birth.

The servile goes before, but lasts not, and the filial follows, and abideeth.

When Esau was born he knew nothing as yet of Jacob, but supposed that the
inheritance of the blessing was his. First he came forth but in part, and in
time was put further out, till also his feet came forth: then he looks back
upon Jacob, and is smitten with grief, and he saw also his own danger: and yet
he contrives to kill him, and to take him out of the way: but the more he
endeavors to suppress him, by so much the more does Jacob come forth. It is
written concerning Esau; Though thou should build thy nest amongst the Stars,
yet I will pull thee thence. Betwixt Esau and Jacob there is no dying: for
Jacob held Esau by the heel, and followed him. Esau is the beginning, that
which follows is Jacob: the habitation of Esau was in the desert.

Moreover concerning Esau and Jacob: Esau proceeded from Isaac, which is a
divine birth, yet the judgment comes upon him: Such a thing is Righteousness
in a man, upon which also comes judgment. Esau has the Righteousness of God,
as if it were his propriety, and he applies it unto his delight, and he
seeks life for himself therein, and therefore the judgment of God must come
upon Esau, that he must lay down his life, till he comes into the state of
Jacob, who abides resigned up unto God, and whether God gives, or whether God
takes away any thing, he is satisfied therewith. So soon as a Man receives a
new life, he ^s again subjected unto judgment, and is forced to suffer death.

CHAP. XXVII.
THat which is moved together with the body of Christ, that is a member in the
body of Christ. The humanity of Christ is a middle thing between God and us,
and God cannot come into us, but by mediation of this. The feeding on the most
pure body of Christ, transferreth us into a divine essence, and that food
consumes all flesh. Christ, when he had taken the Bread, said: In doing this,
ye shall declare my Death: This is the sense and the impression of the death of
Christ, the expression of which is the declaration thereof. Hence it may be
observed, what kind of food it is, to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his
blood, viz. such as many, who formerly had been fed and filled by Christ, going
back, did forsake him, when they should have come unto his food. Great is the
difference betwixt the essential truth, and the notional truth: Also between
the essential death, and the notional death. There is also great difference
between those who know God in Nature, a^^ ^^cordingly do possess and use him,
and (...) who know God in God, and accor^^^ly do possess and use him: for pur^
^^ture, such as is created from God, ^^^^eth into God, without all Adamica^
^^cidents.

It is true indeed, that the Israe^ (...) who came out of Egypt, did eat
Hea^^ly bread in the Wilderness, yet that co^^ (...) not preserve them, so as
that they sho^^ abide, but dye they must, as Christ sa^^^^ Your Fathers did eat
the bread from Heav^^ and are dead.

When first we come out of Egypt, (...) comes to pass, that we can in the
(...) of flesh, or of Nature see, know, posse^^^ and use God, yea and hold him
in o^ propriety, but that nature must come (...) to death, and be judged of
God: an^ then we possess and know God not (...) the life of the flesh, or of
Nature, b^^ in the death of the flesh: and then God is possessed without
appropriation, without touching, or handling: for whatever feels or touches in
us, is the flesh, and is delivered up into death from God, but afterward, in a
true quiet resignation, God beholds himself in us, and there knows, and loves
himself, and although formerly we knew and applied God in Nature, or the life
of the flesh, yet that state remains no longer, but by and thorough judgment is
pressed down into death, and has nothing in God, neither pleasure, nor joy,
nor comfort* And although Nature or the flesh had for some time some such thing
in God, yet now it has it no more. Whatsoever came out of Egypt, and did
rejoy^^ to go forward into the promised Land, that must fall in the Wilderness
and dye* but the Children, sprung from them did come into that Land. Now thou^^
the flesh is thus condemned unto death that it can have no delight nor joy
(...) God, yet the mind is and rests in pea^^ and joy, and then the man, when
the flesh is thus dead, is like to wax which softened by the fire, and is made
fit receive all Impressions. As often as a (...) is willing, upon the
appearance of G^^ to gain his life in God, and he himself ^^prehends the very
thing; he ought the^fore again to be judged, and to suffer a new death. It
behooveth the thieves to remain under judgment upon the cross, retaining no
life, either in God or in the creatures, nor for the obtaining of life, can
they be heard, until the thief on the right hand, forsaking all accidents,
shall turn himself unto Christ. It also behooves this man to remain in
judgment, according to the flesh, till, as to that, he shall be dead: Nor shall
he ever be raised up again into that life, according to which he has dyed, but
he is eternally to forsake it, out of, or from that just judgment. But he shall
be raised into another life, which is God himself. And this is then that pure
nature, that pure humanity, that pure flesh, which Christ assumed, as it is
written Zach. 2.12. And the Lord shall possess Judah his portion in the
sanctified Earth. And such purified flesh has access to God, and God does
manifest himself to it with delight, and it stands given up under God and
possesses God without appropriation, seeing he leaves him also free. Such a
man possesses God no more in Nature, that is in the life of the flesh, but
possesses God in the death of Nature. It possesses God in God, it knows God
in God, it sees God in God. It knows Christ, no more according to the flesh,
as formerly, but according to the Spirit: God, in this man, enjoys all
things; and does with him according to his pleasure, both in time, and in
eternity, and this Man is at rest in God. But the an^iety, which he suffers in
the flesh or nature, he indeed perceives, that sometimes he knows not which
way to turn him: but he so is at rest, that he wills nothing, but what God
wills: if therefore it behooveth a man to possess God in the death, and not
in the life of the flesh, it much more behooveth him to possess, use, know, and
behold the creature in the same death of the flesh: for if this is to be done
inwardly, as to God, much more ought it to be done outwardly, as to the
creature: for all things must be beheld and applied in death, and not in life,
if it be to the rightly done. Whilst therefore we are not yet dead, but are yet
alive, we ought to be lifted up on the cross, and lay down such a life under a
just judgment. For else we cannot be conversant in or with the sight of God,
unless when we lie down in death: and our conversation which is without death,
is no conversation in the sight of God, and though in the sight of Men it may
have a semblance, yet it cannot stand before God. But when life is, as was
said, so laid down, we are by the resurrection of Christ raised up again into a
new life: for unless the resurrection of Christ should be, we should remain
eternally in death. When the thief on the right hand, leaving all, did turn
himself unto Christ, he begged to be heard of him in his Kingdom. Therefore he
yielded up himself into conformity of the death of Christ, wherefore also he
was conformed also in the resurrection. He was crucified by Law, which, like a
just Magistrate, did not desist from him, till it had thrown him into death:
and then he had finish^d his office, and so became justified from ^in: he also
revived not any more into that life, to which he dyed by the Law, ^therwise the
Law would have had power over him again. But Christ vivified him another way,
and in his resurrection raised him up again into eternal life, which is God
himself. Then the Law had no more power over him: for that life, for which
Satan (by means of the Law) accuses a Man, is judged by, and thorough death,
and is taken out o^ the way.

All that came out of Egypt must dye in the Wilderness, but their Children
came into the Promised Land, by these particulars that fruit is denoted, which
follows upon a going out. When a man comes into the Land of Promise, and there
grows fat and gross, if then he does not behave himself rightly, he is again
expelled into the Land of the North* where much misery, grief, and pain (...)
sustained, till the Lord does bring him from thence again; then he enters into
again by another way, viz. with a gre^ter glory, and riches then before; an^
then he shall never be cast out again. F^^ though they which Returned from
Babylon, did not find that in the temple, which they had before, yet the Glory
of the last temple was greater then that of the first.

CHAP. XXVIII.
WHen a Man loses himself, he nevers finds himself the same again as he was
when he lost himself: and he knows not the fruit as yet of that losing of
himself, when he as yet has not seen it, or experienced it.

When corruption is present, Fruit does not presently appear; for that does
grow by degrees even to its full ripeness.

He that is free from all persons, has need that he be free also in his own
person, and that not only notionally, but also essentially.

When a man has lost is body, he never finds it the same again: but in his
Soul he finds a supernatural understanding, Light, and Claritude, and wh^^^^ver
then he understands of Gods, is (...) ^et God, but rather the contrary. (...) A
therefore he has found his Soul so (...) also ^ust he again lose it, as before
he (...) did is body, so, as he shall never fir^^^'d it such a Soul again. But
the calamity of this destruction and death is vast: but out of these a man
comes into the true essence, viz. God: and then that is much more essential,
then it was at first, when he was to lose himself with so great an anguish and
Death.

CHAP. XXIX.
WHen a man loses himself as to the body, he afterward finds himself as to
his Soul, in the supernatural understanding, knowledge, vision, and use: then
when he again loses himself, as to his Soul, he is stripped of all these
again: and then arises great calamity, Hell, and Misery; yet if he goes forth
out of them, then he finds himself in the vision of God* and in such wisdom,
understanding and claritude, as the former understanding vision and use of his
Soul, when he first ^ost his body, could not comprehend Christ therefore so
assumed humanity, (...) that he was united therewith. But (...) after that the
inferior Powers also a^ to be assumed by him, there is yet need of another
death. Then a Man stands in a full purpose of persevering in Christ, and never
to go back again from him: just like him, who sitting at a Table spread and
filled with various and delicate sorts of Food, desires not to depart from
thence: or like him, who living well, and sound, desires not to kill himself.

How much misery, and difficulty of death is required before a man is purified,
^s known to them, who have experienced the thing: and when a man is purged and
prepared for the seed of God, that ^t may be sown, yet he does not hitherto
apprehend nor perceive that seed, and knows not that he is sown therewith,
until it comes up: nor yet does it come up, until it be corrupted in the
Earth. How great miseries and anguishes in dv^ng are required to that
corruption of the ^eed, is also known to them, who have ^elt it. This death of
the Soul happens after the death of the Body is past: for a ^eath also
belongs to the Soul, both which deaths must be fulfilled in a man. When the
body is lost, the Soul also must be lost. And this is that same Talent, which
the Lord required of the man, besides those Ten; for both sums are due unto
him, and he will have both paid unto himself. That which was said before
concerning the seed sown in a purified mind, which is not perceived until it be
corrupted, and growth forth, the very same thing does more clearly appear, from
the similtude of the Field sown with Corn.

CHAP. XXX.
IN a man from whom sin is taken away, and who is purged again from sin, no
more motions thereof are found in the bottom of the mind: for from a root
cleansed from all sins, how can any evil spring forth? For that would be
^^sign, that somewhat was still deficient there, and that the bottom was not
wholly purified. If Plato had had his found^tion thoroughly purged, he had not
indulged his anger over his servant. Wh^^ motions soever happen in them that
a^^urified, proceed not from the bottom of their minds, but from without only,
and such do presently drive them out again, whether it be anger, or honor, or
ambition, or such like.

To a man once purified, there is yet need of a closer purification, and after
that of another yet more close. Death and corruption do ascend as the increase
ascends. Let no man think, that he who has a certainty of eternal life has
therefore no need to suffer. It is written, Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth
is my Footstool. When therefore the mind of a man is the Heaven and throne of
God, then God uses his flesh as subjected unto himself, and for his
footstool. There were given to the Woman in the Revelations two Wings, that
she should fly away into the Wilderness, from before the face of the Dragon:
but the Dragon went forth, and fought with her seed, those are such men as are
not yet set fully at liberty.

Illumination is never brought to pass in a man, unless first he be purified;
for ^llumination must be expected to follow purification, until the very last
point of impurity be also perfectly purged out. And then presently succeds
Illumination; and when the business draws toward en end, claritude does always
as it were hover over him, nor does he yet enter, until the very last point
also be purged out, and then at length the enters. The first purification of a
man is by working under the Law: the second by Christ under Grace. Do thou
consider, how that which is bound may then be freed, and how a man must be
quite wearied out in the combat, under this Illumination. But as it was said
here of the first Illumination, viz. that it is not made before the first
purification be accomplished, even unto its utmost degree: so it is not in the
second purification, wherein the foundation is purged, viz. that we might then
look for Illumination, when purification was fully accomplished: Now though
there be a disparity by reason by Illumination yet there is none such by reason
of purification, for even as the first is performed gradually, so also is the
second.

There is no means extant, by whose help God and our mind can be united, but
only the most pure body of Christ.

If we must be regenerated, and become new creatures now in time, then must
that be fulfilled in our Souls, which was done in the body of Christ: for it
behooved him to suffer, to dye, to be laid in the Sepulcher, and then to rise
again: thus ought our Spirits to be also conformed: yea our bodies also, before
they can be vivified to live eternally, must first dye in much misery and
anguish, and then be raised up again at the last Day.

CHAP. XXXI.
THe new man does all things out of, or from regeneration. He has no need to
go first, and hear, or read, what he is to do or to leave undone because all
his things proceed out of Regeneration.

To a regenerate Man, who works and exercises himself in God, eating, and
drinking, and sleeping, and every temporal need begets trouble and anxiety.

He who has regeneration it self, and is come into the essence of God,
restrains himself within bounds, nor does he act as formerly, when he had the
thing only in notion.

There is no need to command a man newly born, that he should live, and see,
and eat, and drink, and sleep, and wake, and desire, and go, and stand, and
speak, etc. for he does all these things unbidden; by nature, for it is his
essence and property: that which he outwardly hears and sees, is only the
expression of himself: for he derives none of these from elsewhere, for he had
them before, and it is his nature, and he thus acts freely. Nor is it
needful, that it should be told him, what a man is, or what it is to live, to
eat, to drink, to sleep, to wake, to desire, to stand, to go, etc. for he knows
all these by his own proper experience. But on the contrary, a man that is not
yet born, knows not what a man is, or what it is to live, to eat, to drink, to
sleep, to watch, to desire, to go, to stand, etc. Neither can it so be
propounded to him, that he may understand it, or by expression have it
represented to him. The like, to this, may be said of a man born of God, who
knows all things by his own proper experience, whatever the Scriptures
testify and express: for all that, is his nature and propriety, and nothing is
adverse to him, which he cannot freely do. And therefore he is no longer under
the Law: He knows by his experience, the ways, by which we are led to
regeneration, or what regeneration, or a man new born again, is; as also what
is his life, his food his drink, his exercise, his work, his going, his
standing, etc. and of these things there is no need, that any of them should be
commanded to him, for he has all things of himself, and they are his
propriety, besides he freely and willingly does them, nor can he do otherwise.
There is no need to tell a Lover, what Love is, nor a Godly man, what Godliness
is: and because he is so come unto the very essence of things, that they are
become his habit and use, and being always present with him, he cannot then be
angry, though he be contradicted, and the matter is not believed by men, for
else he knows and is sensible of the thing, and that he, who is against him,
ought to be subjected to his Judgment. He who is fully sound in health cannot
be angry, nor grieved, though one should say to him, that he is sick, for he
feels that it is otherwise; but he who has the thing only in notion, but not
in substance, cannot bear contradictions, and affronts.

Before we arrive at regeneration, we must be dragged thorough an unknown,
forsaken, and desolate path, and God pulls a man by this way, against his will.
For when a man labored under the Law, so that he could advance no further, and
supposed that he was now arrived at the end of his journey, then at length must
he journey, and be hurried thorough this unknown way. The first way was
pleasant, and full of fresh-green herbs, though it also seemed difficult, and a
man thought, that the end thereof would be God: Yet the end proved to be no
other then this aforesaid rough-way, which is Purgatory, in which a man is
purged from all things, which are of the flesh: God indeed draws a man hither
and thither in this way, and still some small piece of flesh is torn off, here,
or there, till it be left quite bare, and nothing but Spirit remains. Then the
man willingly yields himself up into the hands of God, and into those
sufferings, because the carnal affections are thus consumed in this purgatory,
so that there is nothing remains but Spirit. Then God comes, and applies
himself unto man, and gives himself to be known of man, and so this man comes
at length to arrive at true substance or essence, of which he is made capable
by this suffering, for in this suffering, or purgatory, he is fully purged, and
made fit to receive God. When God is willing to help us, then he exercises us
with this suffering, when all exercises, and all strength of our own fails,
even then are these the exercises of God, and his strength. When all our
strength is vanished away, and we have so long labored under the Law, that we
can do no more, then is God present, whether we will or no; for here a man must
go on, nor is it permitted him to go back again: for he is in the hand of the
Lord, into which he often desired to come; and that hand will not then let him
go, till it has rightly broken him in pieces, by afflictions, and has tumbled
him up and down thorough various cases. Whence it comes, that healwayes more
and more, loses himself, till he be freed from all his flesh, and is made
capable of the heavenly influence. Whoever they are who are not thus exercised,
but abide in their own labor, can never be advanced higher, but stand at a
stay always in the same state; and if one shall return after the space of a
year, or two years, yea of ten, unto them he shall find them still, as he
formerly left them, how much soever they exercise themselves under the Law, and
severity, and good works, and labors, and fastings, and abstinence, etc. Yet
they all stop their course here, being still inwardly unchanged, and
unregenerated, and of the new creature or regeneration know nothing, because
they are not exercised in the hand of the Lord, by means of the aforesaid
sufferings: for affliction alone is this way to the new Generation, to Wisdom,
and to true Knowledge. The aforesaid labor also must be under the Law, yea and
go before that other (else we cannot arrive at the said state of suffering) so
that no one abides therein: for the mind is not yet so purified, and there
still sticks unto its bottom somewhat that is worldly, though one may appear
otherwise outwardly. Consequently, we become not in our minds, partakers with
Christ, until, being purified by that purgatory, and these sufferings, we are
made capable of him: for light and darkness, Christ and Belial dwell not
together. Those middle things, which are interposed between God and us, and
unto which we always remain fixedly holding our eye, so as we cannot see God;
those middle things (I say) are to be removed, by the means of sufferings from
God, if we are to be united to him. If Gold could be sensible, and speak, it
would certainly say what it should suffer, before it could be purified, and so
the Earth would say, how much it must suffer, and how much it would stand in
need of, before the seed is produced out of its bowels. When a man has
brought all his labors to an end, nor cannot go on further, then is the
chiefest and highest work yet before his hands, lying as undone. If this must
be perfected and done, it must be done by God; for it behooveth that he should
accomplish these things, which are impossible for a man to do.

CHAP. XXXII.
A Man who has begged help from the Lord, judges other men honester then
himself: for he confesses that if others had had this grace, which was done to
him, that they had been more faithful, and more honest by much, then himself
is. Whence also he abstaineth from rash judgment, and commiserates poor men,
because he beholds their future misery, out of which he himself thorough the
mercy of God, without any merit of his own, is snatched, and therefore he
cannot extol himself above others, nor tax them, or delude them, but rather
humbles himself beneath all, and burns with a universal charity. Moreover he
would willingly renounce his own Salvation, that others might but be saved. Nor
can he do otherwise, because this is the property of regeneration. He who has
regeneration, and is arrived at the true substance, adhereth to no things,
whatsoever he does, or omits to do, or eats, or drinks, or goes, or stands,
whether he be with others, or whether he be alone; but he always is free from
all, and unces^antly beholds God, whose he is properly, and for whose sake he
uses all things. At what time he is rapt upwards, he is put beyond himself,
and is without all discretion: and when he is let down again from that same
mountain, he uncessantly looks back, upwards again. The new man by a
continual ascent every houer, and moment goes away unto God, nor does he ever
stop his course, because God is unsearchable, and past finding out. He regards
not temporals, though he may seem so, and though he does eat, drink, sleep, and
is clothed; for if he should regard them he would still stand in time: but all
the aforementioned things are snatched from him by fire, that he might ascend
above time, and stand in God. He dyed and rose again in God: he fell oil from
all things, and perished both in Body, Soul, and Spirit. At first, every one is
an infant, then a youth, and thence he goes into manhood, and at length into
old age, then we falter, and can no longer enjoy the pleasure of youth: and at
last we say, I remember, that I have been a young man, but time is gone: When
young men rejoice, I am in sadness; and whilst they live, I dye.

CHAP. XXXIII.
THere is not a letter in the Holy Scriptures, which ought not to be understood
and interpreted concerning the body of Christ: now there are many members of
Christ's body, that which is not in one member, is in another. The whole
Scriptures, of the Old, and New Testament, with all figures and ceremonies,
prefigure the very substance of the matter, and is a type of the internal
truth, as the Image in the glass, is the representation of the face. And as the
Image cannot be in the glass, of whom there is no truth or substance: So there
is no representation of Scripture, or of ceremonies, or of figures, to which
there belongs not some truth and substance. When therefore a representation, or
Image is true, there is also a true essence, or substance. There is no shadow
without a body, nor figure, or Image without an essence. The Book of Psalms
begins maturely with man, and continues with him unto old age, and even to his
end, and with man it rises up from bottom to top. No Christian transcendeth
the exercises of the Psalms: nor can he get so high, but the Psalms accompany
him still, and express his mind.

How long does the faithful man wait for God, till he comes! and when he is
come, he departs again and hides himself, that a man cannot find him. And by
this very thing God will purge a man, that he may learn truly to possess him
without appropriation: for at first, he assumeth God with appropriation, and
this then is that same subtle flesh of hi^ which ought to be consumed.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
FAith is a most desolate thing. Ju^^ as when many things are reach^ out to any
one, and he catches at the^ but then they are pulled away again but at last a
door of escape is opened (...) him, which then he weighs in the balance, and
because he does not see it to b^ a true going forth, he forth with lets it g^^
and waits upon the Lord. This faith b^^ holds those things which appear
not; an^ which a man knows not whence the* are to be taken: for he hopes where
the^^ is no hope. The Thief saw Christ na^ed, hanging next unto him upon the
Cro^^ so that there could appear no Kingdom no Salvation or Life to belong unto
him but contrary to all his whole capacity (...) Understanding he did believe,
that which he did not see. By how much the farther off, and by how much the
mo^^ incredible the things are which are propounded, by so much the greater is
the Faith. And by this faith comes Salvation and righteousness above all the
understanding, faculty and capacity of man. Christ says: I am humble: These
words sometimes do dart like a flash of lightening into a man, and then vanish
away again: if they should abide, so many adversities and injuries could not
fall upon a man: for he would always think, that these were justly done unto
him, and they also were still to be heartily loved, from whom these were done
unto him. Yea though these should be a hundred sold more and greater, which do
happen to him, either from God or men, yet would he always abide without
complaint or murmuring, and would confess all to be rightly, and not
injuriously done unto him. When Paul said, that he was the lowest of the
Apostles, then was he the greatest. Better is an humble sinner confessing his
sins, then a just man puffed up, boasting much, and handling others with hard
words.

All things may be fulfilled in a man, which are extant in Scripture, but not
by a man's, but by God's strength, and when thus the meaning of Scripture is
fulfille^ in a man, the Scripture is a representation of the things which are
fiulfilled i^ him: so that when he looks into Scripture, he may have the
representation (...) all things which are in himself.

CHAP. XXXV.
IN all height of condition, humility is to be kept; and in the Deity, the
Humanity is not to be forgotten; nor must any one fall back into himself, but
property of person is always to be excluded, and God alone is to be beheld. No
man descends (I say) more humbly, then did Christ, who yet was the most high,
for he comprehended both God and man* So also ought we, when exalted up into
the Deity, to retain the humanity, no^ to forget our finderness, for our
emptiness must always be beheld, and we are to be humbled beneath all others.

We can never come unto poverty o^ Spirit, unless first we be taken up into
God, and after that be let down again from him in the condition of the created
Nature, that is into our emptiness, or anity: and then Christ for certain
re^aineth always with us. No man is ^^fer then in the creature, that is, when
upon the acknowledgment of our own ^mptiness, we renounce ambition, that (...),
the endeavor of appropriating. The ^eacock helps us to a similitude for this,
^or when he beholds his tail, he sets (...) upright, but when he looks
down upon ^is feet, he lets his tail fall: so does a man set in the vision of
God, he desist^th from all aspiring of mind, when he ^ooks upon his feet that
is, the state of his ^reated nature. Littleness is to be learn^d of Christ, for
we ought to be afraid, ^^est thorough high speculatious we be lift^d up, and so
fall like Lucifer. Christ ^aith: I am humble: if he was humble, ^ho was so high
in the Deity, and one ^ith it, what then ought not an elect ^an to be? Humility
therefore and little^ess should be always the care of an elect ^an, that he may
give to God the things that are God's, and keep to himself, that which is his:
For in pride consists the highest enmity to God, and the greatest fall from
him. If therefore an elect Man be a little too much elevated in sublime
matters, let him acknowledge his error with the deepest grief, and let him
confess, that he owes a thousand talents, when another perhaps, who is still
living in nature, scarce owes one. The delight and study of true Christians is
always to desire humble and low things, and there security abides with them:
and Christ dwells in them.

CHAP. XXXVI.
WHen a man is exercised about the loss of his Soul he knows no way of escaping
out eternally, but he is quiet, and chooses to remain in that same death, and
perdition of his Soul without any condition made, nor can he believe any
redemption or salvation, and if one talks to him of these good things, he
refuses to hear them* yea all comfort is a bitter affliction to him, when now
he shall be at rest in this eternal damnation and death. Of these J^^ says: I
despaired, nor shall I at all live beyond this moment, thou have set me ^t the
very bottom. These happen to a ^an in the perdition; and corruption of ^is
Soul, his body being already dead. But, concerning those things, which are done
after the death of Body and Soul, nothing can be said: for they must be ^elt:
all that are spoken are quite contrary to the thing it self: all this
abovesaid, is ^he way to that end that lasts eternally. He who is exercised
in the aforesaid way, ^ometh to attain the apprehension of that end, just as he
does, who finds his way ^ut. This end and this way are the actions of God only,
but the passion or suf^ering belongs to man. This is that way, unto which a man
is, against his will, ^ompelled by God; here will prevails ^ot, but coaction,
as the Lord says to Peter: When thou were young, thou did ^^ird thy self,
and thou wentest whither ^hou would, but when thou shall be old, ^hou shall
stretch forth thy hands, and thou ^alt go, whither thou would not. He who
persevereth not in the said passion, ^ut goes back from Christ, that is, freeth
himself, that liberty of his belongs to time, but not to God, and that man is
abortive, of whom Esdras says: There shall be many abortives.

CHAP. XXXVII.
THe Elect stand yielded up, and left to God: and what ever they meet with,
they accept it from God alone, and acknowledge it to be God, nor do they
respect the creatures: Wherefore also they love their enemies, and are in
themselves, free from envy and hatred, and can pray for their enemies, whose
friends they are, confessing all to be good that happens to them: but for
them that injure them, they, one the other, side count those things not to be
good. True Christains, with all that they have, are not their own, but God's
propriety. Whatsoever therefore hapeneth to them, happens to God, also they
take all as from God: Nor do look upon men, nor upon other things, but upon
God, to whom they give up themselves, knowing that all things come from him.
They who are in this state, to them every cross i^ tolerable, and not only
tolerable, but also pleasant, because it comes from God. When a man yields
himself up to God, and commits himself to his will, all anguish and pain become
tolerable to him, and every hell, an Heaven. But these things come not to pass
at first, when ^his state begins, but they then come at last, when one has
been for some time therein, and exercised therein.

It Is necessary, that the will of God should become as pleasant to thee in the
desertion of God, as is God himself. The ^ew creatures, or men translated into
God, are so subtle, and tender, that, for mere subtle spirituallity, they can
scarce ^ear the least word, and yet it behooveth ^em to hear, see, and suffer
every violent ^ssault and sharp usage.

A man born again chooses the good, ^ut refuses the evil: and steps down into
he commotion of an evil, not from his award foundation, but from without. ^et
that commotion is a cold one, and ^anting strength, it is presently suppressed,
and the good is chosen for its quiet sake, (...) which the man stands, and is
yielded up unto God's will, from whose hand he raceiveth all things: and those
things which are difficult he can bear them, without the motions of envy,
anger, or hatred, as springing forth from his foundation: for he turns his eyes
from all intermediate things upon God alone, and owns all things for good, yea
for God, which happen unto him, nor does he desire them to be averted from him:
for even as God wills, so he desires to bear the thing, and though it be hard
for him, yet he so acquiesceth in the divine will, that he would not have it
otherwise, then God would: seeing he well knows, that nothing happens unto
him, but what God has decreed, willed, and destinated should come upon him.

Those whom God advances to perfection are despoiled of all things, in such a
manner, as if they should say to those things in their mind: look no more upon
us, for your end is come.

Men perfected in age can rightly use a knif, which an infant cannot. Therefore
ought not infants to imitate the perfect in all things which they do, The grown
do fear to give a knif, into ^he hands of infants: also they can keep
themselves clean, and unpolluted, and being free from dirt, they can do that,
which infants cannot do. The Perfect ^o with grief and terror, speak of things
^erfect and sublime, and could more ^illingly hold their tongues, yet are they
^ften times forced to break out into words. They had rather speak of more
simple things, yea of such they more willingly ^^eak: and when they must speak
of sub^me things, they are in streights; When (...) man comes into God, and
God into ^im, then he acknowledges himself (...) be unworthy that the earth
should bear ^im.

All persons are swallowed up, when a ^an comes into God, and they are (...)
found in God. When a man is no ^^nger his own, but stands under God, (...)
also belongs to God so, as that he ^anifestly yeldeth, and gives place to
^od: Then God himself performs all (...) affairs of a man, and all things
open ^^emselves, which before, although ma^^ questions were made about them,
yet could they not be comprehended. He that is translated into God, judges of
all things rightly, and all difference or distinction is manifested to him. He
who comes into God, he sees so many and great riches before his eyes, of which
hitherto he had never heard, so that those riches, which he has now in God, do
appear to him, few and small: and therefore his whole life is in ascending
continually, nor can he ever come to the end* and therefore, should he desire
to live a thousand years, he could not count or reckon all his sufferings,
because his whole life consists in a going forwards. Also on the contrary he is
so at rest in the divine will, that he is prepared, eve^^ that very hour, to
dye, if God so pleasseth. And to speak it summarily: The will of God is his
will, joy, and life (...) and therefore he is prepared to suff^^^ whatsoever
God shall impose upon him* For he has yielded up and commi^^^ himself unto
God. But before this yielding up is performed, how much an^ how great misery
and anguish does com^ betwixt, then at length one comes to a^^ prehend, when he
once does arrive at the very thing it self.

THE SAYINGS OF Mat. VVyer, The Second Book.
CHAP. I.
CHrist said of the Temple Magnificently built, it must be destroyed, so a
there shall not be left one stone upon another. Now he himself was this same
very Temple, in which he had appeared, preached, and taught: And also he
declared, how one misery should follow another. But the destruction of the
Temple denotes the dereliction of the Elect: For man plainly is to be
destroyed, and if he then knew* that this was the will of God, he would yet
notwithstanding be comforted, but this also is hid from his eyes.

When a man is reduced into a mee^ nothing, into dust, and ashes, it is his
perfection. That that which is proper to man comes under the judgment of God,
and is captivated under the power of God. Just as one being led captive in the
midst of an army, desires not to fly away, seeing he knows, that that is in
vain: Thus also does this man bow down himself, and seeks not to escape,
because he is a captive under the power o^ God, which power he knows does
extend it self over all, viz. in Heaven, Earth and Hell. But he which knows
not these things, he seeks to escape, nor will he bow himself down: but the
other knows otherwise, that he is kept bound under the power of God, which no
man^ can escape from. Then whatsoever is the proper enjoyment of Man, is bowed
under the judgment of God, in which also it is consumed. Moses says: The works
of God are perfect, all his ways are judgment. And the Psalter says: My flesh
is very much terrified through fear of thee; and I greatly fear thy judgments.
Behold here the ways of the Lord are said to be a judgment in which all
propriety is destroyed. Here fear and terror invade a man, and the further he
sees thereinto, so much the more he is terrified. When the Lord is to be
feared, his strokes shall be soundly felt. God indeed forgiveth sin, yet he
does not leave it unpunished, but comes upon it by his judgment.

When a man acknowledges, that he is the most inferior of all, and lets all
above himself, and that he is the most foolish, unworthy, and the most vain of
all, then is he nearest to his perfection: and such as he beholds himself, such
also he is. That a man has great Illumitiation, charity, and wisdom, is not
his perfection, but God is his perfection, who is the same no less without him,
then in him. Now when a man stands in his nothingness, and is reduced into dust
and ashes, this is his perfection, and that which God puts forward. And when a
Man is so reduced into his nothingness, then also must this nothingness be
reduced into nothing, nor ought a man even to arrogate that to himself: for God
by his judgment has reduced him into Nothing. The new man does not profit or
go forwards, for it is God himself: but a man profits or goes forward in the
new man, who neither is deficient nor proficient, in this a man profits or
goes forward and increases. The fear and terror of God is introduced into a
man with great affliction.

CHAP. II.
TO speak forth the hidden things of God is rather rashness, then devotion, for
they are to be adored, and we ought to tremble before them, but not to babble
them out. Some indeed do freely meddle with them even by talking of them, but
he that is humble adoreth them with an humble voice. For though one does
understand some profound meaning, yet it always reveals it self to be more
profound. The essence of a thing is too worthy to be expressed in words.

When I pray, that the will of God may be done, I am terrfied: and I must add,
O Lord, with thy grace. I can desire no joy, no comfort, no nor heaven, no more
then does that wall, for I may not: it is grace and mercy which I desire,
communion is a most terrible thing to the flesh, because the flesh desires
propriety, and full possession to it self, therefore is communion death unto
it. Faith is like unto a ship driven from the shore, which has neither rudder,
mast, nor oars.

He that is without appropriation, cannot be angry at whatsoever he is either
to suffer, or do: for to be angry belongs perhaps to others, rather then to
him, and therefore he is to decline it. Nothing is to be done boastingly. For
to do or to omit any thing boastingly, is a great evil. Whatsoever claims,
pleasure, that must dye: if he who is well and at ease, do then lose his time:
then is time made his proper own.

CHAP. III.
TO abstain and repress ones self, is no death in respect of my death: because
that is done out of purpose, but this without and beyond all purposes: yet not
so, as if the will of God were not pleasing to me. God has led me violently.
To be thus lead is the work of God, nor is it done unless God wills. In the
agony of death many things are often done, which are not done in the life's
time. In the agony of death is exercised a hard judgment, and then is a man
sometimes promoted therein, to which he could never come before in all the time
of his whole life. First he must conflict with joy, then with sorrow, and
lastly with death. Whatsoever words are spoken without experience, I have no
esteem of them. If I had known that this misery, in which I now live was to
come upon me, I had perished: but now that I am in it, God holds me in it.
God holds me privately, I knowing it not.

The Creature which is rightly used, is made more noble and comes to God: thus
every creature must return to its original, that is, to God, and this is done
by that man, who abides in a right way. The true use of the creatures is
performed with giving of thanks: therefore except one rightly uses the
creature, he uses it to judgment.

Concupiscence is a thing so secretly hidden in Man, that a Man knows not
whither it be concupiscence or not, till for its sake he be lead away captive.
By how much any one is nearer to God, by so much the more pitiful is his
internal condition. To know God, is a state the most subjected to affliction of
all: By how much any one is nearer to God, by so much the higher is he in
sufferings. To know God is indeed a bitter state, by reason of the departure of
the creature, which for his sake must be left. By how much the greater
affliction any one is exercised in, so muc the greater grace he has, and is
dearer unto God. If any one could lay open my inside, he would see there
nothing but death. I have no prop, nor comfort, nor rest neither in Heaven, nor
in Earth, except the will of God, in which I lie down. God begins some new
thing with me. I never was at this rate in sufferings as I now am. I have
nothing but the will of God, in which I acquiesce. And though I am pressed with
so hard afflictions, yet am I far beneath the passion of Christ, the son of
God, whose hard and vehement passion, cannot be compared with, by any other.
God upholdeth me above my own strength: for it were impossible else for me to
do or suffer that which I do. We aim at great things, but the cup we must first
drink, before those great things can come, is a bitter cup.

CHAP. IIII.
IT is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God who shows
mercy: This a man must experience with Paul in the highest straight and
temptation, before these words can be spoken by him: This is proposed to a man;
that that very thing which thou love, thou must forsake. What it is to be
naked and forlorn, no man knows but he who feels it, and he who either was or
is in such a state. I fall down before God like a most miserable worm, being
unworthy to lift my eyes up unto him. O the cup that is to be drunk! O the
draught that consumes all things! he will not put out the smoking flax,
therefore it shall consume with fire. Here I lie like a dumb thing, or like to
a post, and I only suffer misery and affliction. I lie under the will of God,
and corrupt. If it be said: This is not in vain, for fruit will follow, etc. I
leave that to God, and only suffer his will. In God there is no suffering, if I
could stand wholly in God there would be no need, that I should suffer. God
keeps me in the snares of death, and causes me in time to go into the
nothingness of my self. Though one may get up many degrees, yet we are always
to descend, descend, descend, until we come into dust and ashes. That which
before now we talked concerning this Nothingness it was with a certain kind of
pleasure, yet even all that must be subjected under its judgment: We cannot
arrive at this nothingness, but by the exercise of God.

To be delighted with a righteous man, or his writings, words, or works, and to
have a kindness and a good will for them, it is the gift of God.

When any one is freed from the creatures that he can have an in difference for
them, without grief or joy, whether it be loss or gain, there, is made a
breaking thorough, and it is a certain sort of a singular death, that belongs
to this case, nor is it the work of man, but of God. Many suppose themselves to
be that, which temptation or trial discovers to them that they are not. We must
eat as necessity requires: but we must eat, drink, and sleep with fear: all
propriety must expect its judgment, God suffers no appropriation. That which is
commonly said, we can do nothing without God, is easily said, but what that is
in the very thing it self, or what it is to be conversant in that very thing,
no man knows, but he who is come thereunto. Where God teaches and governs,
there is no place for reason, but it is set aside. The teaching, leading, and
rule of God does far surpass it, and the matter seems, to it, to be impossible.
Divinity is learnt with joy, but experienced with sorrow. They which study
divinity, are for the most part enemies to those who experience it. If grief
invadeth us, it is not to be oppresed, lest its fruits perish, but we are to
abide in it, and yet not to despair.

CHAP. V.
TO have a nature wholly self-denied, both as to God and to the creatures, is a
deadly thing. Unless Nature should be equally denied, as to God, as also to the
creatures, it would not go into death. When the root is extripated, death is
present: When that is accomplished, the renounciation is eternal. When God has
once renounced nature, then is the end come; for it can never return back again
to its former state, but it remains in self-denial even as to God also, for
flesh and blood possess not the Kingdom of God: But the young sprig grown out
of death, that shall be the heir. When any one still stands in laboring under
the Law, in continency; then, to morrow may that be committed, which is to day
omitted: Because the root and foundation of sin, has not yet been condemned,
even to the very death. He that abides in a choice of things, is always in
affliction. He who always seeks after better things and is not contented with
the present, must necessarily be always very thoughtful and restless. He is
one who says: When I thus stood in the appetite of things, my appetite did
enlarge it self so vastly, and toward so many varieties of things, that I
could never be at quiet, till I had wholly renounced all desire, and denying my
own self* I came to be contented with a few small things: and when I saw I
could be sustained by the meaner sort of things, I did not choose the better,
nor was I afflictedly sollicitous about other things: Then at length, when I
had found rest, I was contented, which way soever things fell.

That which agrees with Nature is chiefly to be omitted, and that which is
most disagreeing thereunto, that is, to be done: with how great a difficulty
these things are done, may be perceived. God in the wilderness overthrew, and
wore out those Israelites that still savoured Egypt, and brought up and new
generation, which knew not Egypt. Debility consists in the lowermost
faculties, not in life, but in death, when the mind is taken up to God. If the
Gentiles did constitute any thing, they did it firmly, together with security,
and knowledge, knowing the matter to be thus and no otherwise: But the
Christians do not so: but they stand in faith, founded on no security or
firmness, being also ignorant of all things, but are in the obedience of faith,
whence Paul says: After the resurrection of Christ, was established the
obedience of faith. The new creature has nothing for it self, neither
knowledge, nor security, nor firmness, as have the Gentiles, but walks in
faith. The faithful are led into faith beyond security, knowledge, and science;
for all things are taken away from before their eyes, and from out of their
hands, and they stand in the sight of Go^ and in the hand of God.

Our birth is accompanied with appropriation, yet must appropriation be
separated from Nature, if the Law of Go^ must be set up in us, which cannot be
do^^ but by the death and destruction of the natural man: for it is impossible
for Nature to do the will of God and to f^^^^ the Law, and if that must be
done, the must it dye, and perish against its will (for no death is voluntary,
nor actin^ but passive and happens against the will When therefore God himself
accomplish his own will, (man's will being dead and fulfils the requirings of
the La^ then he draws glory from men.

The natural man can no more lea^^ his propriety, then a tree planted at
rooted, can desist from growing, (...) bearing its fruits: No more also can
(...) natural man fulfill the Law of God, de^^ his own will, or perform the will
of Go^ If therefore, to keep a tree from growin^ and bearing fruit, it must be
cut down, a^ quite rooted up: So thus must the nature man dye, and God must be
in his stea^

Christ says: He that eats my flesh, etc. the flesh of Christ is meat, not
that which we consume, but that which consumes us.

Of Abraham it is written, that the earth was to be possessed by his seed, and
not by himself: therefore he must go out of it, if room was to be made, for his
seed. In this going out a man goes into strange countries, and he knows not
the way, nor can he ask thereof: Yet he always sees one step before him. In
this dying there is great affliction, but that it may not seem such, and that a
man may carry himself also courageously, acquiescence only can effect that for
him.

CHAP. VI.
WHen a man has any thing in his proper possession rightly, he thinks it is
due unto him, and judges it unjust, if it be taken from him, till he is
convinced. But then at length he acknowledges, that he cannot stand before the
severe judgment of God, and pronounces God to be just in threatening to him in
judgment, death and destruction. Then he knows, that he is not worthy to live,
and clearly sees, that none of them are due to him, which he had appropriated
to himself, either as to God, or as to the creature, and therefore he can
desire no more, but suffers his death with the deepest misery and coaction.
He is convinced concerning his appropriation, according to which he possessed
all, and endeavored to possess all unjustly, just as when one is convinced by
sealed deeds and writings, that this or the other inheritance is not due to
him, though he long kept them in his possession for his own, but now is
deservedly commanded to give them up. The natural man is never made perfect,
but is only translated. Perfection is the man, Christ Jesus: and as much as is
received from him, that in him is perfect, holy, new, and just: yet it is not
so in self, for he must renounce self, whose natural part is evil and sinful,
and must be made his, from whom it may become just, good, and holy: and that is
brought to pass in Christ, who is all these, nor is there any other name given,
in which these things can happen unto us.

If any song, writing, or words are accepted of a Christian, and are grateful
to his heart, it is necessary that it should be expressed from out of the
cross, and from anguish. If it springs from joy, or from speculation, it is
vain, and wants spirit or life. Experience teaches all things, and that
which is void of experience is in vain.

We pass thorough time into eternity, and time is mutable: so also is Man
produced with mutability, till he comes thither, where there is no corruption
nor mutation.

No man is to be rejected, with how gross or how low a zeal his spirit boyleth
with, because they may be changed, and therefore we are to be quiet with a man
that stands in his own zeal. We are first in time before we come into
eternity. We first begin with low things, and by degrees are we transferred
unto higher till we come there, where perfection is.

Paul says: Not as if I had apprehended, etc, by how much the more sublime are
the Saints, by so much the more sublime is their desire: by how much the higher
is the perfection, by so much the more sublime are the defects.

A man made conformable by letters, rules, ceremonies, or as to outward
appearance, is like a body which has indeed a nose, a mouth, etc. but yet it
wants life.

Every thing by its contrary, is made of greater esteem, accounted for holy,
and is not rightly known, its contrary not being known, then it is not so. For
if cold were not, heat would not be cared for. Heaven is more clearly
understood by hell, and the grace of God, by his wrath or anger.

He that rightly knows the fall of Adam, and understands his restoration
cannot rejoice, because a man must perish for its sake, and as to all these
things he must be annihilated, as to what he is made for. Gladness is assigned
over to posterity, and to that fruit which shall grow out of corruption, where
a man becomes to be that, which he attaineth to out of corruption. And then he
appears in the glory of God, and acknowledges God from God, and loves God
from God, and is sanctified, and justified, and ^enewed in God. And he is made
that ^y grace, which God is by nature. Before death all things were vain, and
^nconstant, and mere phansies: but now ^re become essence, or substance, which
^bideth. The truth is incorruptible: the ^^uth has made all things free, and
has ^nited a man to himself: and all things ^re therefore done, that we might
get up hither. All things are disposed to a cer^ain end: Autumn, Winter, Snow,
etc. ^or the fruits of Summer: to this end and ^cope therefore are all things
to be directed, and for its sake are all things to be exercised, and applied,
and not for its own sake. The flower is the cause of the fruit, and not of its
self: the flower perishes, but the fruit remains: whatsoever goes before, has
respect hitherto but ^abideth not, but the fruit remains: and this is the
truth, in which a man is ^onfirmed, and founded, that he might be (...) it
eternally by a true union.

The small treatise of the Imitation of Christ is very useful to them that are
laboring and striving, for it gives us the best instruction unto life, and I
am much delighted therewith, but the German Divinity excels, in which is the
representation of God. The book of the imitation is more profitable for the
public, but the other small treatise of the German Divinity is for private use.

CHAP. VII.
BEcause God exercises his judgment so severely in his Children, and yet his
judgment is just, it must be well considered, what becomes us: and that,
though we suffer in a wonderful manner, yet is it done unto us with grace and
mercy, and that indeed the thousandth part of afflictions, according to our
sins, is not inflicted upon us. But God spares us, and unless it were so,
where should we abide? Whence we ought not to be proud, but fearful rather, yea
frighted, and to hold our peace. By how much the more a man recedeth from
himself, so much the nearer he approaches unto God, and by so much the more
heavily is he punished also, in respect of nature, which is therefore subjected
unto death. If a man should at first know this misery and calamity, he would
dye for very grief: but now he cannot be sensible of it, till he falls into it,
and then also does God notwithstanding lead him thorough it. He falls into the
Gulf Scylla, who endeavors to avoid the rock Charybdis. For when a man
desires to be freed from the legal accusation of his conscience, he comes and
is condemned into death, so that endeavoring to avoid the difficulty on that
part; on the other he falls into it, that is, into a state, where the natural
man is condemned. When the Law does no longer accuse, a man is condemned, like
a malefactor, who is first accused, and at length is punished: then the
accusation ceasing, he suffers death; by the means of which alone, he is freed
from the accusation of the Law. He that tries this, shall find it no liar,
which has promised to him no sweetness. If it be said: but yet it is well,
that the conscience ^s free; though nature may suffer: it is answered: How good
the state of tha^ man is, God knows: the truth is, i^ is a miserable
condition, but it is accepted of God, and he that is in it, is made nearer to
God: But by how much the nearer he is to God, by so much the heavier is his
suffering, as to Nature* Here the restraining or bridling in of Nature
suffices not, we must go beyon^ that, viz. we must dye, and we mu^^ perish.

That a man can acknowledge his sin^ is a great gift, but then the affliction
als^ is great. He that acknowledges his sins God delivers him from them. The
vulgar acknowledgment of sins, is not (...) He that rightly acknowledges
himse^^ ^o err, desires to walk in a right way and to decline from that which
is erroneous: but he to whom the erroneous wa^ is not unpleasant, he abides in
it, a^ defends it, nor acknowledges that (...) erred, though with his mouth
he m^^ profess otherwise. In death, that glo^^ is given to God, which could not
be do^^ in life, for in life, a man retains t^^ glory to himself, but in death
he la^ down the glory.

Nature has a way so proper to it self, that it will acknowledge or accept no
sort of death, till it be willing or nilling cast thereinto: and then the will,
reason, memory, and understanding of a man are so bound, and tied down, that
the man thinks, that he alone is smitten, and that no man suffers but himself,
and from thence forward he can neither take joy in any thing, nor can he draw
comfort from the evils of other men. And that usual saying, that common
mischiefs do bring comfort with them, yet is not true in him.

He that is yielded up to the will of God, is without choice: yea his very
words, which infer election, do terrifiy him: for where the virtue of divine
will is felt, there such words do excite consternation. Therefore it is not for
him to say: I hope it will be so, or so, or so it shall be; or so it shall not
be, and the like: but he says thus: (...) hope the Lord will do it. Christ
says: I am the truth. We think that Christ is with us, and that he is such a
one as we are by Nature, but thus he is contrary to us, and is our death.

CHAP. VIII.
ALl ceremonies conform themselves according to God, and are a representation
of the hidden truth, but they do not conform themselves unto our weakness as
some say; yea and that God gave them, because of our weakness, when as other
wise they had not been necessary; to which opinion we must assent. Yea
furthermore they say, that, the very incarnation of Christ is to be thus
adorned, which opinion be it far from us! He that is upon a right foundation,
and has an understanding heart, will be wholly opposite to these opinions* For
such a one feels and knows, that, without the incarnation of Christ, no
salvation can be found on the earth, and that ceremonies, together with all
creatures, are only a representation of the heavenly truth, and that they are
all conforme^ according to God, but not according to us, and so also they ought
to be. And therefore they judge too dryly concerning them, who say they are
toys and trifles: as also they do attribute too much to them, who are glued
fast unto them, and from them, do make Gods to themselves, and set them in the
place of the true substance. They err on both hands, Wherefore we are to wait
for a right judgment in all things from the Lord, and and to fear least any
thing is rashly added from our opinion, for opinion deceives us.

Where the powers of sin are felt, and are conquered and broken, a man is cast
into great affliction. But when a man puts that affliction from him, and puts
it upon Christ, as if he had satisfied for it, and that that satisfaction ought
to be imp^ted to a man, and to be fulfilled in him, so as that sin is to be
taken away, and righteousness to be fulfilled: there a man has not a true
sense of sin, but neglect^th it with a light mind: this opinion also is
contrary to the writings of the Prophets, and the doctrine of the Apostles, who
testify, that Christ must snatch a man out of sin, and let up righteousness,
and break the Serpents Head, and overcome all things, and that this victory
ought to be done in a man, and not to remain without him ( Romans 8. 4.) for they
ought to be a people, in whom all things are done and fulfilled, which the
Prophets and the Apostles and all ceremonies testify. Let no man therefore
deceive himself, by imposing upon Christ any thing, without himself. Where God
does possess a man, there God reigns and keeps him, but man is not at all
touched with any care, for what belongs to God. But a man is not to eye any
thing, but his littleness, and emptyness, that is, his selfishness, this is due
unto him, and upon that account he boweth under all, and judges himself to be
worser, more foolish, and more unworthy then all men. All the rest, that is any
things is God, and is due to God, nor does it concern man. But if any one,
departing from his nothingness, will arrogate to himself the things which
be^ong unto God, that will prove the highest pride, and the most heavy fall.

CHAP. IX.
WHen any one is given up to the will of God, there is nothing so heavy, nor so
painful, which he cannot bear in the will of God, without election: But as God
wills, so is a thing commended to him, who will do all things. And where that
is, there is peace and no where else.

A certain person said, such as the judgment is, so I suffer: under a heavy
judgment, heavily, under a light judgment, lightly. When one also is ashamed
befote his neighbor, because of that, for whose sake he was ashamed before
God, conscience is more at quiet: but when one for a secret hidden baseness
blusheth not before man, conscience is burdened: and therefore here we must be
bound, and no man ought to be ashamed, when he is obliged to confess himself
guilty before his neighbor.

God keeps his promises, but we understand them perversely, until their own
^ime comes when we see what they are, and to whom they belong. He whose will is
resigned, he wants appropriation, and its the same to him, whither the thing
be, or be not. He who has a will yielded up to God, he esteem^^^ for heavenly
whatsoevr happens to him. For all that, is God to him, and God is Heavenly.

Whatsoever falls out to him, be (...) advantage, disadvantage, peace,
disquiet, riches, poverty, bitter, sweet, heat, cold, hunger, thirst, honor,
dishonor, yet a^^ all these, God to him, and consequently Heaven: he is also
without appropriation, and nothing else pleases him, as if (...) were Heaven,
unless that God wills it. But before any one comes thither, many thing are
required, especially Time. He who wants this resigned will, esteems all* that
are against his own will, for torments and Hell: yea even those things which of
themselves are pleasant. Out proper will therefore is to be discarded, and to
this purpose serve our exercises O how bitter is death to him, who is yielded
up to life. All things perish but God, and what is united to him.

The voice of the Spirit is such a terror to the flesh, that when any thing is
spok^en to it of the spirit, it is frighted, and ^rembles, because the Spirit
is its destruction.

They who aim at a mark, shut one eye, and always level at the mark, and when
one hitteth the mark, then he turns himself, and looks upon all the rest, which
none of the rest do, because they have not yet struck it, but do still level
their aim.

By the cross, God casts on man, chains and a bridle. And except this should,
be so, he would wander into error, in time, and though a man sometimes may
think that he shall serve God better, unless this or that happens, yet God
adjudgeth it otherwise, and knows this to be best, contrary to a man's own
opinion.

CHAP. X.
A Man always requires time, and space, and thinks that he shall satisfy the
Law, and yet it cannot be done and he must dye, and God must fulfill the Law in
his stead. That which a man thinks he shall do in his life, that is at last
performed in his death. When the passion and death of Christ are really in a
man, also his resurrection is really in him: if one is real, such also is the
other, if the one be only notional, so also is the other; for there are diverse
resurrections.

A man given up to, God, belongs to God, and he has no propriety, but is a
stranger to himself: whatever therefore God, or the creatures shall do unto
him, he ought not to entangle himself with them, because they are all of God,
whose he is.

When one runs so long, that for want of breath he lies down, then he
dispiseth whatever is his own, and so at length room is made for faith: To
stand therefore in faith, is a most miserable thing: for then is man's estate
quite consumed, so that he lives upon the savor of another, from whom he
expects that, which he wants. Paul says: If ye live according to the flesh
ye shall dye: They who are in death, if they would draw life from else where,
yet have they no time for to be accused, because judgment is forthwith ready at
hand, and the sword slays them. But others, who are yet accused, are not yet
in death. A Malefactor, who has already suffered punishment, and is dead, is
no longer accused; for justice has passed upon him, and now, because of that,
he is justified, from whence was his accusation. God freeth a man, but not so
as to take him from the cross, but to leave him there. God reconcileth a man's
enemies to him, so as that he patiently endured them, as sent unto him from the
hand of God. Before acquiescence, a man is unbridled, but in acquiescence he
beholds the will of God, and there finds rest.

Nothing is so strong and powerful in a man, that God is not above it, and
which he cannot overcome, and drive out, and so set the man at liberty. For
nothing is prevalent against the Lord, before whom all things must fall, and be
as nothing, that the victory may be to God, and all things be confounded before
him.

Before justification by death, sin has the dominion in man: but not after
justification, because then it is crucified in him.

CHAP. XI.
WHere the new creature is, God assumeth the Spirit of man, who then becomes a
stranger to himself, nor stands no longer in his own place, inasmuch as God
takes it up, who is over him, and keeps him. This man is saved out of grace,
and he stands with fear and trembling before God, on his part wanting all prop,
as having God only for his upholder: and then he is held up as it were by a
hair only, trembling with uncertainty as on his part: nor has he any thing in
which he can glory besides his infirmity, which, he always beholds: all
things else are loosned from him and stand on God's part, and do arrive at him,
only thorough grace, and yet he must not look upon them, for ^^e ought behold
nothing, but his infirmities. Far be it from such a one, to say, he cannot
fall, for he that says that, is either fallen already, or very nigh unto
falling.

He who meditates what way things will go with him, he understands not the
thing it self, as that which is pleasant, but thinks it to be against him and
is frighted with death. When a man comes under grace, then also he comes under
the cross, for then the natural man is in a continual death. When a man
understands, what he is to lay aside, he speaks not of corruption rashly, and
with joy. There is such a thing as a resurrection, but it is not so gross a
thing as is believed.

God indeed pardons infants if they speak foolish words, but he does not so
to others: for far be it from them to speak like infants. Now such are infants,
who have not yet been exercised by God.

A cut finger is cured again: but a heart wounded is never cured: That which is
in the state of abstinence, can return into the first state of life: but that
which is dead, rises not again in that state, in which it is dead.

CHAP. XII.
THe torments of the Martyrs are the glory of the death and resurrection of
Christ, for these have demonstrated that a man is to be led in a certain way
above Nature thorough the death and resurrection of Christ, which way is
impossible to Nature. We must then die to all humane strength, that the virtue
of Christ may operate all these thing. Whence it is that they are called the
lights of mankind, because they are led above all the strength, understanding,
and will of men. And all these things can the virtue of the life, death, and
resurrection of Christ perform, if it be not without a man, but really comes
into him. Where there is a real death and corruption, there also succeeds a
real life and salvation: but where that is not really done, but notionally
only, and remains without a man, there also life and salvation is not real but
notional only, and without a man. The Martyrs in their torments gave glory unto
God. Glory is not given to God before that a man arriveth at, or comes unto
his death, and is estranged from himself, and God does take up his room or
place, who keeps, governs, leads, and exercises him above all reason;
which reason here, neither sees nor knows any door of escape, but is held
captive under the obedience of faith: because a thick cloud and a dark mist
has covered the eyes thereof, that it cannot see the way whereby God is wont
to lead a man. This is here that passive state, when a man dies, and suffers
God. But in the active state, under the Law, when life still is present, it was
not so, for then a man was governed by reason, to whom was added Will and
Knowledge about the actions, and omissions of a man: though all things are
directed by divine help, and in divine claritude, which struck reason down, so
that a man could govern himself, conduct, and conserve himself, day and night,
yet when all these are taken away, he must at length come into death, that God
may come and take his place, and administer all things himself. Then a man is
drawn another way, then what he walked before, and it is that which excels his
own will, knowledge, and strength. This man is become passive and God operateth
in him. As the conscience and the mind was captivated, and sadened, when it was
well with the flesh, so when the flesh came into death, the mind and conscience
was exhilerated, and set at liberty.

Many and great gifts of the Holy Spirit do come really into a man, which yet
are not Regeneration; But they go and come. Whereas that is Regeneration, when
and where God has planted his habitation, and God is become one with man. In
God, neither the world, not pleasure, nor joy is suffered, Nature must want all
these when the mind stands in God.

They who stand under grace, their outward man is always conserved or kept by a
deadly judgment, their internal man by vital nourishment: thus they are always
kept by God.

Into the mind, which stands in God, no motion to joy or grief can penetrate:
But there comes a great sorrow, which descends into the flesh, that the mind
may remain free.

What is patience, is it or not, when a man suffers and complains to no man?
no, no, for this is only continence, but not real patience. But this is
patience, when a man can imprecate no evil upon another, by reason of any
adversity: but if any one has injured him, he prays heartily for him; note,
he has a kindness, for him, and loves him: and if one has taken any thing
from him, he yields up, and gives all these things to him as unto his own
self, and is (upon it) of a cheerful, and not of a sad mind. And this is the
fruits of the spirit: but continence is the work of the Law, and cannot justify
a man in the sight of God, and is precedent unto righteousness, which follows
afterward through faith, in which all things are real, which were before
notional: for in old things did abide the shadow, but the real things are of
Christ himself: Paul says: The Law could make nothing perfect, but was the
bringing in of a better hope. There was no rest to the Fathers till Christ did
come, as the Prophet says concerning Sion, Isaiab 62.1. That if one would be
made one with the truth, it cannot be done, whilst non-corruption lasts: and
whatsoever is said or understood, of it whilst it lasts is without
experience. Non-corruption hops in vain, for it comes or arriveth not unto
God. For no man receives God without death and destruction. Every natural man
is in the desire of God, or the creature, and yet neither is due unto him: for
if he could come at God, as he does to the creatures, he would alike abuse him,
as he abuses them, viz. with appropriation. These may be thus observed; every
imagination, which is in man concerning God or the truth, before purgation or
death, nature is ready to appropriate it to her self, and to rest contented
therein with delight: that she may upon that account receive honor, and
respect, and, notwithstanding, this conversation is still but according to the
flesh, which is followed by death. For this rising up cannot abide, this
bridegroom must be taken away, before the real truth can appear. The Apostles
possessed Christ before his death imaginarily, but after death really. Whence
Paul writes: That he knew Christ no longer after the flesh, but after the
spirit and the truth; and that he walked according to that spirit, and not
according to the flesh, and that they were now become invisible to evey natural
man, whence they can be judged by none, but are able to judge all: that they
were now sanctified or made holy, by the Holy Spirit, after that Christ was
risen again from the death; before whose death and resurrection no man could be
holy.

The Holy Spirit makes holy, as the Lord says: Unless I go away, the Holy
Spirit the Advocate, will come unto you. And no man puts new wine into old
bottles, etc. To renounce all creatures, that nothing may remain but God, and
to set God only for the end and aim, Nature and Flesh do hear it with terror,
for they are amazed at this, when they hear, that all things must be taken away
from them. So that if the flesh can but retain one only thing, though the
vilest, yet would it put or place its whole life therein, and would adhere
thereunto: But in truth it cannot be so well done for it, for all things will
renounce it which way soever it tends. Whence at length it must without any
support let it self down into death and plainly dye to all things.

When a King and a Beggar are starved to death the death of either, is the same
and alike? but yet with a distinction.

He that is in corruption, beholding other good men still standing in
non-corruption, thinks thus: Alas! in what condition are you! O how much
still can you be satiated and exhilerated with God, when I can neither be so,
nor desire it.

To be at rest no where, but in God, it is requisite, before all things, that
one should become poor. The sufferings of Job are not hid from me, but that
which followed after it, cannot make me glad. The Lord says: What will it
profit a man to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul? and what
advantage would it be to a man to know all things, and yet he experienceth them
not, nor are they fulfilled in him! and therefore we ought not to take care of
that, to know or understand much, but that we may sensibly apprehend and
experience much. Knowledge puffs up, but Charity edifieth, faith the Apostle:
Experience supplieth all things in man, and is adequate to knowledge: And thus
also the man is made humble.

CHAP. XIII.
WHen death is known, it is also feared: And by how much the more profoundly
death is known, by so much the more does it terrify, and is it feared. If Death
must, be true, it must be true as to all things. When Nature is once dead, as
to corporal things, it ought to remain dead, and, as to them, never to revive
again: But* then life ascends in the Soul, and there seeks nourishment: But
Death follows it thither also; and cuts off the thread of that life also, that
it may there also remain always dead, nor can it ever revive again. So that at
last, the life ascends above all creatures, yea above the Angels also; by how
many degrees it is to ascend into life, by so many deaths it is to dye, and
always to abide in death. If one abstaineth from any thing, he may take it up
again: but according to what any one is dead unto, that, ought always to remain
dead, so as that it can never be re-asumed. I never possess piety, and
whatsoever I receive from God by my piety, I am plainly robbed thereof, and I
can boast no where, neither before God, nor before any man, nor before my own
self: for I live by free grace alone: This state is so miserable, that no man
knows it, but he that is touched therewith. And though I must live by
free grace yet I know of no grace, nor can I comprehend, or understand, nor
know, nor find where that grace should be, nor whence it should come, although
I have often felt it. Therefore ought this grace to be both given and taken
above and beyond the understanding, knowledge, and comprehension of all men,
yea above all merit or godliness, that is in a man, as also above all
intellect, and illumination: but as for the justice of God, judgment, hell, and
damnation, these I can most exactly know and understand, whence they can come,
for they always do handle me very severely. But the will of God is my chiefest
Salvation: As long as the will of God overshaddows me, I can bear all, though I
should be roasted, or boiled, annihilated, or slain in Body, Soul, and Spirit.
But when the will of God hides it self for some time, that I do not feel it
over me, I fall into such streights, as an unexperienced person cannot believe.
My whole hope is, that the Lord will lead us all thorough all, though the case
be full of sorrows, for his arm is all powerful.

When a man stands between Conscience and Flesh and when conscience cease,
then the flesh urges him, and to him it is said. Amend thy life, or thou must
dye; but when one stands between life and conscience and transgresses as to
his life, presently it is said to him from God: Thou must die.

CHAP. XIV.
THe Will of God is the death of the Flesh. Faith, when it is upon trial, God
then proving it, it experienceth the greatest misery. There are many ways of
coming unto regeneration, but the end of all is one and the same, yet one
ascends in some much higher then another does: as when any one comes into
the Sunshine, he has the Sun, yet is one nearer to the Sun than another.

This is my counsel, that a time be set to attain unto God. The inward mind is
free, but the outward humanity without grace, is exercised under a severe
judgment. I have no prop under me, whether I respect God or the creatures, or
heaven, or the Earth: and I have nothing, but that I can lay my self down in
the Divine Will, being wholly set down under God. The Kingdom of Heaven is
present, but I cannot enjoy it: the Sun indeed has shined, but now the falling
thereof is come, and it shines no longer. I lie down in darkness, and in the
shadow of Death, nor is there any comfort left to me but in the will of God:
for I will nothing, but only what he wills. Into which state if any one
really comes, he is of all men the most miserable. I say this, that I may
express that misery in which I lie. To understand these things is pleasant but
really to feel them, most bitter.

When the Spirit suffers, the flesh ought to suffer with it: But when the flesh
suffers there is no need, for the Spirit to suffer. It is never better with me
then when I give up my self into death.

The flesh suffers its own judgment, when the Spirit is in peace, but when
the Spirit suffers, the flesh must suffer also. The poor animals must dye, for
my sake, though against my will: But because I also give my self up to death, I
do not refuse the death also of the animals; he that gives not himself up into
death, cannot take his food with thanksgiving.

He that is to exercise modesty, he ought to be exercised by various
afflictions, o^herwise he will wander, if he shall use it without the
experience of the cross. If I should stand betwixt two things, nor knew which
of the two I am to do, I would weigh them, and would take that which is
contrary to my flesh. When I do so, it is well with me, and I call God to
witness, saying: Thou know, O Lord, what I have done. But when I do
otherwise, viz. that which is grateful unto Nature, it is always ill with me,
and I cannot call God to witness. Conscience indeed is free, but I dare not
allege that, for it is of grace.

The suffering is hard, when no hope is left in the future for the natural man:
for though the daybreak is come, yet there is no redemption, nor comfort, but
a man must wait without hope, and be quiet in death. And though all the joy,
comfort and refreshment of the whole world were present, yet he is bound as it
were with cords, and can taste of none of them. And therefore he never desires
that time may run out, that a day, a week, a month, a year may come, for
whatever comes to pass in them, is to him as it were a nonentity, because he
can rest no where, nor use any thing for his delight, for he is made bare or
naked of all, and is put upon the crossed. Hence is it that both things present,
and to come are indifferent to him, when even then he shall be the same as he
is now. But those to whom the body of sin is not yet crucified, they are
touched with the desire of time. For they are free, and can take up such things
as they meet with: But this state cannot last long, for judgment will come:
then whatever shall be with him for the furture, he cannot take it up, and that
which is contrary to him he cannot reject: for he is impotent, whilst he
hangs on the cross, nor can he execute his own will.

CHAP. XV.
ALl things are or consist in order and order must be kept. If one is willing
to knit together superior things, that he may loosen inferior things, he would
break order, and wander in error, of which we must beware. The Lord says: He
that breaks the lest Commandment and shall so teach, etc. We must seek a free
condion in God, in which one is free from himself, for to be free from ones
self, is a liberty, which is to be attributed to God.

The grossest and the lowest things are images of things superior, which is to
be understood as well of things spiritual, as things corporeal, for we ascend
from the one into the other, and from the inferior to the superior, even as
pleasures, and the abuse of good things and the building on the sands are
images. When things are most gross and low, then are they the image of things
superior, and that which is visible denotes that that is invisible. The
Spirit also has its flesh in which it dwells. Also mysteries have their
external Histories. They who urge mysteries so, as to exclude historys, disturb
order and do err. Although Christ the blessed fulfils all things, in spirit, in
his elect, which he performed coporally in the days of his flesh, yet were they
also corporally done in him, therefore the historical sense must remain, but
also it behooveth a man to experience in his own self the mystery likewise.

The Lord says: Love your Enemies: The cross, passion, adversity, Death, etc.
are our enemies, which we are to love, and embrace.

The natural man is surrounded with death, and which way soever he turns
himself, he has a sword presented to his sight: just as when one turns on
this, and on that side should look about him, and still some body runs before
his face: so also is judgment always meeting with the natural man, ready to
snatch away his life, which way soever he turns himself. At last he yields up
himself, when he can no more make his escape. But the spirit is in life; when
the body (or nature) hangs stretched out upon the Cross. Zeal in kindled with
divine pleasure, is a great pleasure, but the Cross and violent plagues follow
after it. Myrrh was the last gift. For it is written; They offered Gold,
Franckincense and Myrrh. When I hear the Scripture, I am frighted, for it
denotes the natural death. Nature will have an appropriation, therefore
communion is a death to it at which it is affrighted.

CHAP. XVI.
TO desist from propriety, and to help another at our own loss, is a thing
truly pleasant. To find gain in loss, and to abstain from that which is best in
our esteem, and to prefer another thereunto, is a thing grateful to the mind.
It would be truly a just thing, if he who has the temporal goods, should so
relieve his neighbor in want, that the one should be made equal with the
other, nor should the advantage, or means of the one exceed the other: if any
one is not yet arrived at or come up to this account, he ought to esteem it for
thing unjust, and therefore ought also to be sorrowful for it, as also to
endeavor to bring it to that pass.

Let no man judge another in any business whatsoever, especially in that which
he himself has not yet experienced, and in which he has not yet got the
victory: for if he himself should fall into temptation, who knows, how he would
behave himself in it. If any one therefore will use modesty, he must hold his
tongue upon the fall of others in temptation, and behold them with
commiseration. For if any one himself has been in temptation, and has
overcome, so that he remains constant in that victory, in the which he sees
another to stumble and fail, without all doubt he was himself so afflicted with
such streights, that he cannot possibly do otherwise but pity his neighbor
thus overcome, although he do not defend his falling: seeing the case it self
is in it self, so deplorable, that he needs not add to its load, from his
judgings: This man therefore stands thus, and beholds all men with an eye of
pity or commiseration, and neither judges, nor reproacheth them, for he
knows that God alone is the hinderance to him, whereby it is, that he also
does not run headlong in the way of these men, till he becomes equal and alike
to them; and that he should easily be like unto them, if God should desert him,
or not lead him in so wonderful a manner as he does, and support him with so
much long-suffering. These are the considerations that suspend his rash
judgment: whence it is, that the destruction of others cannot make him glad,
but he rather is sad and sorrowful for it, and knows, that he is not better
then they, and therefore ranks himself in the same rank with them, yea puts
himself beneath them. And whatever is found to be better in himself that comes
not but from out of the mercy of God, and not out of his own worth and strength.

CHAP. XVII.
WHere it is written: They confessed their sins and they were baptized in
Jordan; there is meant an utter sinking down into all affliction and adversity,
let it come from whence it will, and from hence it is, that we come to the
acknowledgment of sins. Also whoever rejects or flees from any cross, or
adversity, cannot come to the acknowledgment of himself: and where there is not
a knowledge of ones self, there can be no crying to God. He that will come to
the true peace of God, he ought first to be exercised with all disquiet,
especially when God exercises him by men who are difficult, cross, and morose:
For better means then these cannot be found to prepare him for that condition.
For those men, by whom God exercises good men, do apply all their diligence to
spy out and observe in their neighbor somewhat that is reprehensible, though
it be never so little, and that they expose maliciously enough, especially if
other good men may hear or see it. And then it is, that it behooveth him, that
is thus exercised, to hold his tongue, and not to defend himself: and though he
may spy out many and grievous spots on his adversary, yet is he not to look at
them, but only at his own spots, and in his heart to confess himself guilty of
them. But when he does not thus, but turns his eyes on him, who accuses him,
he will yet more egregiously err: but so soon as ever he does observe it; he
ought presently to turn away himself, and to take the matter as immediately from
the hand of God. For as long as a man is not yet freed, he still wandreth
oftentimes in errors, though unwillingly. From and by afflicting, and morose
men if we use them rightly for that end, for which they are given unto us of
God, we may be much more advanced forward, then from and by men of great
perfections, whilst we are still under sin.

As long as a man is in the state of Martha, so long he must labor, but when
he shall come to the state of Mary, he labors no more: in the state of Mary
a man is only under God; and Christ flows down from above into a man like a
river or stream.

A man transplanted by God, is, in his own eyes, the most uncertain of all men
living: for he ought not to promise to himself the least part of life, so as
that he can live one moment of time: so uncertain he is, that when he goes to
bed, he knows not, whither he shall rise again, as if his life were to be taken
from him, that very moment. If any other worldly man should behold the inside
of this man he would be altogether astonished: yea the man, who seeks God,
and is not yet purified, could not abide thus, no not one hour only: for as a
thing it self, and its image have a likeness externally, but inwardly do vastly
differ, so is the case here. Just as if two men should stand together, and
should give alms all the day long, and one of them should wish, that the
business would quickly be at an end, because he does it with a grutching heart:
but the other should wish, that he might be always giving, yea he would give
his whole self too, because he does it with a glad and a willing heart. Now
when a man is sensible in himself of his churlish temper with contrition, and
is therefore sorry, and wishes, that he could do it with a willing mind, then
the Lord will further help him, and will purge his floor. But they who are
contented thus with an outside show, and thereupon think themselves righteous,
all is not right with them.

Concerning the young beginner, this similitude is to be observed: An infant
who cannot yet go alone would always have somewhat whereby he might hold
himself up, and when that is taken away from him, then he cries, and weeps,
^and stands and trembles, and thinks ^he shall fall: So also the Man that is
not much exercised in acquiescence would always have somewhat to hold by, in
God, wherewith to keep himself up: and when this is withdrawn from him, then he
mourns, and weeps, and thinks that he shall fall irrecoverably. But God does
faithfully preserve him although he himself be utterly ignorant thereof.

THE SAYINGS OF Mat, VVyer, The Third Book.
CHAP. I.
THe Lord knows the way of the just, but the way of the wicked shall perish.
God knows nothing but himself: God himself then is the way of the righteous,
which perishes not. The ways of the wicked are the creatures, which are
corruptible; whence it is also that their way perishes. For all the actions,
business, and pleasure of the unrighteous at last sinks and falls into nothing.

O Father, this is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent: This is holiness, and God, above all images: and of
this, nature, or the natural man, partaketh nothing, but remains separated
from God, and all his creatures: Alas, how great an affliction is this to
Nature, to want images, when as the natural man cannot get above images: for
all his joy, quiet, peace, advantage consist in, and together with images: if
therefore God alone is present, his death is present. God alone is essence and
being it self, and hitherto the natural man cannot come, or else he could never
fall, for whatsoever comes into God is eternal and unmoved.

All that are said of the fall, are said of the natural man, whilst he yet
abides in images, and appearances, and that state is to be consumed-with its
desire of growing on, and of increasing, before the essence it self is come:
but when this is come, Nature must be subjected unto death, and not have any
life or joy in that essence; for that privilege is not due unto Nature. And
here it is that God fills the place of man, and acknowledges, honors, and
praises his own self, and he works, and sets up what he pleases: and
here God himself is present, and therefore the glory belongs to God, and not
to man. Here man stands naked in his poverty, and arrogates nothing to himself,
because to God alone the glory is due. When the essence of a thing is present,
all images vanish: and because the Natural man medleth with nothing but images,
therefore he is robbed of these, when the thing it self is come, and then he
lies in death: yet his mind is taken up into the thing, that is, into life:
but the flesh, or nature goes into death, nor draws any life, either from God,
or from the creature. The natural labor of a man is this, to yield up one
thing, that so he may receive a better, and to go out of one chamber or room,
that so he may come into another more fair: And when he has gotten all these
things, for whose sake he left the former, at last he is also cast out of them,
and has nothing, either here, or there, being deserted on both hands, and
brought to want in either room: Yet so long as he sees any escape so long he
labors, until this also fails: Then he yields up himself, therein
imitating the Ape, who defends himself, and labors, so long as he sees a way
to evade, but being hindered of that he lies down, and suffers himself to be
beaten and knocked, yea he admits all, though it be still against his will:
So also the natural man suffers not these things willingly, but quite against
his will.

CHAP. II.
TO do nothing (in obedience to conscience under the Law) but only to lie down,
and suffer God's work, is a great affliction: Then we cry, Oh that I could do
something. But action has been before already, and it was done with delight
and willingly. But when we must want, as well the worser, as the better also,
and lie down in death without hope of rising again, or of reviving, this at
last proves a wonderful straight. Nature had had before the knowldge of the
gain, and therefore action was sweet and pleasant to it: but here she suffers
under action, and knows no gain from it, therefore these things are bitter and
sharp unto her, and are done against her will.

The knowledge of a natural man consists in images. But God knows himself
without image or notion. The creatures, wherewith brutes are fed, are made more
noble in man, and man is made more noble in God. And so the creatures in such a
man return again into God. And as the Creatures without cutting serve not for
the use of Man, so neither without corruption, are they united to him, so also
cannot Man be united to God without corruption, for all things are done in
order.

Holiness is a worthy thing and unutterable, and the natural man participateth
nothing thereof, because nature cannot come thither. Paul says: Other
foundation can no man lay, but Christ. Discretion comes into a man in one
monent, and that moment is like to lightening but is not the thing it self, for
this follows after. When a man has received that momentary lightening, his
intellect is bound down under it. By one only shine, God does more perfect the
understanding, and discretion of a man, then a man can do himself in twenty
years, nor yet is the thing it self present. Many there are that have that, and
are dead, who yet never arrived at the thing it self.

In a time of necessity all my friends forsook me, and when I came unto them,
that they should help me, they all went backwards from me. These friends were
those Revelations, which I had, wherefore I resolved to trust in them no more,
for assisting me in a case of Necessity.

He that would keep his senses from distraction, he must endeavor to be
constant in prayers, for there is help. And he that would keep his senses, and
preserve them from inroads, he has every day something to do, for the case is
with him as it is with a City besieged. For no City can either by the Emperor,
or by the Turk, be begirt with so grievous a siege, as this man is besieged
with.

In this affliction, God is merciful to the man, and loves him, but the man
knows it not, till at last he comes to feel it. God seems as if he were deaf,
nor to be willing to know or to hear such men, but at length it is found, that
the intention of God was always good: for it is afterward apprehended, that
God is merciful in our miserable streights.

When a man makes the creatures his aim and end, he deceives himself. The
creatures ought to serve us to attain to our aim, viz. God, but they themselves
ought not to be the scope: we ought to adhere to God, and not to the creatures,
and to have a heavenly sense of things, and not an earthly.

CHAP. III.
HE that stands in God, to him all that happens are accounted to be God: he
can impute nothing to the creatures, for he has nothing to do with them, but
with God. He beholds God in the creature; doing with him either well or ill,
because God acts by and through it, and incites and spurs on the creature. And
though as to the outward show? it seems, as if injury was done unto him, yet
he jugdeth not the creature, but himself and acknowledges that the just
judgment is exercised upon him from the hand of God. Whither a man takes all
things as from the hand of God, may from hence be known, if so be when he is
injured by the creature, yet is he not therefore moved: but if he be moved at
it, then he takes it from the creature, and not from God: and so he then
proves, that he yet stands in the creature. He that stands in God, he has
no business with the creature, but with God, and knows him to be faithful, and
just in judgments. To such a man no injury can be done, for whatsoever happens
unto him, he knows it to be decreed by God.

Jordan is the River of jugdment, to it judgment is due, over it judgment
hangs: thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, said our Lord, when
he was about to be baptized in Jordan.

He who understands any thing, which he has not experienced, has no real
understanding thereof: For he is like to him, who speaks of a fair Country, in
which he never yet was.

CHAP. IIII.
NO man can have humility without affliction. Herod, the fiery dragon, and the
mountain lifted up, would have killed the little infant, under the show of
devotion, or worship. The greatest danger is hanging over our heads from Pride,
which dares kill every birth. Christ's humanity is the highest of figures.

I desired and I sought: but whatever I sought and found, it now lies in death,
and suffers destruction together with all that that was gain to me, and that
too without all hope of recovery. For that which must rise again, is not the
body which is sown, for flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, and
therefore must a man be slain, according to the Flesh: for it is according to
the Flesh that a man dies, and is made alive again according to the spirit. If
a thing should rise again as it dies, it would rise again in nature, and would
be natural: but it is not so done; Paul faith, It is sown a natural body.
Nature partaketh not of the Kingdom of God, hence it is, that the death thereof
is without all hopes. The natural man hops to be the heir of the Kingdom, and
thinks that the promises of God belong unto him, and applies all that is
written to himself: but then afterward the thing comes to be otherwise
apprehended when one is lead whither he would not, and God is glorified in and
by his death. There nature is renouned, and it must be robbed of all salvation
and be denied. That which the natural man applied to himself, another takes.
They, that went out of Egypt, desired to come into the promised Land, and did
divide it out to themselves, but they abode in the wilderness and dyed there,
and their posterity only entered into Palestine. Whatsoever therefore the
natural man understands, or says concerning these things, yet all this is
against him, for it speaks of a sword, which is to kill him. Now they which are
in this exercise, and speak any thing thereof, they speak it with affliction,
and not with delight, nor can they ask for more then formerly, because it
belongs not unto them, seeing all things tend to corruption and death: and into
death a man is unwillingly dragged: he conveighs not himself thither, for if it
stood at his dispose, he would never choose this state or condition: but he is
catched and put thereinto by another, who is above him, and stronger then
himself. Just as it is now with the death of the body, so the matter is also
carried in this other death, of which it is said, viz. When any one thinks he
has found his Soul, and that he is confirmed in life, yet must he be subjected
unto death. Now the Lord suffers him first to grow, and to increase, and grow
ripe in youth: but when he is accomplished in that youth, he plainly cares not
for death, and though he knows, that a time of dying must come, yet lie lays
it not close to heart, till he be grown old, then death frights him, and stands
before his eyes, and yet neither then does he know how much misery there is
there to be met with, for if he knew it, he would dye aforehand for mere grief.
They who depart from earthly things, according to the testimony of conscience,
that they may seek the salvation of their Souls, and to arrive at true ripeness
of youth, rejoice in this death, when they hear of it, and understand it
because of the fruit that springs from thence: But they, who are in this death,
are destitute of that joy: for if they could yet have any joy, they would still
have life, and consequently could not be in death: because what ever dies, is
separated from all life. Posterity only lives and rejoices. Nothing is due to
corruption, but death and destruction, and in death all things are removed, as
faith, and trust, and hope, and charity, and all joy, and every thing that is
founds, is to be forsaken. Now if it be to be forsaken and lost, it must first
be found out, and taken up: for that which one has not, he cannot give up: Now
that which here is thus to be forsaken, is also destitute of hope, as was said
and therefore this desertion is done not with delight, but with great
a^^^ction. The first desertion indeed is do^^ with joy, because then some
better thing is hoped for. But that hope is not here, but in this point there
is a total forsaking, and a being made naked oh all sides. Gain, as they say,
makes labor sweet. But mat labor, out of which no gain is hoped for, is,
without doubt, a matter hard, and bitter, and sharp. Labor at first was sweet,
because gain sprung therefrom, viz. that the life or soul might be found, which
also was found. But when this life is found, it is lost again in that same
dying, and a man is alienated from himself, and God possesses the place of
self, and there is no more mountain or valley, but God alone: for Nature is
quite shut out.

CHAP. V.
IF sin were not, neither would death be: if death were not, neither would
there be a resurrection, therefore all things work together for good, for the
elect. Now that which first departed from earthly things is presently after
elevated into divine, and so remains in it self without death. For though it
may dye as to its gross earthly nature, or creature, yet as to its self it is
without death, as having only changed one state into another, and stands
still in its own life, and yet is but the natural man in his own propriety,
though in a more pure estate. And thus he proceeds from state to state, from
a lower to a higher, from a pure one, to one more pure. And although all that
is here said of states are by the means of death, and corruption accomplished,
yet the man himself remains yet in himself without and beyond death, and
corruption; for he is still the same, and cannot forsake his propriety, and
stands in desire, as to God, as he before stood in^des^^ as to the creature;
and thus he ascend^ and goes forwards until he arriveth at the most pure and
nobler state it is possible for him to arrive at. And all this (...) still but
a figure and a notion, but a purer and noble figure but if we must come above
figures, into mere estence, he that thus ascends in images, must now also dye
even to himself: because by this his asent and going forwards in images, he is
prepared, so as he can be how touched with this death, by which he dies and is
corrupted: and then he suffers a death of all his ornaments, and gifts, yea of
his own self. And therefore he can never be restored more, nor be made glad by
any means, because the joy is reserved for him that abides after death, as the
Prophet faith: These shall be written for the generation to come, and the
people which shall be created, shall praise the Lord. And again; Thy labor
shall be rewarded, and thy posterity shall rejoice therein. This is that
glorious resurrection, and fruit, which springs out of that death and
corruption. And hence springs glory to the Lord: This is that bottle, that
can hold new wine, which a natural man cannot contain, though he should have a
state very pure and noble: This was the seed whence conception arose, Wherefore
it is not in vain: nor is it in vain, that by the good help of God, (...) has
separated himself, and disposed himself unto divine things: for then is he
compelled to follow order, and so he acted rightly, and had not done rightly,
unless he had done so; because he would have been disobedient to God, (who is a
God of order, and leads a man in order) whence eternal death, that severe
judgment of God would follow. A man must be led in order even unto his death:
for unless he should follow order, he would certainly remain unprepared, nor
would ever come thereto

And therefore we must first endeavor to yield ready obedience, and always to
attend to that which is next: and also from the very first beginning, the cross
will not be wanting, and by the way thereof, we shall go. By what a man
departs from earthly things, in obedience to his conscience, by that is he,
atlength, rightly prepared to come into the earth, that is, into the corruption
of himself: and that which grows out of this, stands before God. This
corrupttion of the natural man ought to last even to the corporal death of a
man, and after that the tender twig at last springs forth. But the mind here,
even yet before the corporal death, comes into the resurrection, and is made a
son of grace, and of the covenant, which consists in the blood of Christ, now
poured forth for the remission of sins. Christ washes us from sin, by his
blood, which speaks better things, then the blood of Abel: without the
effusion of the blood of Christ, there is accomplished no remission of sins, or
purification. It is a Most excellent thing to be freed and purged from sins:
but to feel how that redemption is performed, and to experience that misery, is
no pleasant matter, but exceeding sharp and difficult: Nor is it possible for a
man, so much as to behold the thing, much less to execute and perform it. But
it is God alone who both begins and finisheth it, to whom nothing is
deficient, because his works are all perfect: Now here a man does nothing else,
but give himself up into tranquillity, and suffer^ the operation of God. The
work of redemption God has reserved to himself alone, and the glory thereof is
his. And because God handles the matter, no man needs to say, that the thing
is impossible: because the work and purpose of God goes forwards. Here also do
faith and patience take place, which also are the work of God, and not ours.
When one serves the Law of God in the mind, then in the flesh, he serves the
Law of sin. By how much the more of the sins of concupiscence and appetite,
remains in the flesh, by so much the more misery, affliction, and death, the
man has: for he walks not according to the flesh, as being that which
condemned under the Law, and being hurried away violently by sin, is crucified
by the Law of sin. Now where these things are not, there a man still walks
according to the flesh: and by how much, the more there is at that time, of the
sins of concupiscence, and of appetites in the flesh, so much the more of life
and joy a man has: but alas! it is a miserable life, which is followed by
eternal death.

CHAP. VI.
BY what way or means, the Resurection, and the judgment of God, are to be
accomplished after this time, no man living can comprehend, or understand: for
whosoever would know or understand that, he belongs unto death, and becomes
subject unto death. We have indeed a representation of the thing, but what the
very thing will be in the future, is not lawful for us to know. When the thing
it self is present, then at length it is known. All things to come are locked
up from the natural man in darkness, and ignorance: yet he arriveth so far, as
to know, that he knows nothing, etc.

By how much the greater is the straight, so much the more durable is the
judgment: by how much the greater is the desertion, so much the nearer is any
one to God.

For the most part inward affliction gets entrance by outward affliction: and
outward affliction is as it were the gate, by which the inward enters into a
man. For without outward affliction, nature searches out many escapes, that
inward affliction cannot touch her. As if one kept in a dungeon, should still
see light by one only cranny, and upon that account, the evils of being in a
dungeon would become much easier to him: So also as Nature can catch its
propriety, this internal affliction is hindered, nor can gain a room or place.
For there is no place for inward sufferings, where Nature has got escaping
holes. Great is the misery where nature is thus kept in death, that she can
hope for nothing: but acquiescence can bear all things.

He who is founded in death, destruction, and misery and is quiet in them,
admits not comfort either of life or of joy, and is unmoved as to all things,
which are grateful and acceptable, and no man can either comfort him, or
terrify him. For if one should threaten spoiling, death, misery, and affliction
to him, he already forseeth all these, and yields himself up unto them, and
is conversant in them. And therefore he is immovable, both in respect of
things grateful, or of ungrateful: No man can either make him merry, or fright
him. Death, and the withdrawing of all things, are indeed a terror to him, but
not such a one as now at length begins but now afflicts him. Nor do
grateful things exhilerate him, because he has renounced all things, and he
can re-asume nothing, and therefore he is unmoved. Here Nature is, as it were,
ground between two Mill stones, because he acknowledges the judgment of God
upon him to be just, and suffers such misery, that he must thus behold the
thing; and the thing must then be done. But he is not like other malefactors,
who are outwardly in affliction and captivity: For these if they could kill
their keeper, they would readily do it, that they might get loose, yea if they
could, break the windows, gates and walls. But this other sort do not thus
behave themselves, but are subjected unto the will of God, and in it do quietly
rest: and although they could do as other do, yet that they cannot desire:
there is therefore a great difference betwxt the coaction of those, and of
these.

CHAP. VII.
GOd himself is the uncreated Salvation, which spreads it self forth round
about: just as the Sun is every where dispersed abroad, where it can be
received: But where it cannot be received, the fault is not in it self. If
therefore this universal uncreated Salvation, which is God himself ought to
take place in man, then must the proper, included, and created salvation of man
perish: for this is not God himself, and therefore it cannot stand in the sight
of God; and a man must, on that score, be cast into death, and destruction, and
be deprived of his Soul, which he had with much labor saved: and when by his
labor he was come so far, that he could not get further, then was it time for
God not be at rest but to cast him into death: that so he might by grace
establish that in the man, which the man by the Law could not gain thorough
much labor. For whatsoever Christ represented in life and doctrine, is
impossible to be actively fulfilled, yet it must be fulfilled in death.

It behooveth a Man to dye, that God himself may effect the matter and that the
glory thereof may not be Man's.

It is not labor, but Regeneration. Christ brings grace, and that which is
grace, is not the labor of man: and (afterward a man, having passed his own
proper created Salvation, comes unto the universal increated Salvation, which
is God himself: and this Salvation, knows God, and with this a man can stand,
before God, for God can stand before himself. And this man no more judges any
one. For this Sun has nothing strange in it, with this salvation a man has
communion without appropriation. And here it is, that the communion of Saints
takes place.

Life repulsed by one; flees to another in which it lives, till it self also
dies. When the life dies as to the creature, it is nothing esteemed off in
respect of that life which dies as to it self: for there life yet remains
alive, and receives other and greater objects then it had before: and in them
it then lives, and has only changed one for another, and instead of a worser,
has received a better, nor is it dead in it self, but is still the very same
life: but when a life dies to its own self, there is affliction unspeakable,
when it can have nothing, whereby it can be sustained, and which can refresh,
or comfort it: for the destruction thereof is without hope, for when it falls
can rise up again no more: because it falls a natural thing, and it rises
again a spiritual thing, and therefore like seeks like, the old bottle cannot
contain new wine: a new patch agrees not with an old garment, therefore we
must dye to deformity when conformity is to be performed.

It is very necessary to have discretion: but no man can have it, but he that
has the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, of which the Prophet speaks, and the
last of them is, The fear of the Lord; for when one receives the former gifts,
then at last he is round about filled with the fear of the Lord, and the Lord
is feared in all.

CHAP. VIII.
ABout the prophetical promises of God, we must always observe, whom they
respect: for they belong not to the natural man, and he participateth nothing
of them, but only his destruction.

Whatever is extent in the Prophets, and the Apostles have wrote, is praised as
that which is beautiful, yea and it is beautiful: but to the Natural man it is
death and he participateth nothing thereof. Although therefore he shall praise
it as that which is beautiful, yet it is his death: yea and therefore he must
come into death, if it must be applied unto him. But Christ is constituted by
his father, to be the Savior, that he may apply all that, and fulfill it by the
cross.

No man that is not dead comes under grace and the Gospel: therefore they
falsely boast, who glory that they are under grace without death. A man not dead
is first to be subdued by the Law, and therefore is to be prepared for death,
by means of which, he is freed from the Law, and comes under grace: as long as
he is alive, he belongs to the subjection of the Law, but when he is, after
that, dead, he is under grace, for Christ is not the servant of sin, that he
might leave our sins in their own state, but he came, that he might free us
from sin, which is done by the means of death. Sin is punished with death. And
Christ is no defender of the natural man, that he should remain alive. For if
he should do that, we should come without death into God, which is impossible.
Let every one therefore abstain from false boastings and defend no
unrighteousness, for that thing will never find success. The whole world is
full of false boastings concerning Christ, but we must not be conformed to the
word, as Paul says.

A man is secretly besieged by many things, of which he is ignorant, and he
then at last comes to apprehend it, when they are withdrawn from him. Also a
man sometimes apprehends a defect in: himself and is ignorant what it should
be which oftentimes is so great, that it must be qualified by the Lord. The
misery, defect and death of nature is rather to be born with, then to fly to
complaints, anger, and murmurings. Suffer and hold thy tongue, and thou shalst
be advanced with help and assistance. Break not out into words, but repress
their motion. Flee not from the affliction of thy Nature for come it from
whence it will, it will bring with it great gain unto thee, and will be a
benefactour to thy heart. If thou shalst not do this, thou shalst have a
disturbed mind, and shalst hot be advanced forward by any exercise.

There are many things in which a man follows concupiscence, where yet he
pretends to another fair outside show. Whatever is beyond necessity, is
contrary to God, and to all righteousness, yea and to a man's own self. No man
ought to boast of his exercise before others, but to walk in the fight of God,
and to rest quiet in him. For its enough if God sees it. All high-mindedness
is to be avoided, least we be esteemed for some body before others. Exercise
thy self before God.

To be able to tolerate ignorance, is wisdom. It is the part of grave old men
to wink at the folly of youth.

When any one lies in death, and is filled therewith, and both inwardly and
outwardly is without rest both day and night, and sees others full of life,
there it is expressed, what lies hid in him, whither life or death. That which
has renounced time, cannot assume death, nor acknowledge it, although it
cannot flee from the same. The death of all things is to be promoted.

CHAP. IX.
THere is no need that any one should be sollicitous how he ought to come into
death and corruption, for it comes in its own time, and cannot be suppressed: as
a woman big with child, when the hour of the birth comes, cannot hinder it,
Whatever a man knows and understands in this death, it is contrary to him for
it is as it were a ditch in which he lies putrefying and corrupting. No
ratiocination, nor understanding delights him. If yet he could be delighted
with any thing, he would also still live. What soever therefore he has,
applies, speaks, or handles, it is all done in death, and he himself is
detained in death, that he may putrefie, and corrupt, even unto the corporal
death, and this is that ending or conclusion of the natural man* Now as this
dead man has, understands, speaks, thinks, and applies all things
infected with death, and lies as it were in a ditch, in which he putrefieth: so
on the contrary a living man has, understands, speaks, thinks, and uses
all things qualified with life; and as the other is in a grave, so this is in
the house of joy, where he eats, drinks, dances, sings, till he also comes into
death, then all these things cease, and he can receive none of them. The
Natural man never transcendeth imagination: and though he becomes so high
therein, that he dares to touch God, yet even then is he overthrown, as it is
written: Though he should build his nest in heaven, yet thence will God throw
him down headlong. Then all is done with him, as with that rich man, who
clothed himself gorgeously, and was fed with the daintiest food, but after all
that, he dyed and was buried; and then, whatever had been pleasant, departed
from his Soul, and could no longer receive it, because his prayers were not
heard. Yet his mind is, in this place, separated from Nature by the cross, and
is taken into God, and lives in him, but Nature is detained in death, under
the law of sin, from which the mind is freed by the cross, and stands under
grace, serving the Law of God, and is free from sin, from which Christ has
freed him: And so is repulsed by the mind, in the bottom of the humanity (
Tawler calls it the lowermost powers) out of which the vitiousness is so
ejected, that it never can return thither again.

When the natural man did stand in his own increase, he did accomplish that
work according to his own will, that is, the will of Man: But when God has
gained to be in the place of self, he effects his work according to the will
of God, but contrary to the will of man. If a man follows his concupiscence in
small things, he follows it also in great things, that which he must do, that
he cannot omit. For it is a thing tried, and proved by experience: If therefore
one would not follow his lust in great things, he is not to follow it then in
small things: for he who is willing to omit great matters, will also omit
smaller. To be deficient to ones self as to Nature, and to suffer therein, is
very pleasant to the mind. For whatever is cut off from the flesh, by reason of
conscience, is profitable to conscience. We must suffer in Nature for the sake
of conscience, but not in conscience for the sake of Nature.

CHAP. X.
IF a man should have the impression of the knowledge of himself, viz. so as
that he should truly know himself there could not be one of the sons of men so
vile and despicable, beneath whom, he would not submit himself, yea account
himself unworthy to have any converse with him. That a man is so evil, so
troublesome, and so morose toward his neighbor, proceeds from hence, viz.
because he, hitherto, thinks himself to to be something, in time, and in
eternity, nor will he be made ashamed. To be in indignation because of
adversity, is a sign that a man is, and is willing to remain something, which
something must notwithstanding be turned into nothing: Whatever thereof is
contrary to this something, must be born with or endured, that that may be
reduced into its nothing.

The shortest and usefullest rule for going forward, is this, viz. that every
one should satisfy his own conscience. Conscience is a book, in which we must
study daily. That which every one will bring forth out of the appetite of the
natural man, by doing, omitting, or speaking, etc. that ought to be
intermitted, though the thing should be lawful in it self unless it were
subject to mutability. Wherefore we may not imitate them, who are in death,
because they do all things in death, which another would do in life. For that
which is dead is free from every thing: Now to be thus free from things, is the
same as to have no life in things. In whatsoever therefore one has yet a life,
he is not free from that thing, whence it follows, that he is to endeavor to
his utmost to abstain from it, if he would act rightly. (For we must satisfy
Conscience, and in all things study to be obedient to it.) If any one says,
that he is free from any thing, unless he did it with affliction and grief, but
not with delight and pleasure, he says not the truth: For that is still to him
instead of a prison, in which he is detained a prisoner: so that he is bound,
and not free: therefore let no man deceive himself, nor boast before the time.
He, who is to come into a more sublime state, must be lifted up thereunto in
order, and by degrees, and it behooveth him to proceed in those ways which lead
him thither.

We must beware of a double heart: Whosoever is ingenious hates it. The
dissembler, and the hypocrit have indeed an outside fair show: yet he will not
indeed desist from his lusts. For he does not think it to be his concern, to be
led contrary to his own will. Fame and Glory is a short and a vain joy.

The new creature is not an action, but a generation: we come unto it by the
cross: for the ways which lead thereunto are the Cross and affliction.

CHAP. XI.
CHrist has assumed our nature but not our sin. That which we so often mention
concerning Nature, we mean of it, as it is corrupted by sin, and not as it is
in it self: For nature in it self is good, but it is corrupted by sin, and
fermented with sin: just as when water and blood are mingled together, nothing
but blood is discerned, though both the matter, and substance of water be still
there. Christ has assumed naked or mere nature, as it is without blood, that
is, without sin: so he has assumed our flesh, but not our sinful flesh. In the
death of a natural man the will of God only rules, viz. because that God so
wills it, and it so pleases him, and his judgment thus requires it: Hither
a man is to refer himself: this is his only restand quiet, viz. the will of
God. Things plainly happed otherwise, then one thinks, all things observe
another manner then a man thinks.

CHAP. XII.
THere is no coming unto an internal state, or spiritual exercises, except
first all the ceremonies are broken by affliction. The warm bed is to be left.
There are men in the world, that for the sake of Idolatry exceed that hardship,
and patiently endure the cold and incommodities: why may not the same be done
for the sake of the true worship? and though, at the beginning, when one is
settled in a custom of lying in bed, the thing will not be without difficulty,
yet, in time, it will become easy, and a man will hate his bed, and the too
much use thereof, and will not use it but for necessity. All things whatsoever
which are at first done with great difficulty, they become gentle and easy by
use. A man must combat stoutly, and with affliction too, that laying aside his
confusion, he may be brought into order, and consequently that God may draw
nearer unto him. He that is kept in confusion, and neglects the means of his
getting forwards, cannot be promoted: but many years, and times are spent with
him, so that he s^ill remains that which he was: and the fault is in some prop
or support he has, either secretly or manifestly, as well in small as in great
matters. Where Nature is crucified, there she wants a prop, for on what another
is upheld and proppd up with, on that the cannot lean her self. We must beware
of every affair, that is used for to pass away time sportfully and
unprofitably: time is to be weighed in a balance, and to be spent on God, for
it is precious, and runs swiftly.

Whatsoever is to a man most difficult and bitter, that he must do, and
whatsoever is most easy and sweet, that he must omit. To keep himself pure in
impurity, is a piece of art, and commendable: but let no man, that is already
out of the reach of such, mingle himself with them, for that would be a
rashness: Whereas he, that is in them already, ought to enter into this combat
and to conquer the enemy, and with tears and sorrow, break thorough the hostile
troops. That which is here said of impurity is not to be understood of those
things which are in themselves impure, (for no purified person can pass
thorough them, when they are prohibited, and are not, in the least, allowed of)
but of things, that are not impure of themselves, yet are such, by which a man
may be polluted, by reason of his own proper impurity, when he satisfies not
his own conscience, and walks not straight forwards in the way of God.

He, that will not suffer, is afflicted in the earth. He erreth in his
understanding, when one is lead into the revelations and knowledge of many
things, but he himself remains without, and beyond them. The Lord says: What
would it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul. He also
that went into the marriage without a wedding garment, was cast out. For those
thing which he had notionally by knowledge, and in the understanding, he had
not substantially, and really. In the science of things a man glories, and is
glad, and delighted when he speaks, or writes of them, all things are done
with joy. But when the substance or essence of things comes, he lies down in
death Nor can he rejoice or be delighted, because he partaketh nothing and has
no thing therein, but his death and destruction. The Science or knowledge of
them can no more make him merry, because they are contrary unto him. And
whatever he knows, reads, hears, o^ thinks concerning them, that all
make against him, because all these things a^ contrary, or adverse unto him.

CHAP. XIII.
WHen a man lies in death, he no longer his own, for he plainly alienated from
his own self. Her therefore he cease from labor, neith^^ does he act any
more, and God stan^ in the stead of himself, and fulfills, and erecteth that in
his death, which had not been done in his life. For whatever he handled in his
life, he did it at all by images: but here in death God has established the
very substance it self; and this is a grace, and the generation which is made
in death. That which Christ denotes, cannot be fulfilled; for it is a
generation which is of it self passive, in the destruction, and death of a man.
It is impossible to man, therefore God himself does it, whence it is, that to
him alone the glory is due: A man who is in death, is not afflicted by the
delay of time: but he who yet hops for joy and pleasure, he is afflicted with
every delay, until that comes, which was hoped for. But the dead lie down
without hope, nor is there any thing which they expect, for they are forsaken,
and stripped of all. But in these things, they acknowledge the will of God, and
comfort themselves, that God so wills. The will of God is their couch.

When a man gives himself up to one lust, then one follows another, but then a
man has to do, as it were, with a Lion, who if any one lays hold on one pa^^
of any thing, he ever draws it nearer: So also if one yields himself up to
one lust, he also quickly yields to another* and so the world gains him
again, t^^ he be wholly swallowed up therein. But then at last the man truly
neglects himself, and expects the severe judgment of God.

CHAP. XIV.
WHen a man perceives, that he is willing to abide in his present state, and
to be at rest, and to subsist in it, then the Spirit cease, and the man slips
down out of the spirit, into the flesh: there the rule or government of the
Spirit is hindered, and the literal Kingdom is set up: there then is no longer a
spiritual Kingdom, nor an increase, nor proficiency, but a going backwards, and
a leaping back again into the flesh, and into the creature: And then begins
hatred, and persecution toward the adverse part, that they will not so much as
receive them into their house, that is, they will by no means come near them,
for the sake of that. And thus these must suffer by and from them, for the sake
of the Name of Christ, even as also they suffer in their flesh, for the sake of
sin, by the Law of sin. For the flesh of these persons, together with its lusts
and affections are, by the Law, lifted up from the earth, upon the cross, and
the lusts and appetites of Nature are cut off, and rejected by their objects,
that they can no longer use them, nor draw life from them. The universal
increated Salvation has in it self no judgment concerning others: for really
it is without judgment: nor has it any need of any means, by which it may
abstain from judgment, because it has no such thing in it self. But proper
Salvation has hitherto carried along with it, judgments, and if it must
abstain from them it must do it by some means, which the real Salvation
wants: Now those means are the creatures, for the essence is God himself, who
endures no creature. Before the essence comes all images must vanish. Real
salvation hides, or withdraws it self from no man, neither is it separated,
nor included, nor made proper: But if any one secludeth, or separateth himself,
he withdraws, or hides himself from it, then the blame is not to be laid on
that, but on him, who does it. Thus is the man who is in this Salvation, and
where this Salvation takes place.

CHAP. XV.
THe chiefest and greatest affliction of all the damned is this, that they are
separated from God; so that he that feels that separation, feels the pains of
hell. God is essentially very good, nor is there any good, but God, he
therefore that is deprived of that has nothing. Whence it is said: He is a poor
man, who goes to hell.

For some years together all things have fallen away from me: yet hitherto the
chief and real death followed not thereupon, as now it does. Death indeed was
always present with me, but it was never essential death till now. For here a
man lies in death and destruction, nor can he take or use any discretion, nor
think this, or that, nor conceive images, unless it be, that he lies
essentially in death, and that death is really present: And when, in this
misery, one begins to talk of these, or the other divine things, even for that,
Nature is to be punished again, and to be crucified with yet a more bitter
death. Nature cannot enter in again, as she went out, for here she took breath
again, and was recreated; and yet there belongs nothing to her, but
destruction and death. They who lie in this affliction, if one propounds to
them any comfort of life, they esteem it for poison, and for bitterness, and
for adversity, nor can they listen to it. Even as if one who is lead into
death, looking round about him, should see all and every one to be dead, all
whomsoever he beholds, yea his kindred, and familiar friends: Here let it be
observed, how great is that affliction, to be deserted of all, and to draw life
no where, and to be a captive and bond-slave* unto death, even to the desertion
of all creatures

But God ennobleth the case by changing it and that thorough a great difficulty
of sufferings, when they are not ennobled, as to an outward fair show, before
the flesh, but in Spirit. The former state is always more noble then the
following, but not in the sight of God: for the tents of Kedar are black; but
God knows them to be otherwise inwardly. Christ comes not as it was expected:
His face is sad, like a man of sorrows, etc.

CHAP. XVI.
THe following combat is always terrible in respect of the foregoing, and that
which follows that, is yet more terrible, and so is every other, after the
former so that the preceding conflicts, in respect of the following, are always
light, though they also, in respect of those that were before them, were heavy.
And all this God does, who leads a man by and thorough these hard ways, till
he has rightly prepared him, and rendered him purged from all dross, and fil^h:
and this a man suffers, and God operates. A man is overcome by God, and
passively lead: and though at first he was also active under Law; yet
afterward he is not so. Because thorough this whole state, even to the
following, he suffers, and the state which follows in respect of the
foregoing is horrible, whereas before that it did seem to be noble: yet in
respect of man, and not of God. For by how much the sublimer is the corruption
by so much the more noble will be the fruit: for a man is still lead more
deeply and deeply into affliction. The former state is always more eligible in
respect of that which follows, so that a man, as far as he is in the foregoing,
cannot account of himself in regard of the following, an heretic.

When Christ says: If they shall say, Lo here is Christ, go not forth: he
would say this: We must not depart from aff^ition.

Into them, who lie down in death, Life cannot enter: They who have not yet
lain down in death, and yet obey the governance of their conscience stand in
the midst between Life and death: they are subject to great labor and strife,
who endeavor by the help of conscience to suppress that life which they have
in themselves. These men, as yet, can know no death, until they come into that
state, but yet they believe it. They who are in death, even their very
cogitations do lie in death, that they can be delighted with noth ng neither
with God, nor with the creature. For if they could still be delighted with any
thing by thinking or cogitation, that would still prove to be a life, which
cannot be in this case.

It one placed under a naked sword should be asked, whether he took delight at
that time in any thing, without doubt he would answer, that he sat in death,
nor could possibly fancy to himself any other thing, but a certain and a real
death. If such a one should get up on his legs, to look about, on life, and
things temporal, he would see nothing before him, but a cloud, that is
judgment, and death. The state of such men is plainly miserable and painful;
nor is it to be wished for: as if perhaps we should say: O would to God we were
like such or such: but this is to be wished, that the will of God is to be
accomplished in us, that we may bear it, and be united with it. Moreover those
men who thus lie in death, have little or no comeliness in them, but are very
much deformed, and therefore he who is conversant with them, must beware, least
he imitates their words or behaviors. For whatsoever they do, or omit to do,
are silent in, or speak, it is all performed in death, nor can any life, joy,
comfort, or pleasure lay hold of them in this state. They are untouched by
delectation and are filled with death. If therefore he who is without the
bounds of this state, should imitate their words and actions, he would do thus,
whilst he is still full of life, and with a feeling of comfort, of joy, of
pleasure, etc. and then would he wander egregiously; because he would be in no
want of delectation, in regard he would still remain full of life: and
therefore let him have a great care, and keep his life safely, least he put it
forth into jeopardy: for though he be still often accused in his conscience for
negligence yet inwardly he has much jo^* and comfort, which they, who are in
death do utterly want.

CHAP. XVII.
THey who are not yet dead, ought with great diligence, and severity, to
abstain from lusts: whereas they who are dead, have no such matter: For those
means, in which lusts do make their abode, are, by the good help of judgment,
so shattered, and broken, that delectation wholly cease in them: because
these men are dead, as to these matters, and whatsoever they do whether they
eat, or drink, or speak, etc. they do all in death and with affliction: also
this death is a sensible death, nor is it like that, in a post, that wants
sense: neither also is it such a death, which being once accomplished, then
cease, but it is an incessant death, every day, for they sensibly dye every
particular day. But for the others, who still abide only in continency, they
(as I said) have not this death, but are still alive. For those means, in which
lusts do abide, are not, in these men, as yet condemned to death: and therefore
they ought to abstain, under the labor of the Law, and sedulously to beware,
because they can scarce do any thing, which is not done by the use or help of
life. But they who are dead, do the same thing in death, with misery, and
affliction. And therefore, as was said above, he who lives, must not regard
him that is dead, to imitate him, until he himself also is arrived at this
state of death: then are those things granted unto him, and are become pure
unto him, which, whilst he was alive, were impure. Yet is it not here so to be
understood, that one may therefore think, that unjust things are lawful for
him, or are pure, as at this day, some erroneous spirits ( David George and
Henry Nicholas) do profess, who think such things are lawful for them, which
are not of themselves lawful, but are wicked and unjust before God, and the
Elect: by which they demonstrate that they salsly boast themselves of their
dying, and death. Let all those, who desire to find out God beware of these
kind of men.

In the book of Psalms it is said: Thou shall change them, but thou thy self
art still the same, and thy years shall not fail, etc. He who feels this
mutation for his part, and a permanency on the part of God, that man feels
somewhat.

Let no man so much esteem of the sufferings of the Soul as to contemn the
afflictions of Nature, for the matter, upon examination, is otherwise found.

When a man stands in the trial between God and Nature, and is equally on
both sides grievously afflicted, so as that he must deny one or the other: Let
(I pray) that man bear up, and let him deny nature, and not God: Let him (I
pray) bear up vigorously, and not shrink: for God helps him.

CHAP. XVIII.
WHen a man's props fall from under him, by which he was born up, it is a sign,
that he himself will quickly fall into ruin: and then it is said, Alas! how
long will this endeavor of appropriation last? shall this my Meity (or
mineness) always endure? and then misery and affliction rush in, when that net
of propriety is to be unloosned: because that is to done by the means of many
sufferings.

He who knows grace rightly, is in great affliction for he is wholly made
sin, and has nothing in which he can be at rest. By how much the less one has
of grace, glory, Illumination, devotion, and of strength, when he suffers the
mortification of Nature, by so much the more excellent and worthy is that
esteemed, in the sight of God. But when one suffers with the glory of an
exceeding high grace, with devotion, and with virtue, etc. the thing is easy,
nor is it so highly esteemed, as when one labors under want of all those
excellencies, and yet is afflicted: yet is not one better then another, for he
that lies in the sun, how (I pray) is he better then another, who does not lie
in the sun? except it be because he has need of greater humiliation, which
must be done for him by and thorough so much mercy: so that he must bow himself
down under the feet of all men, and submit himself unto them.

Conscience is our next neighbor, with whom we are to be reconciled before God
will accept our offerings: therefore we ought rather to suffer the loss of our
own selves, then to keep an evil conscience: yea all adversities are rather to
be accepted, then that Conscience should torment us. He that has an evil
conscience, cannot be advanced forward. An evil conscience is a great burden.
We must therefore use all diligence that our conscience be brought into an
innoc^ncy! but that can never be effected without affliction, and without the
want of all things pleasant. He who is full of lusts is often afflicted, when
those things are not done, which he desired.

It is not wisdom to reveal the folly of another, unless one has a very lawful
cause; else the business of another is not to be discovered. The art of God, is
God himself, and it is taught by God, and infused without any means: although
some certain things should preceed, which have been useful so to dispose a man,
that God can immediately touch him. It Is no art to have no care in great
abundance, but by care to abstain in want, comes to this at length, not to be
sollicitous. If the eye be shut to lust and appetite, we may endure much:
Affliction can bring it so to pass, as any one can deny himself in great
things, which without affliction, he could never have renounced. He that is
free from many, has need also to be set free from himself, not that he be a
captive to himself but be freed from himself. Many think, that they have
discretion, which notwithstanding they have not yet: He in whom discretion is
to be found, both bitter and sweet things must have been tasted by him. To be
free in Conscience from those accusations, which are wont to be made daily, is
a great gift of God, and that liberty can advance a man unto a notable growth,
if he can use it rightly. No man knows, what he has, but when he has lost the
thing, then at length a man acknowledges what he once had. A man is full of
the study of appropriation, so that he always thinks, that this or that is due
unto him, and to be his, and that he has a right unto that. He that stands
in God, walks, speaks, thinks, and operates, as in the sight of God, nor is he
sollicitous, how men do receive it. Men are willing to hide under an evil and
false worship, those defects, in which they are therefore involved, because
they have not satisfied their consciences. And that false worship is therefore
accounted for the true, and remains unknown, but when one satisfies his
conscience, then it is detected to be a false worship, for when one satisfies
conscience, there conscience is cleared, and illuminated, and there a man is
always more and more straightened, and at length comes into that affliction,
anxiety, and sorrow: by which he is so advanced forwards, and his conscience is
so clarified and illuminated that he can gain a true discerning of things, and
no falsity can ever deceive him to all eternity.

CHAP. XIX.
A Certain man said: That burden and trouble, which my neighbor has upon my
account, does affect me with much grief: formerly such a matter was to me a
light thing, and not grievous, but afterward it became a running sore. No man
ought to use any liberty toward his neighbor: after that I had relieved my
neighbor by my own proper trouble, and had transferred the burden from my
neighbor upon my own self, I found my self notably advanced forwards. And when
I did not so do, I was thereupon still under blame, for in this very particular
I walked not in the sight of God. If a man must be advanced, it behooves him to
be quick-sighted, that he may rightly converse with his neighbor. It is often
times necessary, that one should neglect his exercises and his zeal for the
sake of his neighbor, and he shall commend himself unto God, nor shall he
therefore suffer any damage. The levite and the Priest would not perform that;
because they were about their business, and had their exercises, and took care
of themselves, but left their wounded neighbor without help, applying to him
no compassion. There was a true cause which yet they did not observe, whence
also it was, that they were not praised of the Lord. A man attends fervently
unto prayer, and yet let him rightly weigh the causes of things: and God will
know he is to be advanced. Oftentimes an advancement springs from such a
thing, out of which there seemed, that an hindrance would arise.

When a man observes his conscience, then is he always more and more
straightened, that sometimes he knows not which way to turn himself.

To neglect all things, unto which lust reaches out its hand, and not to use
them afflicts a man: When Nature is suspended, then is not a man rejoiced,
though he has the affluence of all things nor is he made sorrowful, though
they should be wanted: if good things do abound yet they are not his: for he
cannot enjoy them truly, so as to have a life in them: but if they be wanting,
he has lost nothing. Wherefore he passes between both parts unconcerned,
neither being rejoiced in those, nor made sorrow in these.

To deny ones proper commodity and gain; and for our neighbors sake and
advantage to suffer detriment, affects the conscience with great pleasure:
but if one seeks commodity and gain, by the detriment of his neighbor, or
advantage by his neighbor's in jury, or honor by his neighbor's disgrace,
then the conscience cannot be at rest, and at last becomes grievously gauled.
Much is placed in this point, so that he who desires to be advanced let him
rightly use or handle his neighbor, let him walk with frequent exercisings,
and with severity, as under the Law, and in all things, let him observe his
conscience. He that spares himself and does detriment to his neighbor, rather
then to himself he can never be advanced. Also a man ought not to admit without
lawful causes, that his neighbor should serve him.

That the Fathers of old did so openly avoid gormandizing, and gluttony, this
was the reason, that gluttony is the chiefest of the vices, under which all
vices are contained. Gluttony is the bull-work and defense of all the other
vices, which being broken down, they can no longer maintain a war, but the man
goes on to fight them, and to get the victory, and one victory after another,
till, by God's help, he quite conquereth his carnal life, and begins a happy
life, that so the flesh being corrupted and undone, the Soul begins to bud
forth, and is gained. But when afterward these things are again to be lost,
certainly that death and affliction is much greater, then was the death of the
flesh.

In things necessary, as meats, drinks, sleep, clothes, etc. they ought always
to be only so taken as Nature can be contented therewith, and not that pleasure
or joy may arise out of them. Such a use of them takes away all superfluity, so
that Necessity only may remain as in the sight of God.

Time is to be esteemed as too precious and worthy then to be squandred away in
the reading of unprofitable books. Conscience ought to be above all cases, not
ought any case to prevail at all, if it be against conscience.

Carnal afflictions, such as are these, to be spoiled for the sake of the word
of God, to suffer persecution, to be captivated, to be tormented, etc. these, I
say, I have not tried, but I highly esteem them, and the more, because I have
not experienced them, rather then if I had experienced them. That which is
beyond Necessity is to be omitted, and not used. If any thing exceeds
Necessity, omit that: for it will be grateful to you, nor will you repent
thereof, although, at present, it may afflict you. If you will not do thus,
greater pains and afflictions will arise therefrom. That which is at present
grateful, at length breeds sorrows, and that which at present affects with
sorrow that at last will bring forth pleasure. That which is sweet at first,
does at last give a bitter taste. Boethius says: The end of pleasure is pain.
Also he says: There is no sin without pain, and affliction, as there is no
virtue without its reward. A man cannot be inwardly advanced, nor have peace
and rest, unless outwardly he be withdrawn from all things, in which he lives,
and which he desires, and lusts after, and is employed about slender and
mean objects: But thence resulteth great affliction, without which
notwithstanding no man is advanced. Affliction is the food of the Soul: To dye
to the flesh is the life of the Soul: Disquiet, affliction, and pain, as to the
flesh, is peace, joy, and pleasure to the Soul: for the one is also contrary to
the other.

CHAP. XX.
IT is necessary that a man should be made ashamed in all things, and glory be
given to God alone. We must condole with our neighbor: if one cannot do that,
yet must he hold his tongue, and abstain from rash judgment.

When all things succeed to a man, according to Nature, pleasure, appetite, and
proper commodity, these are not the means of advancing him toward God: but
when all things go with a man against Nature, viz. otherwise then Nature
requires, and against delight, and appetite, then whole days are consumed in
afflictions, and then one may be advanced in God. When things flow according to
the current of will and Nature, then there is nothing toward advancement: but
when we must sail against the current, with men, from whom many grievous things
are to be born, and who are altogether adverse unto us, there in is
advancement: for such men are both the means, and the cause of advancement: And
then also that, which is evil in us, is felt, and for its fake we can be
affected with sorrow, and can confess it in the sight of God. Therefore
prosperous things are not to be sought, nor adversity to be avoided. For
adversity is always safe, and does advance us in the Knowledge of our selves.
And it behooveth a man to be wary, and to be in perpetual exercise, and trial.

Sweetness is deceitful, and Nature desires it. Bitterness is a Medicine, and
Nature hates it, and therefore we must do, not that which we will, but that
which we hate.

CHAP. XXI.
TO abstain from inordinate and unprofitable words, makes a man as if he were
dumb, and causes him to be silent in many cases, which else he would talk of.
A lascivious tongue extinguisheth zeal, and renders a man inordinate, and weak,
and unfit to overcome temptations.

In which way soever I am willing to go forwards, according to life, the gate
is shut against me: and then death is my refuge. I must therefore shut the eye
of life, and rest quiet in death. If I had beforehand known this affliction,
in which I now lie, I had dyed for mere grief: but now when I am in it, God
keeps me in it, and I can bear it. I never before had believed, that the case
would be thus, as now I find it. Judgment does so drive me, that I can have
neither comfort, nor hope, nor faith, either in God, or in the creature: Thus
the Natural Man is suppressed by judgment, and thus the rod hangs over him,
and which way soever he looks death meets him: but the mind is free* I have no
torture of Soul, and such sufferings as Francis Spira endured, I am ignorant of
them.

Adam was created pure in spirit, Soul and Body; but by his fall he departed
from God, and tumbled down into his ownself: he became estranged from God, and
was made his own propriety, and a servant of the creatures. And this same
growth of self, is nothing else but our desire, endeavor, or study of
appropriating to our selves, which afterward is so subjected unto judgment,
that it can have no comfort, or life either in God or in the creature.
Therefore it behooveth us to be reduced again into nothing, in respect of all
things about which we are made somewhat, and then at length God will be all
himself, in the man himself, and that instead of his own propriety: and then a
Man is restored without propriety: And then a man finds God with God, and
serves God with God, and that is pleasing to God: For God has no good
pleasure but in his ownself. Judgment is exercised upon this his propriety, and
then that loses all hope of restitution, and nothing is due unto it, either as
to God, or as to the creature, Thus it may be understood, what the fall of Adam
is, viz. appropriation: Therefore are also he is to expect judgment, and that
too must be acknowledged to be just.

CHAP. XXII.
WIthout affliction it is impossible to be promoted in God, and to have inward
peace: for where one is to be promoted, or advanced in God, and to have inward
peace, there it behooveth the natural man to be purged from lusts, and to have
no more delight, life, or joy in the creature, but to want all these, and to be
suppressed in death, and to be fastened to the cross. So the Apostle says:
They that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and (...)
thereof.

It behooveth me to give place to judgment, and therefore I am without al^
solicitude for things temporal, whence they may be acquired: For I have not
(...) much time left, that my senses can meditate on such a thing. It behooveth
me to be stripped of the images of all things, and therefore I remain without
purpose, and without council, nor do I know, what in time to come I am to do,
or leave undone, to be silent in, or to speak; but as things are at present, so
they glide away without my privitie: and when all things are past and done, I
am no more sollicitous concerning them. My business is to attend that that is
present, and incumbent upon me. That I thus suffer, it is not for my piety, but
for evil, sin, and propriety; because I descend from Adam, over all whom,
judgment, and death is impending, without hope of recovery. For whatsoever Adam
has, he has it unjustly, he is therefore to be dispoiled of all things, that
he may want all things, and retain nothing, neither comfort, nor pleasure, nor
joy, either as to God, or as to the creature: for nothing is due unto him,
nothing belongs unto him: he also himself can never attain unto any truth, but
he is condemned, and dies in Christ. But whatsoever afterward rises again in
Christ, is clean, and without appropriation; That Christ has condemned sin it
self, is not to be understood, as if he had sin in himself, or he is pure, like
the sun, void of all impurity. Whence it is, that no unrighteousness can stand
before him, but as filthiness, it is condemned by him: just as in the Sun all
impurity is detected, and demonstrated to be impurity: So that the sun cannot
endure it, but rather des^r^yeth it. So Jesus Christ is the Sun of
righteousness, who by his own proper light, virtue, and pulchritude, condemns
all injustice and unrighteousness, and suffers no darkness to stand before him.

I lie like the trunck, of a tree, nor have I in me any activity, but I suffer
only all that, that is done in me: but I cannot act either by reason, or by
understanding: My state is passive, not active: the active went before, and I
also once had it, so as also it ought to be, or else I had not come unto this.
Only it is not permitted to me, that I may or can act, or form in my self the
image of any thing.

We must suffer, even in the smallest matters: for he that refuses that,
cannot be promoted in God: by the suggestions of the spirit, the suggestions of
Nature are to be denied: that satisfaction may be given to the Spirit; no man
ought to follow Nature, that so the will of God may be done, and not ours. The
affliction and misery of Nature, is to be sustained for the sake of God, and
the peace of conscience. It is better, says Solomon, to be invited unto green
herbs with Love, then to a fatted calf with hatred. Poverty of nature, with
peace of conscience is better, then the delight of Nature with anguish of
conscience. Necessaries are due unto Nature, that by their means, a man may be
converted unto God, but not on the contrary. When the conscience is satisfied,
many sorrows do invade nature: But Peter commands, that sorrows are to be born
for conscience sake, viz. Sorrows that are against Nature, for conscience sake,
but not the contrary.

When it was Summer season to my Nature, the heat thereof did stay me, but now
Winter is followed thereupon, yet the Summer is still adjudged by me to be
excellent and worthy, yea even when it is Winter time; but the will of God is
more precious to me, then all things. My business or labor is increased and
agravated, yet am I contented: I keep my sorrows in silence: for if they should
burst out, and be made public, clamours, and complainings would daily be heard
from me, because judgment is always exercised upon me, without consolation,
nor can I have either delight, or joy, or life either in God, or in the
creatures. At the beginning, for some time, I enjoyed comfort, when it was
propounded to me, that I was no longer my own, and my goods were no longer
mine, but his, with whom I should be married. These endured for a while; but
they quickly vanished away again. And from that very time to this, I have been
without comfort, nor can I set my self to read in this condition, seeing it is
not lawful for me to assume so many images: Nevertheless I esteem of the
Scripture at a high rate, for it is dear and precious to me. Just as he who
takes not a thing into his mouth, cannot be sensible of the taste thereof, so
also can no man understand, know, or comprehend this state, unless he himself
does experience it, and come up thereinto. The event or success of things is
plainly another thing, then we thought of, without the wisdom, and beyond the
understanding reason, or judgment of man. They who are in this state, are not
admitted to reason. When others admit comfort, these refuse all consolation:
For whatsoever can be said, that they know: And yet even from thence, they can
have no comfort.

CHAP. XXIII.
HE that desires to overcome his hard temptations or trials, it stands him in
hand to be calm or quiet; to speak little, and to pray much. It is necessary
for me to submit my self to be under men, yea the most foolish, yea also under
such as live in errors, and those of the worser sort, I say, I must be
submitted unto them all. If they sit upon the bench, I will lie under it, nor
will I esteem my self to be better then they. For who am I, that I am not such
a one my self? But that the power of God has turned me therefrom and so kept
me therein, for the sake of which, the glory is not mine, but God's. If I
sometimes, out of urgent necessity, speak of them ( viz. David George, and
Henry Nicholas) in truth I do it with fear and trembling, and not with
pleasure. I neither may nor can assent to their opinions, for they are
depraved, and mightily lead aside, inasmuch as they are fallen into a false
liberty. Their fall is most dangerous, and most terrible: for no man can come
at them to reprove them, so as to touch their conscience: because nothing
touches them, and they esteem and deride all, as if they were childish trifles.
But if they were to be reached, there would be need of a more sublime spirit.
We must beware, that we fall not back again into that, which we have once
forsaken, and left by continence: yea we must have a care, that, if we have
proceeded forwards, we slip not back again, and if we have gained any thing,
let us not lose it again, for it was gotten with great hardship or difficulty.

God acts thus with a man, that how much soever a man has profited, yet is not
the glory his, but God's only, to whom also it is deservedly to be attributed,
as unto whom it only belongs: But man is to be kept under in humility, and his
person to be excluded, and God alone to be glorified, to whom alone all glory
is due.

CHAP. XXIV.
THe most ready and next way to proficiency is this, that a man should closely,
and diligently observe whatever pleases, tempts, or moves his carnal
appetite, and deny them all. By so doing a man sometimes becomes so overwhelmed
with misery, that he knows not which way to turn himself, whence it is, that he
is driven to his prayers.

If any one is willing to have all things done so accurately and according to
his own mind he must, on that score, suffer so many plagues, and for the sake
of one commodity, to endure two incommodityes in the stead thereof. A man ought
to learn to bear, and suffer whatever is contrary unto himself, else he can
never come to rest and peace. Tauler says, Abstain, and Sustain, hold thy
tongue, and hold thy peace: Patience only leads me into the still rest:
Patience is the food of the Soul. Yea in time of pure necessity, Patience is
that bread of heaven, and that fullness or plenty kept secret in the Treasure of
God. Silence and patience quiet a man. To have no delight neither in God, nor
in the creatures, but to perish on both sides, is the most miserable, and
desolate of all conditions: If then thou ask; is there therefore no hope
left for thee? I answer, thy case is now the very same, as if a grain of wheat,
that at this time lies in corruption, should ask; whither or no there is any
hope for it? For if there could be any hope in and to corruption, there would
be no need, that the thing should be corrupted; and he that has hope, has no
need, that he should die. In this death and annihilation the affliction is so
great that a man knows not what he is to do: for which way soever he turns
himself, he finds life, delight, or quiet no where, there meets him nothing but
corruption, and death, and he himself acknowledges that this case is
deservedly his, so that he cannot so much as ask that these things may be
removed from him: he therefore does nothing, but bows himself down, and
shrinketh, saying, O Lord, O Lord! And that conversation he once had with God,
with faith, fervor, labor, zeal, and severity, does plainly go down with him
into the grave, and he no longer has any thing, but lies in the pit, in death,
and annihilation, and suffers the will of God: and whatever he utters in words,
concerning these things, he does it all with grief, and not with pleasure, and
when he speaks he is involved in greater streights, and difficulties; so that
he had rather hold his tongue. Such then as can yet, with delight, and freedom,
talk of these matters, by this very talking, do they demonstrate, that they are
not yet come unto this state or condition, or unto this exercise, because
delight, and pleasure is still alive in them, and they are yet sull of corrupt
desires, and appetites. And although they are drawn off from the lowest dreggs
yet are they turned quite to the other extreme. But yet such are not to be
reputed to be like the men, they were before: For now they are honest, whenas
formerly they were dishonest, and now they are become more averse from
themselves, then they were before. Yet although they are now, in part made more
noble, and more pure, yet for all that, there must come a death, even upon
these good qualities, because concupiscence is still present, and the objects
are only changed, and become more noble. And this is that same state, and
condition, which goes before that same death, corruption, and the grave; and
must be brought to pass, and no man can arrive thereat, unless it be given to
him of God: for from him flows the helps and assistance, and that accompanied
with the desertion, and renounciation of all things, visible and inferior, by
means of many afflictions. This is that state, to know Christ according to the
flesh, in which all things are to be left, before we come to the other
desertion, where Chirst appears and is acknowledged or known in spirit, nor
does he ever appear, as he did in the former or foregoing state. To observe
order in all things, and to be exorbitant in nothing, keeps the mind free: but
when it is otherwise, there arise burdens, and cares; nor is there any liberty
allowed for profitable exercises, because of the great heap of confusions, that
hinder the man. Whoever therefore would be freed from all pernicious
imaginations, he ought to beware, that when he erred upon one hand, being
turned therefrom, that he err not also on the other: for a burden awaiteth upon
him on either side, wherefore we must pray unto God, to direct our external
affairs, into a middle way, for that middle is between both extremes, good: Now
this is said concerning things necessary outwardly, but not of things internal,
unless it be so far as externals have a respect to internals, and are
serviceable unto them; and if they be rightly ordered, do promote them: for
when they are disorderly, they became an impediment to internal concerns, and
do disturb the man making him restless. Whereas if these things be performed
with a turning unto God in fear, and in thanksgiving, then is it from God, and
it is right, and the man is well enough, but else affliction waits on the
flesh.

CHAP. XXV.
WHatsoever has received life, ought to dye. Paul says: If ye live according
to the flesh, ye shall dye: in what thing soever a man places his life,
according to the flesh, in that very thing also he takes his death, therefore
he ought to beware, so as that he place his life in none of those things in
which there is no life. Just so bitter is the difficulty of dying, as was the
life formerly sweet. It is therefore necessary, that a man put always a curb
upon himself, and that he keeps himself in prison, as it were, least he any
ways strayeth, and that he should bound himself within narrow limits, and that
he be in constant expectation of the Lord. For the Lord comes not, but with
streights and pressures for in such, it is that the advancement and growth of a
man consists, otherwise he is stunted. In the cross alone, conversion and
faith in Christ, is given; and there it is that we have or hear our answer. All
fruit grows out of pressure, affliction, and misery, which is every where
presented, by things visible. Let every one therefore become subject to the
cross, and let him not fly from it, at all, God knows the conclusion of
every thing, and prepares its end, how compassionately also does he deal with
us. No man ever perished, but he that did flee from the cross, nor was willing
to suffer outwardly, and inwardly too. Let not a man be perverse, proud, and
lifted up, nor let him speak ambitious words: but let him be humble, simple,
and lowly, and let him possess his mind in holiness, and in contrition, and let
that appear in all his doings, in all his apparel, manners, words, and works,
nor let him ever show himself proud and puffed up, nor having together
therewith, the contempt of his neighbor.

CHAP. XXVI.
TRue Godliness suffers vehement trials and temptations through all degrees, or
steps whatsoever. He therefore that endeavors to be pious in God, he must
yield himself up to affliction, and must not refuse death, nor any pains, or
dolours: Blessed is the man that endures his trial, etc. We must either
confess, or deny Christ, in the time of afflicton, and necessity: and if then
we do not deny Christ, but stay with, and near him, and firmly keep our
standing, that temptation brings great increase, and profit to us; and our
virtue is enlarged, and strengthened; so that we shall be enabled to stand
upright also, in a greater temptation, and to confess Christ therein. The
Psalmist says: They shall go from virtue to virtue, or from strength to
strength, and the God of Gods shall be seen in Zion. God does grant his gifts
to man, yet not without trying him, either before, or after: Wherefore it is
written, Prepare thee for the trial, and bear patiently. The Lord says: Ye are
they who have persevered in my temptation, and I, etc. Again: He that
overcomes even as I overcame, shall be heir of all. Man therefore ought to
reduce his life, to become a mere combat. Job says: What is man, that thou
magnifiest him, or why set thou thy heart upon him? When our Lord teaches
his disciples to pray: Lead us not into temptation, he does not mean that they
should not be tried, but that they should not be overcome in the temptation, or
trial, but that they should remain constant: Therefore to this purpose belong
Watchings, Fastings, and Prayers, as he himself says: Watch and Pray, least ye
fall into temptation. These words he said unto his disciples, when he arose
from prayer, in that most remarkable temtation. So they (in 2. Chron. 20.) also
called upon God, in the time of battle, and he was entreated of them, for they
trusted in him: Shall not therefore our God judge them? true indeed there is no
such courage, and strength in us, that we are able to resist a multitude, which
rusheth in upon us; but when we know not what we ought to do, we have only this
refuge left, to direct our eyes unto thee. Hearken all ye of Judah^ and those
that inhabit Jerusalem, Thus says the Lord: Be not ye afraid, nor tremble at
this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but the Lords, do you only
stand still, and ye shall see the salvation of God on your behalfs: Trust ye in
the Lord your God, and you shall be safe: Believe his Prophets, and all shall
happen well. As Jehosaphat gave council, the children of Judah were made
strong, for they trusted in the Lord the God of their fathers; Help us O Lord
our God, for in thee do we put our trust.

CHAP. XXVII.
A Man in affliction ought to abstain from all delights of the creatures: nor
ought he to seek for a comforter (amongst them) but place all in the Lord: Let
him abide without comfort, without complaint, till the Lord comes. Yea also
let him reject all strange waves of escape, and such like evasions, and let him
wait for the Lord: for the Lord will approve himself faithful to him, and will
suffer him to bear but in a just measure, and order, and that to his own glory,
and for the promotion and growth of the man. All which, would a man hinder, if
being impatient under the cross, he should not wait upon God. Great is the
fruit of affliction and therefore in it, is the Lord to be expected. I expected
the Lord from the morning watch, even until the evening, says the Psalmist,
and Isaiah says: Blessed are all they that wait upon the Lord, for they that
wait upon him shall never be confounded; the Psalmist says, In waiting I
waited upon the Lord and he regarded me. Now if there were neither faithfulness
nor good will in the Lord, of visiting and helping his, the Scripture would
never have represented these things to us, in as much as it speaks nothing but
what is true. The Lord grant us Faith! Paul says: I believe all the things
which are written in the Law and the Prophets. The eye of our opinion, Love,
and favor, is to be turned upon God, and in all things we ought to set him for
our mark, and end, and not things created; if we would con^inue pure, and
unburthened. The natural state, by the fall of Adam, is this, that we should
turn our eyes upon those things from whence springs up to us, nothing but
blindness, and ignorance: which things also are again changed in a true change
which tends to their original: but that then happens, with grief, and with
anguish. Now he that casts himself into that original, he arrives at the port
of grace; and that is revealed to him, which he, before, knew not: for the
imitation of Christ opens and reveals, but the imitation of the flesh
hides and shuts.

In all things we are perverse, until we come unto judgment, and death: Unless
the Lord should exhibit himself unto us, and should sustain us, by his power,
we should all utterly perish: whence we ought deservedly to beware of all
rashness.

There is no need that a man should be more sollicitous about the getting of
knowledge, then he should be of attaining of death: for in death, things do
open, and give out themselves, and true knowledge is unfolded; whereas if life
should remain that could not be effected, though a man should strive with never
so much study and labor. Yea though he might get knowledge according to the
letter, yet for all that, all things are still shut up, and hidden from him,
before he can yield himself up into death, and admit in himself the dying of
the guilty body, such studyings, and endeavors after knowledge, are rather an
hinderance, because thereby a man neglects his own self, and becomes
forgetful of his own concerns. Of this also says our Lord: What shall it
profit a man to gain the whole World, and to lose his own Soul.

That any one in this world should not be solicitous nor feed carking care,
many things are requisite, for there are some who take no care at all; because
they labor not by reason of want, or penury: And many are such by nature. Yet
this is not that which our Lord says: For the words of our Lord always point
at some other thing, then what we derive from Adam, yea they are spoken quite
contrary to that, which we are in Adam. Therefore our Lord is very odious to
the flesh, yea the very death, and destruction thereof is Christ, who proceeds
quite contrary to our Nature.

CHAP. XXVIII.
NEcessary affairs are done, and performed by the chosen of God, without the
cleaving or sticking of their hearts unto them: And if it be not thus, but that
the heart is rather burdened with them, and is involved in imaginations, this
is not thorough any fault in the things, but because of that defect, that still
abides in man. And thus a man goes away blinded, not knowing himself, until he
falls into temptation or trial. But when he comes to a feeling knowledge of
himself, then he may be advanced; which could never be done before; because he
had to do with sin secretly. That which a man sometimes thought was hurtful to
him, and his hinderance, that afterward serves to advance, and put him
forwards: Therefore should a man remain without any choice of his own, but wait
what God will do with him, and thus yield himself up, as being bowed under the
divine will.

Here is the communion of Saints, and that in the highest degree; Let therefore
the lowest degree blush that even it also does not earnestly long after this
communion: for if the Sun gives himself forth in common, certainly then the
Moon ought to do the like, who else ought to be ashamed, if she should claim to
her self too great a propriety, and arrogate all to be hers. He who is
swallowed up by created things, feels from them either a pleasure, or a pain,
even to joy, or grief; so as he can have no peace: But he who is free from
them, is free also from both those evils, so that neither what is pleasant,
neither what is ungrateful, neither gladness, nor sorrow reaches him. And
because joy has no place in him, neither also does sorrow touch him, if things
do happen other ways, then joy and desire do expect and ask. To stand between
comfort and discomfort, between joy and grief, and to remain untouched, and
unmoved by either, is a great liberty, and the gift of God, for no man has
that of or from himself: Yea let no man unduely think that he has gotten that,
for many things are required before we can arrive at this state or condition;
and when we are come thither, yet is not glory thereof belonging to man, but to
God alone. And thus man is to abide in humility without judging, or contemning
of others.

CHAP. XXIX.
SIn is hated in a double sense, and that by diverse sorts of persons. For some
do hate sin, because of affliction: they thereby being afflicted, and terrified
in their consciences, as also because of the loss they sustain by it, as the
loss of their souls, of heaven, and of eternal salvation; and if these two were
not, viz. the torment of conscience, and the loss of heaven, they could love
sin, and be friends with it, yea become to be united and to be in league
therewith. And it is thus proved, because that same hatred of sin, proceeds not
from the nature of the mind nor from regeneration; in as much as there is, in
this state, still left the old life, to which belongs judgment, and
condemnation, and is that that must dye the death. Whereas others, viz. such as
are transplanted into God, do hate sin, out of the Nature of their minds, and
out of regeneration. For the new life which is in them, will not bear sin, nor
suffer it to be: and that not because of that torment of conscience, or loss of
salvation, but out of its own nature, by reason of its tenderness, and its holy
temper. For this nature can endure nothing that is strange, for it is the
Newman Christ Jesus, who is God himself. Hence is it that these two Sorts do
thus differ one from another: The first is, when some are the enemies of sin
for their own sakes, when as, by nature, they are still friends. But the other,
and second sort is, when it has lost (ipseity or) propriety, and hates sin by
nature, for such are in God, and, being new creatures, have attained a new
sense, which is spiritual: Whereas the former sort, is still natural, and has
a natural sense; whence they wear about them, not the new, but the old
creature. Yet they are well enough in their own kind, and their state, or
condition precedeth the latter, or second, and waits for it. The Lord be
merciful to us: For this last state is not the result of our studyes, and
endeavors, but of the grace of God: a m^n comes thereunto not actively, but
passively, and it behooveth that God only be the work-master therein. Tauler
says: Keep thy self passive, and God will be active, and then the thing will
not be impossible; because God himself will do it, and transfer a man to that
one scope, or end, viz. God himself; and all this, by and thorough Christ Jesus
our Lord, who being just, suffered for the unjust, that he might bring us unto
God: and that is it which is promised in the Prophets, that the Lord would
prepare such a people, as should declare his praise, which is written in Luke
1.71. Salvation from our enemies: And that which Paul says: T^ condemn sin
thorough sin: it is a great bi^terness to me; yet it is a sword that pierces
into my breast. No man can know what it is, unless he have layn in it. But to
all the rest, who yet stand in the labor of the Law, those sayings are as
sweet as honey, but to me bitter: but when they also shall have come thus far,
the same thing will happen also to them. Oh grief! that I must draw my
Salvation from out of my enemies, and experimentally feel, that sin shall be
condemned thorough sin.

CHAP. XXX.
IF we ever are willing to become proficients, we must bear one with another,
as God also has born with us, and still bears with us, and even as others
also do bear with us. Yet it is chiefly to be endeavored, that we daily become
less and less troublesome unto others, and being accepted of God, we should
have soundness of conscience. We ought to be brethren, and not accuse, diffame,
or contemn one another for any shame or spot. And if any one cannot do, or have
this from the very foundation, yet he ought to suppress these things in
himself, and to have a care least they break forth again: and then will the
conscience be endued with no bitterness, and the state of the man will be well.

We ought not to be troublesome to one another in gestures, or words, or works,
or thoughts, but every where to seek peace in love. And because now its told us
concerning affliction, that we must be subjected thereunto, in what manner
soever it rusheth in upon us, it is to be accepted as from the hand of God; and
a man in affliction, ought to abstain from all delights derived from the
creatures. We must begin to cut off our members, before we come at the heart.
Sin must be starved to death, and as it is usual to deal with a fever; neither
food is to be given to it, and wherever it would put forth it self, it is to be
hindered from growing. Yea also its life, which is so strongly manifested in us,
is by the help of conscience, to be suppressed, until it come to its death. If
any one would seriously possess these things, let him daily call upon God, that
he would be present with him in them. When he (the Author) was sometimes asked,
what was to be done with those persons, who persecuted others for the sake of
Faith? answered, that we ought to love, even our persecutors, and added this
similitude: If any one by great and daily travail, desired to go to Cologne by
a journey or way very difficult, and troublesome, and some body should, by
chance, come and put this traveller into a Coach, and so carry him to Cologne,
certainly to such a one he ought to return the greatest thanks, but not hatred.

CHAP. XXXI. Concerning the exercise of Prayer.
THe Author being asked concerning prayers, answered: I every day appear thrice
before the Lord in prayer Being asked, whither by the voice of his mouth? He
answered Yes, viz. in the Morning, at Noon, and at Night. Being asked, whither
he did so, by reason of all those sins, which pressed him down, with the
heaviest care, or anxiety, and which were in him most displeasing to God? He
answered, Yes. But said he, such representations were always set before my
^^es, that I might appear pure, and that did keep me from sinning. Moreover I
always had my mind lifted up to God in my labor, that I might diligently
observe the very bottom of my heart, nor would I let my hands be free from
labor. If I had wandered, or erred any where, or had done any thing, that I
knew to be unjust, I was not heard, but rejected of the Lord. Therefore I was
still endeavoring, that I might always appear purer and purer, if I intended
to be heard of the Lord. It is necessary that a man should exceeding seriously,
and diligently exercise himself in prayer, if he intends to be advanced in the
Lord: For Paul says: That man ought to pray in every place lifting up pure
hands, without wrath, and contention: viz. least that our consciences should
accuse us, or our cogitations, excuse themselves, and thereupon become angry
and contend in us. Prepare thyself first, before thou prayest, nor go about it
like one that is about to tempt God. We ought with fear, and terror, yea with
great trembling appear before God in prayer, and therefore we ought to be
prepared, before we pray. Poverty and affliction teach us to pray. By how much
greater the affliction is, by so much the more peircing will the prayer be.

We are to endeavor not to seem, or profess our selves otherwise before men,
then we profess our selves before God: For men before men, seem to be somewhat,
when yet before God, they be still as a nothing in the bottom: and consequently
they deceive themselves.

CHAP. XXXII.
A Man ought not openly to reveal his divine exercise, viz. that, by which he
is exercised by God. Some are naturally so close of heart, that they are
willingly silent, and reveal to no man their divine exercise: that is the gift
of God, and is pleasing to God. Others are naturally open of heart, so as they
willingly discover, to any one, their divine exercises, and their whole mind,
and that is very displeasing to God. Such therefore are to endeavor and study,
to g^t close hearts, and let them learn to bridle their tongues, and beg help
from the Lord. For no man can readily come to be silent, unless first he be
deeply smitten in his heart, with most bitter affliction, so as his heart
becomes as it were ground to powder. For he that is not yet come to this
poverty, but is still rich, cannot hold his tongue. He that handles himself
severely, that he may break his nature, and becomes harsh to his own sel^* can
difficultly compassionate others, whom he sees not to be as severe as he is
himself: and therefore he so drives others, that they may be like him in
state, or condition, and he is unmerciful, nor also can he be silent (although
sometimes he has his conscience pressed down with sollicitous care) because
his heart is not yet pierced quite thorough, nor is dug down to its very
bottom, nor utterly broken with bitter affliction: but he that has h^s heart
ground to power, and deeply wounded with great, and bitter misery, he can hold
his tongue, yea he chooses rather to be silent (although sometimes necessity
should require it otherwise) then to speak, unless God shall compel him
thereunto. For such a one cannot so readily convert himself toward outward
things, but what things soever are in such a man, are turned to the affliction
of his heart, and all things are filled with sorrow.

CHAP. XXXIII.
I Never found so clear an understanding, nor so great experience as in grief,
sorrow, misery, affliction, and in the death, and destruction of the flesh.
That time which is spent in the cross, pain, grief, misery, and streights, is
gained: but that which is spent in pleasure, joy, delights, and plays, is lost.

The mind of a man, that is still floating up and down, and can still be moved
at things pleasant, or painful, or in joy, or in grief, does not yet belong
unto God, for in God there is no mutation, because he is unchangeable: Now when
the mind of Man cannot be moved by the aforesaid things, then is God present in
that Soul, and it is he who works that in the man. Those six gifts of the
holy Spirit must first be accomplished, then at length follows that seventh
gift, viz. the spirit of fear of the Lord, which puts a man into a sweet calm,
because this spirit of fear, preserves all the former gifts, that they may
remain pure; and then it is that a man is, in all respect, struck with a great
fear and trembling, that he may rightly use them, and keep them pure; it is
this last gift of the fear of God, that keeps steady in all things, that man
that has received it. We are therefore earnestly to endeavor to act rightly
in all concerns, and to walk before God with holy fear. Our conscience is our
book, into which we ought every day to look, and in which, to diligently, and
seriously read, and study, that we may most exactly perform, that which it
witnesses. Conscience is a thousand witnesses, about which the old, and new
Testament is our rule of direction.

CHAP. XXXIV.
THis year proved more difficult, or hard to me, then it was ever before in all
my life, and yet I did most accurately weigh, and ponder on that same time. For
by how much the more sublime, any one ascends in affliction, by so much the
more accurately does he weigh and count his time, and it proves thereby more
profitable to him. All the foregoing time of mine, which I had spent before
this year, vanished away, and came to nothing, even as this my present time
also shall vapor away into nothing: because my body is annihilated. I have no
support, hence is it, that times becomes so tedious to me; but when time is
spent in labor, it produces no difficulty. But when I am deprived of all my
strength, I can neither pray, nor desire, nor lift up one thought to God; Yea
here I lie, and corrupt in body, mind, and spirit, as long as breath remains
in me: Yea as to my understanding also, and my reason, I am reduced to nothing.
As for my understanding, I know nothing of it, whither, viz. I have an
understanding or not, for in this great gulf of misery, all things are reduced
to dust, and ashes. Here I lie, and am sensible of nothing, but judgment,
death, and condemnation. And when one said to him, is it so, that when thou art
accused, presently judgment is at hand? he answered, Am I accused? (not as
though I were so perfect, as that I could not be accused) but if it were
possible for me to take up life in such a moment of time, as that accusation
might assault me in, even in that very moment should I be blown into mere
atoms. But I have not so much time left me, because as many moments of my life
as yet remain, so many judgments, and deaths do I suffer. I lie as it were in a
thick dark cloud, and see nothing; oh how very small, weak, and dim is that
poor ray of light, that is round about me! I cannot see far before me, yea
neither does my way, and path appear to my sight; yea I am lead on where no way
is, and that which is life to another, that is death to me, and contrarily,
that which is another death is my life. Judgment is so sharp to me, as it is
when one, not thinking any thing, lays his hand upon some place, and presently
some body knocks him on the fingers. When any would reply upon him, that this
case was a certain kind of preservation from God, because he laid his hand so
faithfully upon thee: he still answered; True indeed this condition is the most
safe before the eyes of God, but the most afflicted one in my sight. For if I
should acknowledge this state to be safe, forthwith another judgment is to be
undergone by me. For plainly, I am lead without knowledge, without being
acquainted, or understanding the way. For he who has experienced the thing its
self, and he that has been lead in this way, only notionally, are vastly
differing, because true knowledge and understanding, is such a life, such a
prop, that a man comes then only to know them when God withdraws them from him.
Just as when one labors with great thirst, and sees a pot stand before him,
yet for all that, his thirst cannot but afflict him still: but then if there
should come one who should take the pot quite away, then remains no hopes of
ever attaining to drink thereof. All the Elect are brought unto God thorough
affliction, but all do not tread this same path of the cross, by which I am to
pass.

CHAP. XXXV.
ALl things are transformed, and changed, whence I observe, that, ere long,
many wonderful things will happen, and the strange things of God will spring
forth. I indeed have desired to see them, but I shall not arrive at them, for I
see my end before my eyes, yet I rejoice, because of the time to come, which
now is ready at the door, and I rejoice concerning that time, when I look upon
children. Remember me, my mind presageth (not as if all I say were Gospel) it
will be, that the glory and the knowledge of God will more adundantly break
forth hereafter. But I must possess my end, and departure hence, and that is
now at hand, yet nevertheless, I stand in the communion of those forespoken of.

God is a perfect and a pure God, with whom that one may be united, many things
are requisite. And therefore we must not cry out too plainly, although we hear,
and see many great matters in a certain Man, for all as yet may have an ill
conclusion. This I say for this end, that we should always abide in fear.

CHAP. XXXVI. Containing the last Exhortation of Matthew Wire, and his
Departure out of this life.
ANd now I shall bid you farewell, for perhaps it is determined, that I may
speak no more. I will recommend my self to the Lord. See that ye labor and
walk in all conscience, before God: Love your brothers, and sisters, as your
own selves, and take care of them, otherwise judgment will come upon you. This
you must do, that when you shall lie, as I now lie, ye may lie with a quiet
heart. Behave your selves in all things uprightly, and seek after the salvation
of your Souls: for salvation is of greater price then money, or all goods. Money,
with its goods perish together, but salvation brings peace to the heart of Man.
Let me depart from you in freedom: from my death (as I hope) a living motion
will spring up in you. I recommend you to the Lord, who can freely bestow on
you wisdom, and understanding, and all other necessaries in a hundred fold. The
Lord will presently give me rest, I expect, and wait for eternal rest. I am to
suffer so long as the Lord will have me. If I had known this affliction before
now, I should have dyed for mere grief. O inward desertion! O desolation (
Wisdom 1.) which now stands ready at hand! I desire to be the most vile of all,
and only long for the crumbs which fall from the childrens table. If I could
have avoided this affliction yet I would not, for my conscience has bound me
to abide by it. Misery, in affliction, is great: a man would willingly be lead
with certainty, but yet is he lead with uncertianty, and it is, as if one
should journey by night, and yet not know the way; when (besides) the waters
are out, he may chance to fall, and yet he must go forwards. Yet is he secretly
lead by God, and when the morning arises, he shall see, that the business has
succeeded well enough. In affliction nothing is known, how that a man is
sustained, and taken care of, but at last it is acknowledged, and then it is
known, that God was always present, even in his desertion. The highest
affliction does manifest, that selfishness, or propriety which yet was before
undiscerned: and God prepares a man for this highest of afflictions. All
things are snatched from me, even before my face, yet I know what I am to do; I
will beg of God a favorable death for my self. O Lord behold thy miserable
creature. O Lord embrace me, for all things are from thee. O Lord embrace all
my powers, and strength, and grant strength unto me, in this my deepest misery:
Here I ly before thee like a most wretched worm: All the affliction which I
have hitherto suffered, is nothing to this misery.

Having finished these words, and commending his spirit into the hands of God,
he fell asleep in the Lord by a pleasan^, and easy departure on the 25th April
in the year 1560, about the 4th hour in the morning, at Wesel, in the year
(...) his age 39.

Here end the Sayings.
THE EPISTLES OF M. Wire, Which he sent to his Familiar FRIENDS.

WRITTEN By the Author in the Low Dutch, and published after his Death. Being
afterward turned into Latin, and out of the Latin now at last into the English
Tongue.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1683.

TO THE READER.
A brief Narrative concerning the Original of this small Treatise.
READER,
WHo art a Christian in good earnest before I shall begin to relate any thing
of this little tract, or of it is original or subject, I am willing faithfully
to exhort thee as also most earnestly to beseech thee, that thou diligently
callst upon God for illumination, and for the opening of the Eyes of thy
understanding, whereby thou may be enabled according to his good pleasure,
rightly to understand, that which is here proposed, which being by the grace of
God performed, thou shall in very deed experience, that this book will be very
useful and profitable unto thee, seeing it is every where filled with the most
excellent and choice expressions, which are able to lead thee unto the true
judgment of many points. Nor does it only bring most notable advantage to thee
only, but also to all the Elect, who duly, and according to true knowledge, have
a zeal for God, but to such as are perverse, and behold all things with
perverse and blind Eyes, these things will without doubt, seem to be full of
dullness, and foolishness. O that our eyes were single, then certainly we should
easily perceive that these Epistles and sayings have not flowed from humane
wisdom, nor through the dead letter (as to the more divine senses) nor from
the outward bark only, but from the instinct of the holy Spirit, and that he
who wrote, and spoke these, to have been, indeed, a man divinely illuminated,
and a very intimate friend of God, and that he learnt and drew these truths out
from the book of his cross, and by the means of his inward Sorrows in the
School of Christ.

But let us make our approach nearer, to the thing intended, and that we may
preface a few things concerning the original of this small treatise, let the
hearty Reader know, that the aforesaid-friend of God, wrote these Epistles to
his familiars, and friends, separated from his dwelling, in diverse places; to
every one according to his condition, to stir up their zeal, by no other
means, then the study of simplicity: with no intention to have them afterward
printed, and published, insomuch as that, after his death they being by some
honest hearted searchers, collected together, were thus put together into one
Volume. But those sayings of his, he himself wrote not, but only uttered them
orally. And this was his faithful counsel, that every one ought to seek the
thing there, where he himself had sought, and found it, and in which place only
it can be found and gotten, viz. In God, the ever springing fountain of all
wisdom, and goodness, and from whom flow these living streams; neither may any
one (who is not willing to be deceived) draw them from strange muddy Cisterns
or Lakes.

Now by what means those his sayings were (he not knowing it) taken from his
mouth, and comprehended in one volume, we shall briefly declare.

This most religious Matthew (amongst those of his family) bred up an honest
young man, whose name was John Spee, filled with an earnest fervor, and Zeal
for the divine glory. This person was daily with him, so that, as there was
occasion, he heard his speeches with his friends, and familiars, that came from
several places to visit him; as also such discourses as he frequently had with
himself. All therefore what ever he had heard, being well imprinted upon his
mind, and memory, when the discourse was ended, he in his own chamber,
faithfully committed it to writing: nor did he in the least acquaint any one
with them, even to his last breath. But then, when he was about to die, he
discovered to his friends, who stood by, that he had privily committed those
sayings to writing, as they would find them amongst his written-papers. Now why
that treatise of his sayings was divided into three parts, the reason was,
because the aforesaid John Spee, by reason of his own private affairs, went
away twice, and consequently had ordered, according to each space of time, a
part distinct by it self even as they were afterward kept, divided, and are
here printed. But the distinction or distribution into Chapters and Verses was
done by another, for the Readers sake, that by the guidance of a Table, every
particular point might be the more conveniently inquired after, and be found
out.

Moreover, as to the forementioned John Spee. This may be said of him: He was
an unmarried Young Man, descended of a Noble Family, very pious, and having a
manifest warmth and Zeal. This man seeing he was blessed of the Lord, with the
true knowledge of the most holy Gospel, having bid adieu to the world, daily
studied and searched into the Holy Scriptures, being, with all his might,
intent thereon, so that he might but arrive at the true knowledge of himself.
And when he saw that youthful lusts, according to the flesh, did strive to get
dominion over his soul, and upon all sides, rushed in upon him, he began to
exercise himself with all his utmost endeavors, in watchings, and fastings
daily, and both night and day, tiring himself out with prayers; that he might
resist those invading lusts, and cast a bridle over them. And when he observed,
that sin did not yet cease from his Soul, and mind, he entered into a more hard,
or strict course of life, with all severity, which he continued even to his
death, out living the most pious Matthew eleven Months only, for he then died,
and was carried into the true rest from all his labors on the second of March
1561. May our merciful Lord and God, grant to us all, his compassion, and
graciously help us that we may in his good time be set free from al^ our
erroneous ways, and thoughts, and from all our faults and blemishes. Amen.

THE EPISTLES OF Mat. VVyer.
EPIST. I. By what means we may come to the clear perception of divine Grace.
To G. of F.
WHereas, I certainly find in thee, a desire greatly enflamed, and that thy
soul even burns with a thirsty longing after the gaining the most clear
perception of true divine Grace, manifested by Christ our Savior, I could not
rest contented, until, taking this matter in hand, I should endeavor briefly
to show to thee what that is, that can conduct, or lead thee thereunto, whereby
those things may be the better discovered to thy sight, which are here a
hinderance to thee, so that they being rejected, thou may with fear beware
of what hides thy light with thick darkness.

For it is impossible, whilst there yet remains but one only (yea though it be
the least) root of sin in which a man still persists, that he can ever arrive
at such a degree of Grace, because at the time that Regeneration is perfected,
when by that clear light, above nature, manifested to, and in a man by the holy
Spirit, that same enmity, that is interposed between him and God, is
represented to him, no iniquity, nor any accusation of conscience ought to be
found in him; Yea so pure must that regeneration be, that that man, as far as
he is conscious to himself, should have nothing, either in Heaven, or in Earth,
which he shall not have already resigned up, so as to be ready with a most
ardent zeal, to forsake all things, for the sake of God; Yea, he shall never
have need further to sustain even the least check of conscience, but shall have
beaten back all by a most invincible perseverance in fighting, and shall have
supplanted all whatsoever may disturb his conscience, insomuch, that by these
means, his soul may at last arrive to have a conscience in full peace, and void
of all accusations.

For often times a man thinks that he is come to the cutting off many wicked
inclinations, and that then he is in little or no want, and that chiefly,
because that which is the quite contrary, whereby it is possible for him to be
corrupted, is not manifestly made known to him, whereas if all that, was a
little more clearly manifested to him, he would certainly then, very readily
apprehend, that he was yet at a far greater distance from that degree of a more
purified conscience.

Seeing therefore this is the condition of man that his unrighteousness and
wickedness is greater then he can know, therefore all such things, as fall
within his sight, are always to be by him sedulously cut off: for he neither
can sooner be able to perceive those sins which are unknown to him, or shall he
observe depravities, which were not before understood, but by thus doing. For
so long as a man lives slothfully in known sins, the sins that are unknown,
will not show themselves: whence it comes to pass, that a man living at this
rate, commonly remains in darkness, and the light never comes to shoot forth
it is beams manifestly in him. For when he shall have rooted out those sins that
daily rack his conscience, there presently will arise in their stead another
new accusation of his conscience, which was, till now, unknown to him, seeing
that same field of accusations will never be barren even to the last moment of
the combat. Wherefore the aforesaid vices are not laid open, even to the very
bottom of his nature, unless they show their faces by degrees, and that even
from the very first entrance into the combat, to the very point of time, when
the strivings, with the accusing sin, are finished by afflictions, and through
the cross; the Soul, at last, gaining her freedom from, and becoming
conqueress over them all, in a conscience truly pure, and thoroughly purged,
apprehending nothing at all, either within, or without her self (as far as it
is truly possible for a man, to see, and know after a most exact scrutiny made
by the power of God) which she has not fully resigned up, and denied herself
in. And to declare it in short, upon this very point turns the hinge of the
matter, and unto this ought all such, as earnestly endeavor after the
attainment of rest, and peace, with their utmost diligence, to reach after it
with their whole heart, and to Institute their lives, accordingly thereunto;
unless they are willing to try how it will be, to be distracted, and drawn
hither, and thither, by a wavering kind of zeal, nor ever to get free from
accusations of that sort, and much less to be strengthened by a firm Faith of
mind, but to be always vexed, and tormented with anxious thoughts of heart,
partly through the so often repeated pangs, and pricks of conscience, inwardly,
and partly by the unspeakable hot zeal, of the many contenders, about the
truth, outwardly, they become wracked in so miserable a manner, that at the
last they grow wholly ignorant which way to take, or turn themselves.

For so long as a man is still held captive in himself, by any kind of iniquity
whatsoever, and is in the inwards of his soul, privately accused of it, and yet
he gives no due heed thereunto, being ignorant, how he may get free therefrom,
and studieth and endeavors, what he can to defend it, either by
scripture-sayings or by some other ways, which still hold him in this error,
nor yet is he, for all this, freed from it in his mind (his conscience all this
while freely prompting, and telling him whether he does well, or ill) and
notwithstanding he endeavors to pacify his conscience, by these, or such
like ways, yet he shall find that all this his labor is lost, when he shall
see that this same secret accusation, and laying of blame upon him, before his
judge, will never give over, or cease.

In this point therefore let every one try himself, and let no man deceive
himself, flattering himself with sugared words, for the day will manifest all
things, whether we be willing or not, yea all whatever we now gladly hide in
the bottom of our hearts, and yet do deny and disown them.

If therefore we say: I confess my faults: I confess my self to be as
miserable, and as perverse a sinful man, as can be found any where; Go to then,
let us endeavor, that that for which we are to be accounted Sinners, be taken
from us, and that we be turned from all unrighteousness. For the bare
confession of sins makes no Man innocent, but the very rooting out of sin. For
as long as any Man is accused of any iniquity, or perverse action yet
remaining, even so long is it, that he is still in bondage, nor are his Sins
forgiven him: it is therefore absolutely necessary, that he should quite
extirpate all such, and after the accusation thereof is made in himself, that
he execute the sentence, that he may for ever die to that unrighteousness:
insomuch, as that there be left in him no such purpose of ever doing again, any
the like iniquity; so that, all being thus brought under, there may remain
nothing covered, or secretly hidden in his Soul, which he shall not wholly
desist from, in the true simplicity of his conscience and that he become pure,
and wholly cleansed according to the utmost and best of the knowledge of
himself in his own breast.

Then at length the Lord in his own time may for this Man's good meet him, as
being manifested to him, through some very great temptation, and may force him
upon some anxious, and horrible combat; which the poor wretch had not in the
least foreseen, nor even then neither, could understand, until all was past,
and finished. Then it is, that he who, before that, seemed to himself, to have
arrived at a true innocence of conscience in himself, is set at the bar of
divine judgment, and from the opinion of being highly lifted up, or advanced,
insomuch as he seemed to himself to touch the very Heavens, he is thrown down
to the nethermost place of some most deep humiliation, even like Hell it self.
Then is he blown upon, and purged by the true fire of divine Judgment, kindled
within him; and the enmity that is interposed betwixt God and him, does daily
decrease through Jesus Christ, who now at last does begin to perform in him,
the proper business of his office, and is about to reduce him, unto the Image
of his death, burial, and resurrection, whereby at length he may be brought to
the true union of a more divine constitution in Christ, together with the hope
of a glory to come, which shall never more be changed, even such as shall be
manifested to all, who with their whole heart, and in truth are Lovers of God
above all.

Whoever he is that is brought unto this eminent rejection, as also to the
acknowledgment of himself, he, as to the inward man, is afflicted with most
wonderful streights and difficulties, before he can be arrived there-at,
insomuch as he becomes willing to renounce, submit, resign up, yea and to
account for, as nothing, all that treasure, he has scraped together from
opinion, and that strange high flown exaltation, yea and all that liberty,
which is born together with us in our first natural generation. Which being
full effected, at length there succeeds the revelation of the glory of Christ,
whose likeness he, by little and little, grows sensible of, and which observed
thus gradually to increase in him, he catches with great earnestness, inasmuch
as it presents to him wonderful promises.

Now this last state being arrived at, he still becomes more and more averse
from all things past; and by how much the more this same aversation increases,
by so much the more plentifully do things following succeed in the place of the
former, insomuch as at length he becomes quite freed, in due time, from the
speech, wisdom, understanding, counsels, and actions, which hitherto he had
exercised himself in, as to the creature, and was lead from infancy to perfect
mandhood, according to the measure of his age in the fullness of Christ.

But now there are some who are fully contented with their own zeal, and think
themselves altogether certain, and sure of that reconciliation which is
acquired in Christ: Now whether this be truly so or no, shall be, at last, then
made manifest, when the secrets of all hearts from the very bottom of their
Souls shall be laid open thorough him, who searches the hearts and tries the
reins, and will render to every one according to the works of his hands.
Whereas if whilst they yet enjoy the breath of life, they themselves searching
narrowly into their own bosoms, would commit or leave their course to the
secret accusation of their hearts, and would not cloak their sins with such or
such reasons, or also with some sayings of the Scriptures (misapplied or ill
understood and used) then would they fully perceive themselves to be yet far
away removed from that reconciliation, that is given by Christ, and would find
in themselves nothing but the wrath of God; from which yet they cannot truly
get free, unless they can come into Christ and the image of him, and
consequently feel sensibly in themselves Reconciliation, Freedom, and
Redemption, not without, but within their own selves; and thereof to become
persuaded in themselves, not by an undue disorderly reading of the Scriptures,
or from some kind of opinion of their own, make themselves more assured, or may
expect or receive it from any creature whatsoever, but feelingly, livingly, and
internally, being convinced in their own hearts, do truly become sensible of
the highest love in the deepest enmity; of the greatest riches, in the
extremest poverty; of the profoundest joy in the most pressing streights, and
misery; and in the fiercest combat, the sweetest peace, and (in a word) in the
lowest despondencies and weakness, yea desperation and inconstancy, the highest
faithfulness and constancy ought to be found in God.

Here Faith comes to be tried, whether it be of man, or whether it be of God:
for if it be of man, it refuses to choose for it self true poverty of Spirit,
together with the abnegation of proper happiness, which it elected for it self;
for it denies to assume for its conservation and happiness, any thing but what
is before its own eyes, and is promised in words grossly understood from the
Scriptures, and acquiesces in the doing of them only, that the Soul may be
saved: but if some things seem to it to be impossible to be performed it lays
all that upon the shoulders of Christ, as without and beyond it self, and so
quiets its own conscience in the best manner it can be possibly performed. When
as if from the most inward secrets of its own Soul, it would confess the truth,
it would indeed tell you of a conscience not soundly pacified, but rather of
one that gnaweth and tormenteth, unless it strives of set purpose to hide the
true state of the matter.

But if such a one be about to object and say; This is the Devil, that thus
accuses, and blames a man, in his conscience, from which notwithstanding any
one may be freed, by and thorough Christ. Well then! it this is the Devil, that
thus accuses him without any Lie, and yet, by this accusation, keeps him
still captive in his chains (for he has not as yet forsaken him) then Christ,
dwelling in him also, has not, as yet, set him thus at liberty from the Devil,
Hell, and Sin, that his freedom and reconciliation might be truly found to be
in Christ himself; Because for him, for whom Christ dyed, in him also, he ought
to rise again, so as Death, Sin, the Devil, and Hell may have no just right
over him, yea not so much as to touch him with the least finger, because that
he being plainly freed from all these, by Christ dwelling in him, he is become
a member of his body, against which can no accusation or condemnation be
brought: for even as the head is found blameless in innocence, so also is the
whole body, with all its members.

Let every one narrowly prove himself, before he boasts himself to be a
member of this body; for Christ is not so vile in us, as we may think him to
be, nor is the imitation of him so small a thing, that it can be comprehended
and known by our gross natural reason. Because as he was supernaturally
conceived and born; so in like manner, did he operate, and speak, yea whatever
is manifested concerning Christ, ought to be most exactly expressed in us in
Spirit and Life, and in divine truth; therefore he that will glory that he
understands, and knows, Christ and is a partaker of him, it behooveth him in
the same manner, with Christ to be regenerated in Spirit, so (...) that it is
no longer he, but Christ who lives in him. And then indeed no Devil, nor any
accusation can touch him moreover he also will himself judge of all far
otherwise, then by the light judgmen^ of a natural man, seeing all the
mysteryes of the Scripture are to all, that i^ of Nature left in him, occult
and hidden, until the man be transplanted into the likeness of Christ, where
not the leas^ room is left for nature; inasmuch as she is condemned already, as
being at enmity, even with God himself.

Thus I have briefly and succinctly laid before thee, those things, which are
ordinarily met with, in them who conceive a zeal for God; that thou may
learn cautiously to proceed in these matters, and that thou be not driven
hither and thither by every wind of doctrine, but that thou may finish thy
combat with a serious and most arden zeal, until the Lord shall guide thee, a^
last, unto the regeneration, which is do^^ in spirit, being frequently invoked
b^ prayers, and sighs, after many adversities, and both inward, and outward
sorrows, by which a man is wonderfully put forward toward that which he aims
at. The Lord grant to thee his grace, in his own time, that thou may at last
become joyfully sensible, in the secret of thy heart, of those most excellent
helps, and victories, which are attained to thorough the cross, sufferings, and
pains.

EPIST. II. Concerning the most subtle craftiness of Humane Nature.
To the same Lady.
THe Lord multiply unto thee the benediction of internal grace, and the right
understanding of his will, inasmuch as his will cannot be acknowledged by
nature, left to herself, seeing she is plainly contrary thereunto, although
sometimes she may seem to be thoroughly united unto it: for all men do, with
open mouths, boast of the knowledge of God, and no man will be wanting in that:
every body cries, that he is arrived thereat and that he has fully obtained it
(I speak o^ those who study their own righteousness and give up themselves to
God, and trus^ confidently before God, that they ar^ made free thorough Jesus
Christ) where notwithstanding such a man, never ye^ arrived, in the least, to
truly know himself and has never as yet, observed the most crafty temptations,
and the seducements of his own nature; because he esteemed that for good, which
(on the quite contrary) did draw him farthest away from God, and his motions,
and comes quite opposite to all those things which God wills, and desires.

Here, thou must diligently have a care rightly to understand, the nature, and
desires of that propriety (which give me leave to call Tuity or Thiness) which
dwells in the flesh, and yet bears before it a certain appearance of some
spiritual quality. For all men are lead captive by this enemy, none excepted,
though he be the most devout, yea though he may seem to live the life of an
Angel, and may bring to light wonderful secrets, yet will he be no less, then
the rest, caught, and bound in these most subtle fetters. And although some
begin to be aware of these snares, yet, for all that, some other, such like
trap, is laid more fine^y, and secretly, which the fall into ^ometimes, which
afterward, does afresh ^^^rify them, when as before they seem^^ to themselves
to have obtained illumination, salvation, Yea even God himself.

Now this a man cannot know, unless (...) be lead thorough them, and tries all
(...) God; for in such a man, these mat^ers cannot be more plainly, or deeply
^^planted, so as to abide in that presence of God; true indeed, they may partly
be ^omprehended by Nature, but when Nature is withdrawn from us, we are ^^und
stark naked, because these things ^ere not, at the first, owned in spirit
be^^re God, who only remains constant, ^^d immutable to all eternity.

For God is a spirit, and he that would ^ow him in truth, and see his
bright^^s, and adore him, it behooveth this ^^n to endeavor after all this, in
spirit, ^^d into this state, or condition, it is necessary that a man be truly,
and properly lead by God, in his own time, yea and that it also is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs: but if so be any one be faithful, in that
wherein he stands, then shall much more be given unto him.

Concerning all these things, thou will find most full instruction in those two
Treatises entitled the German Divinity, and that of the Imitation of Christ,
the Authors of which have experienced these things in God, and do give,
concerning them, a true guidance, and information, which we are to find in our
own selves; although they do not put into our hand the very things it self, yet
is the world deceived in this very particular, viz. that it can account of some
certain semblance of a thing, for the very thing it self.

For the flesh, or Nature in us, is never willing to sit down in an inferior
seat, and if it but begins to reject somewhat that is false, yet by and by it
leans upon some other such like prop, being confidently persuaded, she is acted
by a divine spirit, when indeed all this, notwithstanding, springs out of
flesh, and blood, (...) little heightened out of their natural propriety. Such
is the cunning of us all, ^one excepted.

It behooveth us therefore to apprehend, and learn all these things in God,
that the light may be separated from the darkness, and that that notable
difference and distinction, in this very point, be well known to us; least we
take one thing for another, viz. flesh for spirit, Death for life, slavery for
liberty, and for the free flowing grace of divine power.

These things, because a man, in his life time, is always willing to get, and
keep Reconciliation, and eternal Salvation, are plainly known to a few,
inasmuch as a man esteems those things in the place of God, and for things
divine, which indeed do but hold him bound in a perpetual imprisonment, being
that, which is his own nature, and propriety, viz. the fear of eternal
damnation, by means of which he abstaineth from all external, and carnal
filthiness, and impurity; and cuts off those things from himself: being then
fully persuaded that now he is truly at liberty, so that he will not proceed
further on, and refuses to deny, and resign up both the proper, and the
imaginary salvation of his Soul, although he should experience, or feel in
himself that the true righteousness, which is acceptable before God, is that
very circumcision, that is done in spirit; and thence springs up the
New Creature of God. However it is necessary that every one should first
satisfy in all respects his own proper righteousness, holiness, and imaginary
salvation, that in the end, he may rightly understand the difference of both,
viz. of Light, and Darkness, and of the holiness that is from man, and that
which is from God: for if he be not faithful in the smallest things, how shall
he arrive at greater? which certainly is impossible. Therefore it behooveth
every one to satisfy his own conscience, and with all moderation, and
discretion, to obey the testimony of his own heart, that being raised up,
thorough all the degrees of holiness, and being enriched with all the
affluence, riches, and imaginary goods of his own spirit, he may at length be
brought to the divine poverty of Spirit, by the manifestation in him, of the
divine righteousness, and of that degree which is, by far, the most excellent
and exalted, as being that, which throws down all the rest; so as there remains
nothing that can stand before it, which is not its own self. By this way we
come to apprehend our selves to be poor, miserable, rejected, and condemned,
yea blind, unhappy, and neglected, yea unfit to perform any the least good, who
formerly ascribed to our selves all good things, righteousness, and Salvation,
being confidently persuaded of our eternal ^ife, and divine Sonship: Then, Then
I say, it is that we find our selves to be wholly in corruption, and
condemnation, at length, seriously understanding, that we formerly had not so
much as ^he true taste of any good, which could compare with that good which we
now ^ee.

And then we come, and readily sit ^own by all other men, yea though they ^e
the most profligate wretches, because, ^ow at last, we begin to set before our
eyes with fear, and trembling, and condemnation, and to behold our corruption
at the very bottom, so that, for the future, we reflect upon no one more then
upon our selves; and if before, we reviled any, repulsed, persecuted, cast out,
reproached, or looked upon them with an evil eye (I speak of such as supposed,
that they did these things, out of a godly zeal) now indeed we become hugely
wary, and leave every one to his own Lord, and Master; because this true
combat, has done in us havoc enough, and begun its cruelty.

I was willing to unfold to thee these things by these few lines, which
notwithstanding thou will better and more piercingly feel in the very thing it
self; Therefore exercise thy life in these things, and show thy self strong in
them, importunately begging, and expecting all from God above, with all long
patience, and sufferance, who will in his own time, effect all things for thee;
for here, we are not to run before, but follow after only.

Now therefore thou have writings enough, whence thou may learn, how to
behave thy self in external conversation, and honesty, wherein thy conscience
will, most notably, both lead thee, and condemn thee too. The Lord grant to
thee to meditate, to understand, and to be wise, that, according to his will,
thou may be instructed in his School, and by his discipline, that all may be
consummated in him, and by him, and to his Glory.

EPIST. III. A Preparation to the entrance into the promises of God.
To the same Person.
PRemising all due readiness of my respects, most Noble Lady, having taken hold
on this occasion, I am will^^ng to send this letter to thee. For though, for
some space of time, I did not visit ^hee by my letters, yet have I always been
sollicitous for thee in the Lord, with (...) continued readiness of my heart,
and ^n inclination of my poor mind; being otherwise certain, that much writing
did not conduce any thing to the increase of grace, but the movings of God only
do. And therefore I had determined in my mind to forbear writing, least perhaps
I should thereby disturb the working of thy Soul, trusting in the divine mercy,
that God himself would preserve thee to become more strong, and more pure, by
his inward motions in thy Soul; and by purifying it, from all inherent evil
affections, and the depraved root of inbred lusts, more then it is possible
ever to be effected by letters written: For this is the work of God alone, and
is effectual in them, who study, and endeavor, to submit themselves unto his
will. For it is impossible that they who are disobedient, and never strive to
quiet the accusations of their consciences, by conversion, can be so accepted
of God, as to attain to the grace of Christ Jesus, to dwell in them; for he
that is not faithful in the least matters, can never be made Ruler over greater
things: if therefore any one is not faithful to his own Soul, with which yet,
he is one, and firmly united, how can he love God, from whom, as yet, he is far
away removed?

In this manner it is necessary, that every one should strive, with all his
might, and power, for the testimony of his own conscience, to renounce, his own
proper Soul, as far as it is possible for him, in the sight of God, according
to the highest degree of his knowledge: now if any one shall do thus, in that
highest degree, with the greatest diligence, the Lord will in part enlighten
the darkness of his understanding, as to perceive more profoundly, in himself,
what is the true power of the Law, viz. what sort it is of, in him, viz.
spiritual; and not only is concerned about an external abstinence from evil
concupiscences, but much more rather, about the most deeply fastened root of
sin in us, in which we all were conceived out from Adam.

For so long as the Root remains in ^s, the action, or power of the Law, is
always against us, viz. the bottom being still polluted, not being yet purged
by a true amendment, but by some certain ^^^d of likeness thereof: And
therefore the Godliness promised unto us, does not only, and properly require
of us, that we should desist from external vices, but that the very inwards of
our hearts should be purified, so as that a man should be cleansed, and
perfected most exactly, in his understanding, appetite, and in his will, that
he may no longer serve the Lord, and obey him, unwillingly; inasmuch as at
first, a most troublesome task is to be undergone, in turning away his heart
from temporal, and spiritual captivity: but when he is united to Christ he must
perfectly be freed from all the earthly concerns of his lusts. For seeing that,
in man, there is nothing nearer to God, then the Spirit, or mind of man,
therefore it behooveth, in the first place, to cleanse that, from the darkness,
and grossness of reason, in which we are involved, by the fall of Adam; so that
we may be lead into a fuller, and more pure degree of divine knowledge, unto
which no man, yet abiding in his corrupted nature, can ever come.

Wherefore whoever desires to attain the true knowledge of God, and of himself
it behooveth him, before all things, to strive with all his might, to withold
himself from every vice, that is become familiar to him, and to which he
inclines and which, sometimes, he commits even in this very work. For man,
even while yet he is in his corrupted nature, in which he was conceived, is not
so far removed from the presence of God, but that yet he still retains, in the
supreme part of himself, an occult and a most inward spark of some knowledge of
God; as it is notoriously seen, that all men possess some kind of power in
knowledge, by help of which they discern good from evil, insomuch as whilst
they remain in the state of evil, they are accused in themselves, by that same
knowledge, but when once they are introduced to the state of good, then they are
at rest. If therefore a man follows the dictates of that knowledge, inherent in
him, from his first nature, and abhors the evil that he knows, but sticks
close to the good, then at length, he arrives there where he comes to
understand, that it'^ utterly impossible for him to give the highest, and
fullest satisfaction to that knowledge, which he has by nature; whereupon, he
is brought into great troubles of heart, especially if he be diligent about the
study of Good. Moreover, because man is wont to fall so back again into
himself, as that he does that which is good, rather from the force of his
conscience, backed with some threatenings of the judgments of God, then from
Love, and an earnest desire of the good, then he searches out means, by which
he may be freed from that accusation of conscience. Now when he can find no
means thus to bind down the appetites, thoughts, and motions of his flesh, but
they always still get loose again, then indeed it is that he apprehends that
tho all outward vices, and transgressions were laid aside, yet there still
remains in the flesh the root of them, and that he cannot be freed by all his
endeavors, grievings, and mournings, from that appetite of the flesh, (which
stirs up in him Anger, Wrath, impure lusts, and vain thoughts, and such
like) but some time, or other, it will again seize upon his Soul: and thus he
comes to see, that he is not so set free from the dominion of the Law, but that
he always must yet endure that accusation concerning the root of sin, yet
lurking in the most inward parts of his heart.

Now although the more vulgar, and common, external knowledge of Christ, is
willing to palliate, and cover over this inward stain, by the blessed death of
Christ, saying, these things cannot hurt a Christian, Christ dyed for them; nor
indeed shall I contradict them: nevertheless because Christ therefore came, and
appeared, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, and that he might free
the captive Soul, from the burden of its sins, it is indeed necessary, that
the same Christ should destroy the very foundation also of this satanical
building, and by his own seed again sown therein, should thereby get the
possession of the heart, and mind, as it ought to be done, and as it is
agreeable to the Lord alone: Even as these things were figured out by the type
of the promised Land, which was promised to the seed of Abraham, upon on this
account, that every evil seed might be eradicated from thence. But before
things could be brought to that pass, the Israelites must suffer many mischie^s
from their enemies, by changing the lives of many, for a most cruel death: as
it came to pass in the wilderness, where every thing, that was still infected
with the knowledge of old Egypt, was punished with death, that no impure thing
might enter into the promised Land. In like manner also, no impure thing is
taken up by Christ conforming in us the promised likeness of his most holy
humanity, but all these must first be laid aside by the death of sin, that we
being thus purified by him, should be fitted unto his body, together with the
most perfect, and common conjunction of Christ, as of the head of this body,
from which all the members derive their motion; but the rebellious members
abide not in any living body, unless perhaps, by an improper name, they have
the name of Members, for such do as it were cut themselves off from the body,
and set themselves against it, which case can never take place in any true Body.

Most dearly beloved Lady, I was unwilling that these things should remain
unknown to thee, inasmuch as they are a preparation to the entrance into the
promises of God, into Christ. (I say) and his likeness, who alone is our hope,
and mark, and aim, to which we aspire, and tend to, which also I pray thee to
somewhat more exactly consider, and ponder. The Lord grant unto us all his
mercy, that laying down our load of sin, we may, by virtue of him, be restored
in Christ, who mightily assisteth the hearts which are prepared, and submitted
unto him, and helps to repress, and stifle the growing stains of sin, and
afterward, takes in hand the very foundation it self of our hearts, where the
root of evil abides, whence all the springing fruits do proceed, even fully to
burn it up by the flame of divine righteousness. If God shall please to grant
it, and necessity shall require it, I am altogether ready, according to my
simple capacity, for the sake of thy holy advantage, to express these things
more clearly in writing, trusting in the Lo^d, that by his help, thou will
measure all according to the rule of righteousness, nor, either to do, or think
any thing, but what is of the Lord, and what conduces to his glory, and the
furtherance of us in the Lord; that under the manifold distraction of worldly
businesses, not the least moment of time may remain idle in us, but being
busied in temporal matters, either in mind, or working, we may always direct
them for the benefit, and use of our going forwards in the true steps of a
Christian life.

Most dearly beloved Lady* the whole bottom, or foundation of thy heart is to
be dug up by thee, and to be searched into, whether any thing lies hid
there, that is contrary unto God, and would not willingly be separated from
thee, and which thou thy self can very hardly let go: if any such thing
should chance to be found out, thou must, this very* moment, renounce it, and
give it up to the Lord, with submission unto his will. My trust is in the mercy
of God, that thorough the grace of Christ our Lord, it will come to pass, that
things will go well with thee, and that thou will be put much forwarder, by
having thus yielded up, and renounced the whole foundation of thy heart,
sparing no one thing, which else thou, thorough the whole course of thy life,
did hunt after, with, at least, one half of thy heart, inasmuch as it is
that, which is a state rather of enmity, and is an abomination before the Lord.

My Lady, I take a liberty in these matters, and that I might write to thee
what is right, and true, I am not ashamed, by which means thou may, in
amanner, know what thou art to do, and how the matter it self is to be
cordially handled, I having this firm hope, that the Lord will not be wanting,
but that be will hear thee, according to thy faith, and that he will indue thee
with power; to whom also I give up my self, as a fellow-helper in this outward
ministry, which is, and belongs to the creature; being with my whole heart
intent upon thy improvement, inasmuch as I am also become thy fellow-sufferer.

The God of all grace and mercy behold our misery, and free us from out of
these chains of sin and Satan, that we being lifted up into the communion of
his sons or children, may be unloaded from all burdens of the flesh, thorough
Christ, our alone Savior, and Mediator, that we may always watch for, and
expect these things, with unwearied sighings, and longings of heart. Wherewith
I recommend unto God, thy self, and thy family, but especially thy husband;
that the Lord would grant unto thee prudence, to take care to order thy family
concerns, in the fear of God. But first thou must begin with thy own self, that
if any truth abides in thee, it may afterward flow forth from thee, or else
thou will make no progress, but all thy labor will prove in vain and to no
purpose.

EPIST. IV. That, by true internal poverty, we come nearer to the Lord, then by
any imaginary riches whatever.
To a certain Woman pressed and burdened with Trials.
MOst dearly beloved Lady, when I understood thy condition, viz. that thou art
deeply afflicted in heart, and that the senses of thy mind, will not be reduced
to their former tranquillity; I am somewhat grieved, because I know, that, as
yet, thou art too weak to stand under the load of afflictions: But indeed that
which concerns this thy present state, and condition, under which thou art now
kept, viz. that thou can no longer enjoy a quiet mind, nor can thou get thy
conscience to be at rest, these all bid me hope the best of thee seeing it will
certainly come to pass, that by these means, the Lord will raise thee up to
greater degrees of grace, and favor; as it commonly happens to such of thy
condition, whom God begins to afflict with grief, and temptations. For this is
nothing else, but the laying bare of many depravities, with which our hearts
are filled; which if the Lord is pleased to remove out of our hearts, then he
thus exercises our whole man with Melancholy, so as we could rather choose to
retain and keep them.

But it is more for our advantage, that those depravities which possess our
minds, by reason of whose presence, a certain false and imaginary peace did
deceive us* should therefore seasonably be withdrawn from us, before that we
have run out (together with them) perhaps, our whole life; being persuaded that
we shall gain somewhat, when yet we, being thus deceived, shall, in the end, be
overwhelmed in our Souls, by an irresistible deluge of grief.

Therefore in this case lay aside all despondency of mind, for in Melancholy or
trouble of mind thou please the Lord more truly, and art nearer unto him,
then if thou should persist in a great tranquillity of mind, as that which
is the effect of a false security and peace: even as it is wont commonly to
happen to those, who do promise too much to themselves, because that they do
abstain from the false religion, and from the more gross acts of unruely
sinners, and from all unrighteousness, or injustice; from which indeed we ought
wholly, and always to abstain, but then if any one shall, for this reason,
think himself cleansed, and to be made a Son of God, certainly conscience will
oppose such a one by its testimony, and will convince him, that the very
bottom, and foundation of his heart does yet abound in the root of sin, and of
self-love, together with all those desires, and lusts, of which Paul does
testify, that concupiscence is, viz. properly that sin, which leads away a
man into captivity.

Therefore because commonly, he is accounted a pious man, who studieth to be of
a good outward conversation (for more then what is without, a man cannot see)
hence it is, that a man sticks always about these things, supposing that ^e
has accomplished all things, unless by chance, he falls again into some gross
sin. Yet for all this the root of sin still remains deeply fastened in him: but
the mind takes no further care, how it may come to the true purging out of all
these, seeing it may seem impossible for a man to be freed from them. Which
indeed is very true as to us, but to God all thing are possible: hence it is
found in the elect, that God even quite conquereth sin in man, and will rule
and govern in the man, not only by plucking out all the external acts of the
more gross sins, b^^ also in the very bottom it self of the heats yea and in
the most inward faculties (...) sensuality, Love, appetite, and our proper
will, by which all our external actions are governed.

If this thing were made more commonly known, and should be received by many,
in good earnest, men would no go up and down with such merry g^stures, and in
such security as the do but, without all doubt, would be convinced that the are
sinners, and are (...) yet, at a great distance from the son-sh^^^ of God,
although now they think themselves set on the highest step of divine grace, and
that they have just hope of the inheritance of Sons. But if the Lord should
take away the vail from their hearts, as it is done in thee, and should rob
them of that peace, which they have gotten from without, they certainly would
be involved in the like miseries, and streights, and would apprehend themselves
to be the poorest of all, though a blind security does now persuade them, that
they shine in the greatest riches. Yet the Lord, who is the searcher of the
hearts, and the reins, will in his own time, most clearly uncover all, and will
bring them into the Light; to whom we ought to submit our selves with patience,
and long-suffering, waiting for his salvation and redemption in us: for its
better by real inward poverty to draw ^earer to God, then, being by imagi^ary
and false riches, blinded in our ^earts, be hindered from the true going
forwards unto God. I was willing hearti^y to discover these things to thee,
that ^he true difference of thy condition might, according to my small
judgment, and the testimony of my heart) become more, and better known unto
thee: for I am of opinion, that thou thy self, if the Lord shall leave thee,
for some space of time, in this condition, wilt come to know the truth of the
matter more exactly, and to perceive those things, which hitherto have layn hid
from thee. Now therefore weigh all things more rightly, which perhaps hitherto
thou have not done, even as many things, are wont to be lightly neglected. Yet
I trust in the Lord, that he will stand by thee every where, least thy burden
should be too heavy for thee to bear, and that thou be not tempted beyond what
is meet for thy weakness to suffer, according to his mercy: For our nature is
not fit, without the divine help, to bear these burdens, in regard no support
can appear to it, now, from any where else; because in whatsoever thing, it
formerly was wont to rest, and to trust, all that, in such a state, shrinks far
away: Nor can a man, in this condition, be better advised, then plainly to
neglect all external temporary means, wherewith his mind was used to be
delighted, and to renounce them quite, inasmuch as they are such, as will else
still be the cause of many afflictions: Let him therefore do this, viz. let him
learn to subject his whole self to the will of God, submitting himself to all
that God shall impose upon him, in this his tribulation, with a firm resolution
of mind, to bear them all, so long as it shall please God.

If a man can arrive at this renunciation, and submission, he shall surely find
a wonderful advantage, and a strange renovation of heart, insomuch, that that
which before was difficult, and hard, will be now pleasant, and grateful to
him; and that which before, was mere terror, yea as death to him, will now be
as a Sanctuary of refuge, yea life it self to him. And to tell it in short, all
things will change themselves in a man, when the Spirit of the Lord rules in
him, and impels him to the obedience of the Divine will: Whereas, whilst he ^s
miserably led by the conduct of his own carnality, he will live, as governed
into mere disobedience, under his own proper will: for which very reason the
divine will is so troublesome to us, that we cannot be subjected unto i^ nor
yield up our selves to the hand of God, but rather, as far as in us lies, we
choose to save our lives, and not to lose them. But the Lord who seek our
advantage and intends nothing else but good to us, regards not that complaine^
of our flesh, but gives up our Souls thorough much sorrow, stirred up in us by
an accusing conscience, to that we ought to subject our selves, till all
impurity of our inbred and corrupted appetites be by the devouring flames of
the divine judgment, consumed and purged away in us.

Then at length we come to apprehend the Lord: and to be willing, and to seek
out both as well internally as externally, that all our perverse thoughts and
sensual appetites, may be purified* nor to be no longer stirred up by our own
proper will to all wicked desires, and pleasures, wherewith our corrupt nature
abounds.

The Lord illuminate our understanding, and grant unto us wisdom, and true
discretion, that every where and time, we may contain our selves in good order,
under his fear, whereby we may proceed, and grow in divine knowledge, and
grace, according to the measure of our calling, and so at length, if it may be,
that we may be able to arrive to a fall age in Christ, according to the divine
sovereign pleasure, and commiseration. Let us with all our might and power
adore the Lord, with uncessant prayers, and humiliation poured out before him,
least that which is temporary, and partaketh of time, should find any place in
our hearts, but rather that it be so expulsed, that the Lord himself may
possess that place, even until all our thoughts, words, and works be performed
only according to the will of God: and may grow forth with all discipline, and
obedience, under the most mighty hand of God, and that we may with all
patience, wait for, and expect his coming unto manifestation: When he himself
will wipe away all tears from the eyes of his, and give them eternal comfort,
and true ^^lvation, unto which it now, in this moment of time, behooveth them
to be prepared, by a constant sorrow, and misery, by fear, and anxiety, by
terrors, and by death: for they cannot like the common sort of men, spend
their lives in mere pleasures, but he does always detain his under a rigid
discipline, and many frights, and makes them drink down the bitter potion of
tribulations, that all their internal faculties as well of spirit as of Soul,
may be brought under the Cross; nor can they ever arrive at true peace, until
every one of them learns, nakedly to yield up himself into the will of God, and
contentedly to take of the potion mixed by God, and given him to drink, out of
mere grace, and Love.

Now that this cup is bitter, is no fault of God's, but our own; and that
because we are contrary, and enemies to what is good, and cannot bear to be
purged, just like the vulgar people, whose troubles are increased by a mixed
Physick-wine: For by nature a man flies from all things which are hard, and
produce pains, and yet there is no other way to be recovered, nor to come at
health, then by those means, by which we are always more and more adapted to
Christ, our head, by a similitude of his sufferings, death, and burial, that
afterward by a like resurrection also, we may be taken into him, and be
possessed of a never-fading crown of glory. For how much we suffer together
with Christ, so much also shall we reign with ^im, not indeed in this time of
tempora^y abode, but in the truth and perma^ency of spirit, and life: in which
we shall arise, and be excited to such a like^ess of Christ, as consists not
with de^raved Nature, but is lifted up above Nature, and is conformed into a
spiritu^^, eternal, and immortal life. Thus there^^re all, and every one of
them, in their ^wn order, may expect it will be, ac^^rding to the measure of
the divine gifts, ^^at the enemy, may, for the time to ^^me, have no more
right, nor power ^er our Souls, by reason of sin, under which hitherto we have
been bound, ^^d captivated, hoping for salvation, ^^d redemption in Christ,
from all our internal enemies, who force our Souls into slavery, so that in
tract of time, we may in all holiness and righteousness serve the Lord, as
present with us, all the days of our life.

He therefore that has appeared on earth to preach the Gospel to the poor, and
to the desolate, will comfort and cure our sorrowful hearts, and graciously set
the captives free, he, I say, will in his own time, appear gracious to thy
humane weakness, and will bless thy internal poverty, and affliction with a
gre^^ plenty of the fruits of holiness. Now these few things I was willing,
according to the simplicity of my heart, and my mea^ gifts in the Lord, to
write unto thee, from an earnest desire to serve thee, that (...) perhaps some
means might be discove^ed to thy heart, thorough the divi^^ mercy, leading to a
greater proficienc^ in the knowledge of God, and the thy Soul might be sealed
up in etern^^ peace and reconciliation thorough the grace of God, and by his
Spirit. A^^ 31. 1559.

EPIST. V. For what end the Scripture was given, and how we ought most exactly
to satisfy conscience, also concerning the difference between humane
righteousness, and that which avails before God.
To U. of W.
MOst dear Lady, having this occasion offered, I was willing to write a few
lines unto thee, giving thanks to you all, for your friendly inclinations of
heart toward us: The eternal God grant, that that bond, in which we being
bound, together in him, and do profess a mutual union to the true members, may
become more firm, and may grow in Christ our Lord, according to his holy will,
to his glory and our death. As to what concerns my condition, it is indeed, at
present, such as is tolerable to the flesh, as long as it shall please God, for
the bond of death remains in my heart, and in my members, and all the rest is
known unto the Lord. The Lord himself take us all into his protection, that we
may be preserved in his fear, this dangerous time, which, as I conjecture,
cannot be done, but by most hard sorrows.

O would to God, we could, at length, come even unto the death of Christ, and
feel it in our souls, which indeed is set before our eyes in the holy
Scriptures, yet somewhat shadowed. O Lord, grant unto us that life, which the
Scripture every where bears witness of, yet oftentimes, by so frequent
exercises of so many various readings, a man is but kept back, and distracted,
when, as yet, it is in the first place necessary, that every one should observe
himself in the acts of hearing, speaking, thinking, working, and in all else,
where a man is busied about any other matters in things of thi^ life, and that
all these be, to his utmost put to the examination of his judgment and that he
most exactly endeavors and in all, has a care to satisfy his own conscience;
for so long as the accusation thereof endures, by the guilt of an^ (though the
least) transgression; it is impossible that peace an be found in h^ Soul.
Because as long as any one does not satisfy his own conscience, he is willingly
kept a prisoner under sin. But the difficulty of this way hinders many, as
much as that which the Scripture says, that no man can stand before God in his
own proper righteousness; which is very true. However yet, if we are willing to
trace thorough this most rocky way of our conscience, even to its utmost limit,
it is necessary, that, at length, we should come to a mortification, and
destruction of all our laborious endeavors, and then will our own
righteousness shame us: On the contrary we all would dye, before ever we have
lived, and glory that we have renounced our own righteousness, when as even yet
we stick in the midst of our sins, breaking forth into outward acts. But the
matter is to be otherwise, and more accurately considered, if we desire to make
a proficiency in the Lord: for that life which we live in the flesh, is dead,
in the sight of God, nor has no liveliness in it, in his account. Yea
furthermore, that life, which our Soul enjoys, whilst it confideth in, and s
bottomed on these or these things, must also be changed for a death, and it is
by no means to be permitted, that the enormities thereof should rejoice in its
progress. For this life, which our Soul has taken to herself, after this
manner, springs from no where else, then from out of that imaginary
righteousness, and holiness which we fancy is to be found in us, and which
tickles us with a strange kind of sweet flattery, and privately is very
pleasing to us, yea and gives to our Souls, a kind of tranquillity. These
things are hid so deeply in a man, and deceive us with such dissimulation, as
if all were well with us; whence it is, that all things are ascribed unto
Christ, because the man knows, that no such thing can be attained to, but by
Christ. These are those things, whereof the Scripture makes so often mention,
viz. our own proper righteousness, our own proper works, our own proper
holiness, and all such like, viz. if we trust too much to any of these means,
which were granted unto us from the Lord, and stick rather unto them, then to
the only love God. For to love God, is no other thing, then most accurately to
do that which he wills, not for the hope of any salvation, or of any good
things whatever; for the Love of God it self thus puts a man on, that he cannot
do otherwise. And here it is, that we are able to search into the most inward
corners of our hearts, whether or no we seek ourselves else where either in
Soul or body, and whether we serve God, and love him for this end, that our
souls may gain salvation.

But here, for the most part, it will be answered; that whatever things are
done, are done, only for love: yet nevertheless men do perform these things out
of the terror, and the impulse of their own conscience, as the scripture
witnesses. I say not all this, because I would detract in the least from good
works, and set light by them, but rather that we should go on further, and not
to rest here: nor am I willing we should sit down, in a private kind of peace,
of having gained some steps only, before we be come unto the end, nor till the
scope, for whose sake all this is done, be duly attained. And though there be
others behind us; who follow up after us, being yet a great way off; yet it is
incumbent on us, because of our greater knowledge received, to put out this our
talent to the highest interest, we can possibly, that in us may be found
constant perseverance, if so be, at length, we can arrive, perhaps, to a true
dying, having no need more to reiterate so often our renewing of death, so that
all may together, and at once, remain buried also in Christ's death eternally;
a more certain essential sort of death, (as I may so say) following us into
that better state or condition.

Most beloved Lady, receive I pray thee, these my letters kindly, if perhaps
they may prove to be of any use to thee in thy holy endeavors, and that we may,
come at length, to the total renouncing our flesh, that then we may be judged
according to the rule of righteousness, which the Law requires by Christ. For
in Christ, sin is utterly condemned to death, and as much as we are planted
together with him in the likeness of his death so much also shall we, thorough
his resurrection, be received into the newness or the Spirit, who then performs
in Man the office of a Governor, and is to him in the stead of his life, whose
place, before this, our flesh supplied: all that is beyond this, the Lord
himself will manifest to us, when we come thither.

If therefore we have our inward senses rightly exercised by the Lord, and do
firmly adhere to him with continued prayers, then will he kindle in thy heart
some living light, which my dead writings can never effect, by means of which,
being inflamed with a greater zeal, to renounce all flesh, we shall be able to
offer to the Lord our hearts emptied, and set free by a mere, and pure
submission unto, and a firm purpose of remaining, and persevering in his will:
so will the thing prosper, and our work will more happily succeed. But why this
work will succeed with so much difficulty, and with such a length of time, this
is the reason, because somewhat still will stick close to the heart, which we
cannot wholly renounce: for when but one half of the heart is yielded up, the
offering remains impure, nor is it accepted: whence it is that the Scripture
commands us to have a great care of or to watch such a heart, which seeks
double ways, and carries upon either shoulder, and halts on either leg, etc.
For we cannot at the same time satisfy the flesh (conscience hindering us) and
conscience too, (the flesh hindering us) therefore it is necessary, that we
yield our selves up wholly, as a pure offering, and grateful to the Lord, for
such a one is received by the Lord, and blessed of him, that thenceforth he may
bring forth fruit, and at length, that thence may arise the righteousness that
is available before God. Unto which may the Lord promote us, and keep us by his
infinite mercy in Christ our Lord and Savior. The Lord preserve us, that we
may persevere in his grace, according to the tenor of his most holy Will.

EPIST. VI. Being a Christian exhortation, which contains many points, very
useful and profitable to all Christians.
To the same Lady.
MOst beloved Lady, seeing that there remains no more time to me in this
life, as far as by my uttmost capacity of sense and reason I am able to judge,
or is to me known, I am constrained of my self freely to open, and more and
more to unfold my mind to you. Yet the true fruits of proficiency in the Lord,
are not attained to by my leters, nor by our mutual converse appointed in the
Lord of purpose, but only and alone by the grace and mercy of God: For that the
same depends only on the meet divine commiseration, he best knows (yet only
in Soul and conscience) who himself is exercised in the very work o^ the Lord.

In the first place therefore it behoo^^ is diligently to beware, that we be
not (...) our lusts driven to that pass, as to think, that God is the cause of
sin: whereas the night can sooner be made the day, then he be any such thing.
Because in God there is no darkness at all, but mere light; and whosoever would
come to know this work of God thorough his mercy, they must begin this
knowledge with sincerity of mind, which seeks nothing else but God alone,
whosoever proceeds with a double heart, is an abomination to the Lord. Now
doubleness of heart consists in this, when we are not with out whole heart,
Soul, and thoughts given up, and wholly left to the Lord; also when we pour out
our prayers before him with a heart, divided in two, whence ^lso it is, that we
are not heard according ^o our desires: For the Lord loves us ^ore then we our
selves do love our ^elves, inasmuch as he is averse to our estruction, and
always freely bestows (...) us, that which is most useful, and ^ost
profitable for our happiness, which ^^deed is that, which, at first, is un^^own
(...) us, but is at length made known (...) us, though by and thorough great
afflictions; because that we were so far falen into our desires, and into that
evil which we call our Propriety, that we must first be subjected to great
anguishes and griefs, before, we can become submitted to the will and obedience
of God, which is that which can be never done without a spiritual death, and
the mortifying of all our own powers, even as they sensibly feel, who are
chosen, and lead by God into such a death.

Wherefore we are to endeavor, that we may most patiently accept from the Lord
whatsoever he has foreordained by his power over us, being to our utmost
resigned up to him alone, continually imploring him by our prayers, and with
hearts lifted up, importunately to beg his mercy, that by his grace we may be
sustained, and preserved even to the end, nor that we may not be turned aside,
by any temporal enjoyments, or by any case happening, which is able to make us,
in this life, faint-hearted, but that we may abide confirmed in this way, with
perpetually going forwards in the blessing of God, and in real fruitfulness.

I do not describe the cause by which we may perchance be drawn away, and
turned aside, let every one try himself, for there are diverse sins which vex
us, every one in his own state, being captivated by that evil which we term our
proper evil in our own will, and desires, in which every one of us are kept
bound or chained. May the Lord advance us forward to the true and divine
communion, and to a willing obedience unto God, that we may be set free from
all those bonds, by which thorough our own faults, we are inthralled: to which
freedom notwithstanding, we can never come, unless we dye, and spiritually
depart, in and by which, captivity is lead forth in triumph, after the victory
obtained by the most powerful hand of God, in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
we being-raised up again in Christ unto the true eternity, in the life of the
Spirit; when that which is become old, shall remain cast off, neither shall any
pardon be given it, but be condemned to death, and to be perfectly separated
from life.

Let this therefore be our rule thorough our whole life, that we endeavor to
lay aside that which is a stop and hinderance to our hearts in the way of the
Lord, which yet is naught else but our own selves, who do oppose our selves to
the Lord, so that we come before him praying with half a heart only: whenas
notwithstanding, if our hearts did spread themselves before the Lord, with a
perfect resignation, and could abide in a continual progress of such a
resignation, and in a firm purpose of catching at nothing more, being free,
simple, and nakedly poured forth before the Lord, we should then find with an
admirable success the power of the Lord in conquering of sin.

Yet it is not possible to arrive at such a liberty of heart, but by the special
mercy of God, to which also are to be joined our unwearied endeavors and
prayers; For we have so encompassed our selves about with such a wall of
separation, that we want the true discerning of our intellect by reason of that
thick darkness, wherewith our senses are deeply benighted; whence it is, that
we always place without our selves, the cause of our holding back, and of our
barrenness, and complain that we are hindered, and overruled by things
external, the contrary of which, if things proceeded aright, and we were sound
at the bottom of our hearts, would come to pass, so as that which is internal,
would contain, and rule in a due order, all externals; nor would it be hindered
by any thing external: and thus all would prove well for our use and advantage
in the Lord. But the Lord will much better inform us in these matters, and
effectually cause, that if any temporal things that are less necessary, become
a burden unto us, that we shall lay them aside, so far forth as it is allowed
to us, by our Conscience, in the Lord, yet not without a most exact
consideration thereof.

For he who thus knows himself to be weak, so as he may easily be hindered by
and from things external, stands altogether in need, that he should
constantly and earnestly beg of the Lord, that he may be kept unpolluted, and
that his Sensitive faculties be thus, thorough urgent necessity, always kept
exercised with continual prayers, and an elevated heart, which would never be
done without necessity: for no prayer, does more truly hit the mark, then that
which flows from necessity: for by how much the more pressing the necessity
is, by so much the more piercing are prayers made. So that in these very evils
themselves a remedy is found which leads us unto God; if so be our ultimate
end be nothing else but God; and as to things outward, we propose to our selves
to be obedient to nothing but the divine will, and to perform it most exactly.
But this case does wind in a man, into such difficulties, before it can be
brought to pass, that it will concern him to engage his utmost resolution, and
powers to strive, with diverse and most difficult pangs, and desperate
temptations, which increase upon him daily more and more. For just so it is
with these combatants, as with the poor wild creature, which is driven up and
down by the hunters, till the time of the Lord be come: Now the Lord preserves
us when we know it not, yea when we sink into swoons, and are swallowed up by
straights: and then does our death truly begin when all our arrogance is quite
blunted, and suppressed. By reason of the weakness of my hand I could write no
more, recommending you herewith unto the Lord, who can promote us all in his
own way, and preserve us in a constant diligence, and in a perseverance of
divine graces.

EPIST. VII. Which is the true way of coming unto Christ, very useful for Youth.
To G. of R.
MOst dear G. I gave this to thy Cousin upon his departure hence to be delivered
unto thee, that thy blooming youth may be more and mo^^ put on unto true zeal,
for I was always in my mind, persuaded, that thou did^^ search out after that
which is good. (...) therefore we are, in some measure, (...) serve one
another, and to help forward in the ways of the Lord, it is necessar^ that thou
should exercise in practice, that gift which thou have received, and advance
it unto fruit bearing, that thou may not only search after knowledge, and
Science, but also to think of this, how thou may reduce thy self unto a
oneness, which is not done by knowing many things, but in many things desisting
from our our own will, and in breaking our desires even in the flower of Youth.

For our own proper desire is indeed contrary to God, and this is the chief
root out of which all Sins do grow. To him therefore that would arrive at the
state of Christ, there is no other way allowed, then that, by the Law, he die
to his natural desires and lusts. He that would retain and keep his lusts, and
desires, supposing that only for a knowledge of Christ, apprehended in his
understanding, he shall be accounted before God for a believer, this man
certainly will wander far out of the way. Inasmuch ^s this same faith goes no
further, then unto the understanding, his salvation also ^n go no further then
into the under^tanding, and reason; so that it must at last needs dye in that
death that is so necessary to all Christians, viz. wherein Reason is destroyed:
for in this death there remains nothing but the Soul, or mind only.

But if it be objected, that our faith, and knowledge do penetrate even into
the most inward regions of the Soul, and mind; I answer thereto. That then also
it is necessary, that this our Soul and mind, when it shall live with such an
estrangedness from the flesh, that it cannot but with great Nauseousness and
tedious disdain, bear in its self all the desires and lusts which spring from
the nethermost parts of the flesh, so as it would rather dye infinite deaths,
and to be freed from them, then with pleasure, even once to perform them in the
verv act.

Behold, my G. this brief proposal, how every one ought to prove and try h^^
faith. If any man believes in Christ from the very bottom of his Soul, (...)
must need be wracked with great do^lours in his Soul by reason of sin, so the
he will account of sin for the most grievous torture that can be found in all
the world, and for his greatest enemy, and how then for the sake of acting it,
can he enter into a friendship with it.

Although therefore the Vulgar knowledge of those who glory in the Gospel may
say on this wise; Sin, if so be it is not perpetrated in the very act, though
it should lurk in the heart, does us no hurt: yet do thou (I pray) hear how
Christ does nevertheless assert; that he who looks on a woman to lust after
her, is already guilty in the sight of God: by which words surely Christ
excuses not, but accuses the lusting of a man, and will really have it
accounted for sin in the sight of God. Dearest G. I beseech thee, do not
despond in thy mind, because of this hard saying, for all things are possible
to God: I only write this of purpose, that thou may seasonably learn to
judge of all things, least thou should consume thy youth unprofitably, and
that thou may bear fruit to God ^in thy own soul, they in the mean time who
are of the dregs of the Vulgar though they may have knowledge, yet they lie
down tired in sloth, nor do they oppose sin with the least burning zeal, or
brea^^ its impetuous assaults.

Nor yet does this external abstinence from sins, and the debilitating of them
suffice, for it is necessary to descend to the very bottom it self, when even
the thoughts are to be judged in the presence of God. Far therefore be it from
us to commit sin in the very act.

Also this my Letter intends this at least that thy young limbs be stirred up
both night and day to the worship of God, by continued prayers, in temperance,
purity meekness of heart, long-suffering, lov^ of thine Enemies, as also in the
Reading of Scripture, in holy proficiencies, an^ in other virtues conducing to
Christian discipline: Concerning which, thy ow^ Conscience will afford to thee
a testimony all which being performed, thou wi^^ every day rejoice in thy great
success i^ the work of the Lord, that at last, when thy most miserable
condition is known thou will be a terror to thy own sel^ and therefore thou will so much the more diligently call upon God for help that his most powerful
right hand ma^^ at length graciously support thy Soul, and conquer the power of
the enemy in a real victory. The Lord have mercy on us all, and heal our
diseases, and effectually cause us to hunger and thirst after his
righteousness, least we be left naked in our own impurity.

EPIST. VIII. How any one who is studious concerning the way of the Lord ought
daily to exercise himself.
MOst beloved Niece, Because I understand, that thou earnestly desire such a
disposition of heart, as truly to walk in the ways of the Lord, I could not
withhold my self, but must write to thee these few things, for thy greater
confirmation in them; that thou being once entered into this way, should not
desist from vigorously proceeding forward, and to adhere to the Lord with thy
whole heart, together with a total suppression of thy carnal part. Be therefore
diligently studious, that thy diligence be not tired out in reading, in
humanity, in Silence, in meekness, in temperance, forbearance, patience, and
compassion; also learn to exercise thy self in all studyes of virtues, that
thou being found faithful in little things may be made ruler over much
greater: for if thou shall not be faithful in these few things, assuredly thou will never be entrusted with more.

But I hope that thou will receive wisdom and prudence from the Lord, that thou will have a care of, and diligently attend unto thy own self, least some bitter
root should spring up in thee, and so thou and thy Soul tumble headlong into
destruction: for the flesh does very subtly assault a man, to beguile him,
and turn him away from Godliness. Wherefore making a strict watch upon thy life
and conversation, carefully incompass thy self round, having cut off the world,
and all wantonness of life, speech, and thoughts, preferring every one with all
gentleness, and patience, not only the good, but also the evil, and the
immodest. Learn also to bridle in thy self and to humble thy self, being always
turned to the Lord in thy heart. Never let vain, evil and unworthy thoughts
arise in thy mind, but always oppose them with great earnestness, pouring out
to the Lord fervent prayers: and if thou gettest any spare time on holy days,
or otherways, employ it in reading the holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, or else of that little book entitled Of the imitation of Christ,
and in these exercise thy self, and learn to ponder them often in thy mind. If
thou read any thing which thou do not understand, call upon the Lord with
ardent sighs and daily tears, that he would open to thee the true sense of his
most holy word for to be the Necessary food of thy Soul: for the more thou
shall follow the Lord, the more thou shall understand of holy Scripture, and by
how much the less thou art intent to wait upon the Lord, by so much the less
shall thou understand Scripture.

Therefore let thy constant endeavors be to approve thy self faithful in these
things, which are viz. made known to thee in and by mortification, and a
continual access to God by prayer, nor let any time slip by thee in vain, and
without thus doing. If thou reply that thou understandest not what thou
read; again say; that though thou may no^ understand all, yet is it
incumbent o^ thee, to exercise thy self in the sacred word of the Lord, as also
to be unwear^edly sollicitous about it. For by these exercises thou shall
sooner be amended then by idleness; and these are the be^^ means of instituting
and of exercising an^ man for a better life. Wherefore I pray thee, be thou
intent to the diligent reading of the Scriptures, and apply them unt^ the
amendment of thy life, to the mortifying of all unrighteousness, and to the
instruction of thy own self, until the Lord shall please to give thee a great^^
measure of understanding the fundame^tal meaning of Scripture, that thou may
not be lead up and down by an^ man, but may be taught by him from heaven.

Now though all men boast of the that they are endued with the Spirit (...)
God, and are divinely taught by t^^ Spirit of Christ, yet are they still a^^
great distance from what they boast of: for else they all should have fought
otherwise, then as yet they have demonstrated, before the door to grace could
be set open.

They think indeed that they are wholly dead, and yet feel sin, and the
accusation of transgressions to be still alive in themselves: nor are they
nevertheless willing to listen, when one tells them of the mortification of
such sins, and do always defend their state and condition by these or the like
reasons, notwithstanding the gainsaying of Conscience, which they strive to
quiet by outward performances, or ceremonies, concluding that the obedience due
to God consists in these performances, and so pretend to ^ield obedience to
God without or out of themselves, when within themselves they find nothing but
mere disobedience.

Whenas in truth, whosoever he shall ^e, (no man excepted) who makes all is aim
at the true mark, he is concern^d first to satisfy inward accusations, and
(...) dye to every sin; for if we are dead, to one sin, we shall wholly run
into error if the rest be left still alive.

But say they; Christ dyed for these sins, and it is impossible we should be
fully perfect: Well then! if Christ dyed for one sin, certainly also he dyed
for another, whence it will follow that there is no manifest need that we
should dye either to this or to that sin: let us therefore abide in the old
nature of our flesh seeing that Christ dyed for our sins, and will make
satisfaction for us. So is it (add they) but we are bound to mortif^ all sins
that we can, but to be completely made pure, we cannot. We tal^ thus, when we
cannot get forward any further for men are apt to think that tha^ which exceeds
their power, is also impossible to God. But in good truth when a man can go no
further, an^ has born the sharpest conflict of all, an^ still something is
wanting to him, the God works in him such things, as a^ above all humane
Understanding, an^ does thus cleanse him from those sins, from which, formerly,
he could not be let go^ free, but they always did inwardly accus^ and blame him.

Whosoever therefore affirms that he may come into communion with God, whilst
he still remains under the condemnation of sin, that man deceives himself; for
God has no communion with sin. He that would have a Communion with God, and
Christ, to be extended also to himself, must be a sanctified Man, even as he is
holy, without all accusation. Let not therefore more be ascribed (I pray) to
us, then becomes us, nor let us boast our selves richer then we are. My dearest
Niece, I write these things to thee, least thou should here or there,
according to these or these ceremonies or external works be deceived, if some
body should perchance propose such like unto thee. Rather first purify thy
self from all unrighteousness which sticks fast unto thee according to the
testimony that thy own Conscience gives thereof, as also the Scripture bearing
the same witness; and never look without but always within thy self: for thy
own Sin, thy own Idolatry, thy own Pride, thy own Malice, thy own
unrighteousness is to be made known unto thee, and from them thou must dye,
then will the Lord freely bestow more upon thee: and as thy soul shall come to
want some more things, it shall abundantly obtain them. Herewith I recommend
thee to the Lord who is able to lead thee into all Godliness, and into the true
study of walking in his ways.

EPIST. IX. How one may arrive and come at the best portion which is God
himself, thorough many tribulations.
To the same person.
MAy much grace and salvation fruitfully abound in thee, in a true and daily
proficiency in the way of the Lord, into which we being in our weakness entered,
are obliged diligently to go thorough therein, that being freed from our
weakness and inconstancy, we may at last be lead unto the truth of eternal
Union with God: least that in the multitude and variety of things we be drawn
hither and thither and be further solicited, or rested but that we may obtain
the best por^ion, which is God himself, and never more be deprived thereof.

But before we can come at that, all those faculties must first be mortified,
which hinder God from accomplishing his work in us. Now how much any one
labors in that mortification according to the most inward testimony of his
conscience, and approves himself faithful, so much fruit also shall spring up
from this deadned seed, which is to endure much hail and snow, and cold, and
miseries of weather, before it can put forth true fruit, and such as will prove
advantageous to a man.

Thus also is it with the seed of that ^hin tender knowledge which is sown in
us; if this is at length to produce such fruit, as may be useful to any man for
to be a true nourishment inwardly to his soul, then indeed is this knowledge to
be purified with many temptations, assaults, difficulties, griefs, desertions,
yea all such like hardnesses, and least it should remain carnal it is plainly
to be slain and mortified.

Alas! what sighs of heart break out, before this year of trial be run
thorough, in the Wilderness; partly because of the ruggedness of the way, and
partly because of that pinching hunger and thirst of Soul, and the want of all
divine comforts: then flesh and blood look back again to Egypt, and repent that
they came out from thence. In this state we must act cautiously, and
vigourously call upon the Lod, least we be tired out, and the tediousness of
the ways roughness quite overcome us. For sure it is, God will make good his
promises to the full, leading us from and thorough hardships, to a more soft
condition; thorough disquiets to peace, through wants, to all plenty, and
thorough defects, to all abundance; where all tears are to be wiped away from
our eyes, nor shall any sorrow be ever able to touchus any more.

My Niece, I therefore write these things, because, I know, that diverse
tribulations hand over us, under which if we demean our selves with courage, we
shall certainly be endued with great grace from the Lord: Let us therefore
rightly observe the persuasions which are daily set before us from the Lord,
least we fall back again into the self-same misery

Trust not thy flesh, for it is manifestly contrary, and in enmity to the
divine will, and therefore it is to be suppressed strongly by using all
diligent watchfullness, or else it will deceive thee by its subtilty, and will
seduce thee to a turning aside, although it may appear very gentle unto the.

Submit thy self to sufferings, that thou may with a ready mind bear
whatsoever is grievous, burdensome and tedious, and endure, even to the end,
and in this daily cross possess thy soul with patience. Let not the Length of
time be irksome to thee, offer up to the Lord thy carnal mind opportunely, for
all that belongs unto it must at last be made subject to the Lord either sooner
or later. Endeavor this sedulously, viz. to give up freely to the Lord thy
flesh and blood, thy soul and spirit, that he may do with them according to his
own good pleasure, so as thou may never hereafter find any contradiction in
thy self about these, but that Christ alone may be in thee, thy will, life, and
sole governor. The Lord have compassion on us all. I pray thee give my hearty
commendations to A. the wife of thy brother, and give her this letter to read,
in some measure to stir her up to the Lord, whereby she may, with a heart
prepared, endure her many griefs, and sorrows, and willingly to accept them
from the hand of the Lord, as from him who by these means, striveth to chasten,
and to purify her; So that she also bewareth that she be not ensnared by any
sin, but will strictly observe her life, viz. to please God, and to perform
that which will be pleasing to him, yea also let her learn to sustain
willingly, what he shall lay upon her, that that which is at first sharp or
sower, may at last become sweetened to her in the Lord, and she her self at
length may remain wholly yielded up to the Lord. And thus I recommend thee to
the Lord, who can advance both thee, and all of us by his grace, that we may
become his living Sacrifice, and sweet Savor to his heavenly father, that our
labor may not be in vain, but may daily increase with fruit-bearing.

EPIST. X. A brief information, how a man who begins with zeal, is used to be
lead thorough continual sufferings, and conflicts: and what kind of fruit are
at last brought forth from those dolours.
To his Sister, A.
MY most beloved Sister, That all may be well with thee in the fear of the Lord
I desire with all my heart: and thy further growth in him, does very greatly
rejoice me. For although in these dangerous times, many new things are here and
there produced from multiplied discords, one showing this, and another that
way, by all which the hearts of many are disturbed, and they are disquieted
contrary to the intention of Godliness; Yet God has prepared an eminent glory
for them, who, with a valiant mind, do break thorough these things. Also
because now a narrower way is proposed, then in times past, therefore also a
greater grace is now apprehended to be in man: for by the benefit of straights
and anxieties are gotten all the good things, which God has promised unto man,
and nothing is more contrary unto God, then an imaginary peace and
tranquillity, and such a condition, as in which it is well with a man, and in
which he lives a quiet pleasant life free from any vexation of adversities,
misfortunes, and other mischiefs. Briefly, God is never farther absent from us,
then when all things happen unto us according to our own wills, and when we
enjoy every where a prosperous success; whereas straights, misfortunes, a
cross, and a pressing need are nearer to God, be they in matters great or
small, provided that in these evils, we so behave our selves, as to bear our
sufferings with a willing mind, and with joy as from the hand of God, that
thereby we gaining the knowledge of our captivity, and chains, do endeavor
forthwith to put them off, and to dye.

For so long as we find any thing yet in us, which stirs us up either to
sorrow, or to joy, so long are we bound and captivated to our own selves, and
are the Slaves of Nature: Now if we being set free from the first natural
generation should penetrate to the other that is spiritual, and should be led
into the true state thereof, certainly then no adversity, misfortune, injury,
yea nor fire, nor sword, nor any thing else that is a relict of nature can
overcome a man, which should be accounted by us for evil, as the Vulgar
accounts them for evil; for whatsoever happens to a regenerate man, is
accounted by him as a means to the eternal glory of God, so that to such a man
nothing is sweet or more worthy his esteem, then every adversity, and injury,
wherewith he is wont to be treated from others; so that by how much the more of
them are sent him from God, so much the more he will judge that he is
propitious to him. But there are many things required first, before we can
learn to acknowledge the hand of God: for when we are first overwhelmed by any
adversity, then we either throw the blame upon man or we complain that God does
afflict us: and this proceeds from this, that we yet stick, and lie in our
sins, because of which, we are accused in our own conscience, and rendered
Enemies to God. Therefore are all things to be laid aside, whatsoever we
acknowledge to be unjust, though they may seem never so small, and we must, go
forward with a stout, zeal, so that we must both day and night fall down upon
our faces in prayers unto the Lord, that he will please to bestow on us freely
wisdom and understanding for the true knowledge of our selves, consisting not
in words but in deeds, that afterward we being our selves destroyed, may
truly dye, also that we may reflect upon no man in the World, but upon our
selves, by which at last we may learn to acknowledge the good hand of God, who
gives to his own, naught but the cross: and this is the supreme and safest way,
by which a man is saved.

My dearest Sister, I have here in few words described to thee the Type only,
or the picture and shadow of that fruit which grows out of the cross, yet if
thou art willing to know the thing it self in the truth thereof, and to
apprehend it with a right faith, thou thy self wilt seek it properly as from
thy own experience. But before thou can believe that the cross is of such
great advantage to thee, thou will feel certainly many adversities, and
miseries, and it will behoove the to cut off many of thy accommodations, that
so thou will behold no body else but look at thy own self: for it behooveth
thee to find salvation in thy own self, and so also thou art to make
experiments of dying, for thy self: He that is honest without himself, he also
is saved without himself, and the salvation of such a one stands allways in
need, that being corroborated with the sweetest promises, it should of beten
renewed, because it proceeds not from God, but from man, whom it concerns
to use an external comfort because he is destitute of all internal comfort. For
the dwelling of God is not but in the most inward recesses of our Soul, and we
then at last acknowledge and own his voice, when we are wholly freed from
nature, else we remain always seprarated from him, by and thorough that Enmity
which is put betwixt God and out nature. As much therefore as we still persist
in our own nature, so much are we still separated from God, and do understand
his whole Essence, government, means, directions, gifts and discipline in a
sense depraved, and parverted by nature, for it holds us so captive, that as
often as God sends us certain means and helps for our [spiritual] death,
presently this very nature by her counsel turns us off from them to others,
that at last this chastning rod becomes frustrate, and fruitless, and these
gifts of God are accounted for plagues, afflictions, and heavy burdens, and
are received with murmuring, and indignation. Most high God! how evil is our
eye! may the Lord graciously please to open our eyes in his own time, that at
length we may be able to see.

EPIST. XI. An admonition how Youth may be put off from the world, and how it
ought to seek the Lord with all modesty.
To J. M.
DEarest J. That which I peculiarly desire, is that which also, I trust, the
Lord will effect, to direct thy ways to the chiefest scope, whereby thou may
now in this lifes-time modestly compose thy senses to the studyes of the paths
of God, and to the daily and nightly endeavors, after virtue. Thou have now
seen the world, and have experiencedt hat there is naught to be found therein,
in which can be any quiet of Soul, inasmuch as she is much rather lead in this
world into disquiets, and troubles.

Because therefore the Lord by his long-suffering has born with thee, and has
deigned most indulgently to wink at thy youth, it now altogether would become
thee to be more diligently set upon thy watch, by better using thy time, then
as yet has been done, whilst thou art still tossed up down by the waves of
this world.

The Lord will, I hope, more and more draw thy heart with fervor to himself,
that thou may seek him more seriously, even as formerly thy mind was wont to
be stirred up by the novelties of the world: and which yet have in time
vanished, or will yet vanish, seeing none of all things temporal could ever
persist, as we daily observe with our eyes that all are subject to change. If
therefore any one shall indulge his inclination in time, it is needful that he
be, together with time, afflicted with sorrow, so, that nothing is more safe,
then to withdraw himself from time, even with the loss of all, and to turn
himself to eternity, which is capable of no mutation, and in which nothing
dwells in our hearts, but a pious and constant tranquillity. That we may come
thither, we must endeavor with all our might, to learn to blunt the Edge of
all our pleasures, and to abdicate our own will and appetite, so that all
things may be cut off and supplanted, in which our flesh would live, and play
the wanton. Then shall thou truly please the Lord, who also will strenuously
help thee to rout the enemies of thy Soul, that thou shall be carried from one
righteousness to another, together with all proficiency and increase in divine
knowledge and Love. Herewith I commend thee to the Lord.

EPIST. XII. How all things are to be accepted from the hand of the Lord with
true Submission.
To a certain betroathed Gentleman.
DEarest N. The Lord will in due time turn thy grief of mind to be for the
better: for as in all, so likewise in this are we to be given up to the divine
will only. When the time shall come which he has proposed to himself, no man
shall, or can prevent the matter, but if the time be not come, we indeed may
desire it in our own wishes, but the thing shall want its success. Not that I
strive, as it were, to resist thy desire, but that the alone providence of the
Lord is to be accepted, so, that there be no difference of choice in us,
whether we are to wait, or whether to go forwards, and on the contrary. For
this is to wait expecting on the hand of God, to stand submitted to God, and
not to live to ones self, or to follow ones self, or to desire.

If we find any difference in our selves, so, as that we desire rather this
then that, then the whole thing is from our selves, and not from the Lord; for
that which is from the Lord is free, and wholly commended to God, without any
desire of this or that thing, so that the divine will be done, which also is
done, if we find our selves uncloathed of all desire, how advantageous soever
the business may seem in our eyes.

Yet by all this I shall not entangle thee, for I know, that thy mind earnestly
affects a freedom from all appetite of fulfiiling desires. The Lord who is a
true helper in all needs will be mindful of thee and of all of us, and will
comfort thee with his wonderful operations and will lead the from the Love of
the Creatures, to the Creator of all; whence all have their Original, and
emanation, and to whom, as unto their end, all things do return in their own
time: so that we also, even all of us, must appear in him, by our departure and
death, in which notwithstanding his eternal subsistence is manifested, as being
that which is to be glorified in all those who, by the benefit of his death,
and of the death of all those which are found created in them, do arrive at
that eternal communion, which by the most powerful hand of God, quickens and
raises up the dead, but not the living.

If therefore we would enjoy the same resurrection with Christ, we are also to
be transplanted into the same death, being yielded up to God with all our
might, and becoming obedient even to death.

May the Lord instruct thee with a true understanding, that thou may
meditate on his will with a piercing and continued consideration, and may that
be a help to thee in thy sufferings, according to his mercy, and may it direct
all things for thy benefit, as they are decreed in him from eternity. Which is
what I confidently believe he is about to do, and to bring all to the desired
end, by his eternal grace.

EPIST. XIII. An Exhortation raised from that consideration, that whatever is
without God, tends to eternal death, and destruction, and how we ought always
to set the divine judgment before our eyes.
To the same person.
MOst beloved N. That it is so long since I wrote to thee, this is the cause,
that I wanted an opportunity according to my desire, as also that I placed more
confidence in the Lord, then in my own letters being fixed in this firm hope,
that he would direct all things to the best end, and that he would apply a
remedy to all distractions of thy heart, and that he would thrust them all
under his obedience: For even as I my self according to my simple way, do
confide in the Lord alone, in all my necessities, waiting for help from him
only, so also I judge the like of thee, with firm belief, that the Lord will
out of his compassion behold and look upon thy case, and will deliver thee from
all thy troubles of heart; although this thy state may press thee to so much
the more diligent, and fervent, and more continual calling upon God, and to a
greater abode in his fear, because else it an be no otherwise done, but that
all labor, glory, cogitation, fruit and pleasure of the flesh, with all those
things which belong unto the world, and have communion therewith, do all, at
last, together tend to eternal destruction, nor can they, by any hope of life,
be firmly fixed to eternity; for Death, and an eternal blotting out do pass
upon all things which are without God!

But the faithful and merciful God will have compassion on us, that we may be
subjected to his chastisement, with a continual meditation on the divine
judgment, under which it behooveth all flesh to tremble, and to give glory to
God alone, that thus being yielded up unto God, we may be wholly governed by
him, and that we may serve him in all righteousness and holiness, as it becomes
the Sons of God.

God grant this to thee, which I wish from the very bottom of my Soul, as the
Lord also knows, that we may together remain given up to the Lord both in body
and soul. O would to God, that our hearts could be always mindful of that
misery, destruction, and eternal death which hangs over all flesh, and where
it is truly made manifest, how far all joys are distant from us, as also the
pleasures in this earth, together with all the advantages, pride, and other
vanities that are pleasing to our flesh, and all the other motions tending
thereunto.

Nevertheless from the Lord I always hope that which is best, viz. that it will
come to pass that he will purify us miserable creatures, even as gold is purged
by the fire, and that he will wash us from all impurities. The Lord grant that
our familiarity which we have in divine love, may not, by these sufferings, be
diminished or decreased, but rather be comfirmed by the divine benediction,
which is fertile in all who are patient, and who in Goliness, and the fear of
the Lord, do constantly persevere even to the end of the fight, although they
were vexed with all manner of trials.

The Lord of all grace have mercy on us all, that we may never but be
proficients, and seriously, and diligently walk in the way of his fear, that we
may always be more and more endowed with his grace.

EPIST. XIV. A brief Instruction how any one may in due order arrive at
Regeneration, and whence it is, the new creature may have its Original.
To the same person.
DEarest N. I could not withhold my hand, but must send this letter to thee,
seeing I am not at leisure to come unto thee, therefore this Epistle shall
supply the want of my presence. For I am wholly persuaded in the Lord, that thy
heart, yea, when not admonished by me, will not yet be tired out of the
continuance in the work begun, and in the growth in the fear of God our
Savior, least that any one happly should disturb and confound thee by these or
any other persuasions; for to come at the very thing its self, there is no need
of many rules and exhortations.

Search narrowly into thy own self, and if thou can find any thing for whose
sake, thy conscience shall accuse thee, then it concerns thee to desist from
that, and to dye thereunto. This therefore is requlsit, that thou learn to
examine thy self, whether thou suffer any thing against thy will, and with a
certain kind of indignation, nor art thou willingly subjected with humility to
all others: For its necessary that in all resepects, thou should account of
thy self from the very bottom of thy heart, for the least, and the most
despicable, and that thou willingly submit thy self to every body, yea to him
that injureth thee. If thou will endeavor this, thou will soon find in thy
self a great defect, nor will thou willingly perform that, but wilt be moved to
indignation, and to impatience: But if thou art never looking back, and art
subduing the flesh with a just and true zeal, and wilt accomplish the rooting
out from thy self the serpentine nature, at length, by the breaking forth of
the divine illumination, thou shall find great grace in these things.

But here is need of great and accurate examination, and the Lord is at all
times both night and day to be called upon with a fervent mind, that he will
bestow wisdom on thee to know thy self, and all thy stains of nature, even the
most hidden, that thou may be able to cure them diligently, to renounce
them, and wholly to dye unto them. For after that the flesh is withered, and
nature dead, the new creature may at last be planted in thee, whose source is
out and from God, and not out and from man, and the admonitions of man, nor out
and from any external ceremonious rite: for it is born of God, who is a spirit,
in our spirit; so also is all the true spiritual circumcision of all things
internal in our Soul, where it is also promised to us, that by the holy Spirit,
the eternal God, the Savior shall be raised up in us out of his own seed, who
shall abolish all enmity, which still lies between God, and the inward man
himself, and will eternally unite us with God, and will bring us to our
Original, which is God himself.

Dearest N. I should indeed writ more of this to thee, for I further desire,
that thou would thy self set too thy hand to the performance of these things,
and that thou would get a living sense in thy heart of all these. For in thy
own self thou will find a true monitor, who will, more rightly then I can,
observe thy defects; neglect him not, but lend thy ear to his accusations, and
then forthwith will thereupon follow certainly, very notable advances. Also the
Lord, who hears the desires of all who persevere, will not reject thy prayers
and tears, but to all whatsoever thy heart, pressed down with straights, and
griefs, proposed to its self, he will behold with merciful eyes, and succor
thee with a strong hand. And if sometimes he may seem plainly to have deserted
thee, nor that he will ever hear thy prayers, then do thou fully believe, that
at this very time he is nighest unto thee, that he may succor thee with his
help: for by how much the more miserable, the more anxious, and the more
deserted any one is, so much the nearer is God to him, the helping of whom he
then most speedily performs, when no comfort, nor help is found [unto or] for
our desires. And this is the true knot of all piety. The Lord grant, in his own
time, that thou may truly apprehend this in thy own self. For the grace, and
word, and promises of God do abide in man in a living sense, nor can it be
expressed in words, how the very thing it self properly is: and although all
writings may give testimony of this word, and of this grace, yet are not they
properly that very word, and the very Salvation of God, for the virtue and
operation of these ought to be livingly expressed in us. The Lord be mindful of
us all thorough his mercy!

EPIST. XV. How Youth is to be supported during its weakness.
To F. S.
DEarest F. We hope it will so be, that the Lord will direct all to the best
end, and will stretch forth his helping hand to that young man to make his
voluntary entrance, that he may be brought to a greater firmness, seeing that
he is not yet exercised in the ways of the Lord, and he still flourishes in
his Youth. But the hand of the Lord is liberal toward young and old, and is
stretched forth with plenty of grace, where, and whenever he shall please.

Therefore the Lord (I hope) will remember this weak one, and will hear his
daily complaint, and in his time will help him; for when all the creatures
sail, and all remedies vanish away, and there is no other deliverer found or
invented, then will God alone, of necessity, present himself as a Deliverer:
For the Lord will look back upon all such, whose hearts he has of purpose put
in the winepress of tribulations, that being left nakedly poor of all evils, so
as they appear dried up, yet after they shall thus be subjected to his
judgments, they shall not want retribution, but shall abound in his blessing by
the communion of the blood of Christ poured forth, and of his eternally
prevailing merits, and of the reconciliation made betwixt God his father, and
our miserable humane nature.

It would be profitable for him, if he should remain with thee, all the winter,
that so he might enjoy a further introduttion, and should learn more firmly to
set his feet in the ways of the Lord now when he is yet of an infirm age, and
is more infirm in zeal: for it is our duty to lend a hand to the weak, and to
be a prop to them, as it was done for us, in our youth: although I my self have
not extended my age very much: yet have the bonds of death bowed me down under
the judgment of the Lord, in the prosecution of my misery with continued
terrors: The Lord have pity on me, and graciously discover to me his
countenance shining with the light of grace, and so enlighten the darkness of
my heart!

EPIST. XVI. A fair admonition to his Cousin German; wherein he very greatly
demonstrates a most tender care of his Soul, hitherto had with solicitousness.
To M. D. W.
MOst beloved Cousin, I was altogether obliged to write, in what state our
affairs are, for though hitherto for some good space of time, we have been
somewhat separated as to bodily presence, yet I am assured in the Lord, that we
were so much the more diligently excited to a mutual care, by an inward
presence of mind. The Lord knows, how mindful I am of thee, and how much care
I have for thee in the midst of my most sad conversation, filled with all
griefs, and in my constant combat. But I trust in the eternal God, and his
providence, that he will with stretched out arms lead and keep us all under his
own discipline.

Now because I have crept thorough many dangers of mind, how great the power of
corrupted nature is, is very plainly manifested in me, by and thorough the
power of God; though that also is come to pass by and thorough innumerable
anxieties, in all which yet, the glory of God every where reveals it self,
upon which account I am deeply concerned with a most vehement sollicitousness
for those who are my fellow sufferers in these straights, to whom the
Omnipotent God will reach out his hand, and seasonably set before their eyes
the virtue of his grace, which lies hid under those sufferings, that at last
the man may be stirred up to the desire of the true cross of Christ our Lord,
in which all the treasures of divine grace are known in their highest beauty,
without which no man can be set free from out of the chains of his nature.

And here indeed there is need of great caution, and we must diligently adhere
to the Lord both day and night; for often times nature clothed with the
outward show of good, presents her self to us, but if she be tumbled down into
death, then will her fruits be at length truly made known, and the power of God
will shine forth so much the more gloriously. The Lord of his mercy be mindful
of us all, that we may wisely order our conversation, and the forces of all our
enemies being all overcome and broken, we may at length arrive truly at the
true brightness of God. For the wall of separation hindering that clarity, is
great, which it behooveth with unwearied labor to diminish thorough the
benefit of the cross, and with daily torture of mind to destroy.

Yet the eternal and merciful Lord pierces thorough all darkness as does the
Sun, and so refreshes those that are in an agony, with their pains, that his
grace and glory never shine forth more clearly, then from under sufferings;
although whilst we yet remain subject to vanities, and are still captives to
creatures, that claritude is still very much diminished; for so long as we yet
are busied about images, the efficacy of truth (which seeing it is to be
without any image, cannot then be united to them) is very wonderfully hindered.
For God is but one only, and to know him from the very bottom of our hearts, is
all the skill, and is such as is never learned in an undisturbed life.

Dearest Cousin, I do open to thee as it were the interior bosom of my mind,
showing, whither all my labor tends, and at what mark all my whole being,
and all my words and thoughts do aim at with grief, and which I continually,
with tears of heart, pour forth before my God, and do with hope, account the
Lord will not reject me poor wretch, but chastise in his way, and will bless
with increase my labor after the decease of my nature. My Cousin, as to what
concerns those friends who have changed their dwelling, their outward condition
is as yet tolerable, as also the outward conversation both of the Mother, and
of them also is full of piety, even as formerly: But if we look further, even
to the utmost power of nature, and to the very bottom of the Soul, about these,
the business have not so well succeeded, even as neither can these be attributed
to them all in common, nor are they wont to be given, or received by words, and
admonitions. To the Lord therefore I commit them, who in his own time, and
according to his own good pleasure will advance those persons higher. For they
earnestly listen, and are delighted with my present discourses: but how
pleasant they be to them even in their very Souls, the Lord knows, for I do
not apprehend that their progress forwards is yet so great: and perhaps, the
Lord will yet for some time keep them so.

But for my part, I order my conversation, for the most part, with my self
only, because many discourses and admonitions to others, do very much disturb
me: when yet all concerns, as well inward as outward, I freely would so deliver
up and oblige to the Lord, that I would think, say, or do nothing but to the
Lord alone; yet how much difficulty I shall every where find in all these, the
Lord himself knows.

Yet he who is faithful, is never left destitute of power, as most miserable I
do find thorough the mercy of God, who helps my arm to fight.

As to our other familiar she-friend, she receives all with her whole heart,
and a willing mind, whither they concern the understanding, or the will: but
because of that sollicitous care wherewith she is involved in outward things
not a few, as also because of her trade, the true fruit cannot yet spring forth
from the true root. But the Lord who is faithful, administreth, as I perceive,
all means for the removing away by diverse sufferings, these hindrances, and of
bringing forth this fruit with deep pangs, so that I hope, at length, that the
death of nature will follow in the end. The Lord look in mercy upon her, as
likewise on us all, that in his time, and according to his good pleasure we may
come to the true essence of divine clarity, and that we all being delivered out
of the hand of our enemies, may serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, now and for ever incessantly, in
inaccessible clarity, Amen. In the year 1552.

EPIST. XVII. A wholesome Admonition, in what steps the progress of the Just
does consist, with a Conclusion concerning Esau and Jacob.
To J. W.
My John,
I Heartily wish that all thy affairs may have good success. Having an occasion
thus offering it self, I was willing to write these lines unto thee, that by
the benefit of them, we may be promoted to continued progresses in the Lord.
For I hope thorough the grace of God, that thou may daily go forward in that
truth, and in the true Circumcision of thy heart, and not in the acquisition of
many Sciences, and of diverse Knowledges, wherein the greatest part of our time
is consumed, and not upon that, for the sake of which yet, life is given unto
us, viz. that we may know God. But God cannot be truly known by science, but by
finding him in our selves, so, as that which we know of God is found and
expressed in us, and in our Soul, so that we our selves are not far distant
from that which we acknowledge for good, but are united with it, not in or by
opinion, but in very deed and truth. But these things can never be fully
accomplished, unless first we dye to all those which we our selves have and
possess in our selves, which is that that is called the old man, who very
subtly exercises his dominion in man, according to the variety of men's
conditions. If the flesh be still gross, also its fruits, and vices are gross.
Now if any one will supplant his external vices, there is another more subtle
thing dwells in man, which he had never before known, because it formerly did
stick to him in a grosser substance. And seeing that the Scripture also does
sufficiently propose it, we are diligently to labor according to that
Scripture, because it is that which is ordained of the Lord for this end.
Having therefore received of the Lord sufficient knowledge concerning these
things, let us be diligent in our endeavors; for little knowledge is necessary
thereunto, if so be the heart it self be but prepared, which incessantly, both
day and night called upon the Lord, with intimate desire aspiring to a union,
so that no creature can any more move it against the Lord, and turn it away
from him.

May the Lord give unto his, mercy, and be a help to our misery, in which we
being yet bound in the darkness and chains of death, are still captive. My
John, I communicate my heart to thee in my letters, even as I enough know that
thou also seek my prosperity so that let us both together seek the Lord
being perhaps not far distant in the Lord, one from another. Presently after
thy departure, it was decreed by the Senate that E. and W. do leave their
dwellings, so that they must be gone from hence. The Lord bestow on them his
grace and mercy, that they learn to bear these things in true patience, even
from their own brethren, and to accept from the Lord that cross, for their own
advancement, and for the rejection of all other things, and that they may
resign up all to the Lord, and turn off from them, their brotherly Love. For
Esau always remained the brother of Jacob: but that Jacob received the
blessing, was done of grace, according to the election of God, in which indeed
Jacob did stand, but yet without boasting, and without pride, for it behooved
him always to bow himself before Esau, in sufferings, without murmuring. And
although Esau behaved himself with a very proud carriage toward his brother,
yet the blessing was continued to Jacob, though Esau endeavored to snatch it
from him again by persecution. For Jacob lived not only in show, but in truth,
when he dwelt in tents: On the contrary Esau cared only for all outward things
by laboring and hunting. The Lord grant, that we may so rightly immitate the
birth of Esau, that Jacob may at length come forth: for the birthright was due
to Esau, but for this end only, that Jacob should be brought forth. The Lord
have mercy on us.

NB. The birth of Esau, signifies the birth out of works under the Law, but the
birth of Jacob signifies that that is of faith under grace.

EPIST. XVIII. Being a most excellent admonition concerning the Education of
Youth: together with that wide difference, wherein the old Philosophers are far
distant from Christians.
To Dr. J. Velsius.
DEarest Dr. That my young Nephews have succeeded well in your house was to me
altogether grateful and most cordially acceptable, for I know that you will
take care of their affairs by a diligent inspection, for the sake of that
relation that is between us, whereby these growing twigs may be advanced in
their true increase; for they stand greatly in need of a prudent overseer, till
by their own experience in the future access of age, they also do attain unto
prudence. The Lord grant to them his grace, that they may well place their time
as well in studies, as in piety, in which all consists, seeing that the Lord
ought to be the end of all studyes. To this mark therefore are they to aim, and
to seek the glory of God, and not their own, nor are they to fall into
themselves.

Also I hope that my Uncle will deliver them to you with all advice unto
obedience, and subjection, and I hope that they will persevere in the fear of
the Lord according to the capacity of their age: But we conside in you, that
you will not be wanting to them in the best counsels, especially that they may
lead a Godly, and sober life, and that they may be turned away from all
youthful appetites, and from such errors as break forth at such an age;
moreover that if they commit any thing against the Lord according to their
slender wit, they may in time be brought to the observation of their
conscience, by the benefit of which they being more diligently restrained, may
always abhor to sin. My D. that I thus write, nothing but my inclination
toward my Nephews causes it, for else I am aware, that you will educate them
prudently, and in the fear of the Lord wherefore pardon the liberty I take,
that I blush not to propose somewhat like thereto, inasmuch as that what I do,
is with an eye to that zeal wherewith we are both heated to find out the ways
of the Lord, when as I apprehend us to be both alike, and to have altogether
the same inclination of heart mutually one toward the other. The Lord help us
yet more and more in love, as far as pleases him, so that we may but be found
in a continual progression thorough his grace, least our time be found to prove
empty and void of fruit before the Lord, but that we may always proceed from
righteousness to righteousness. Even also I wish the same to my Nephews, that
forthwith, at the very beginning, some agreeable distinction of Religion may be
instilled into them, that they may learn to discern all things with judgment,
and not easily to take up their rest in outward means, one only excepted, viz.
Jesus Christ as expressed in his true obedience and finished in his Soul even
unto the death of the cross. He is set before us for an example, as our only
scope, by the benefit of which we may in true illumination come to the eternal
mercy of God. It will be therefore very profitable for them to be led as it
were by the hand unto this scope, and that they may learn radically to satisfy
their own consciences, exercising themselves in them, from their tender years,
and to have no confidence in any other means set or contributed out of
themselves. And although they should find some virtue in themselves, such as it
wont to be found in the serious studyes of some of the heathen, such as are
Temperance, Long-suffering, meekness, rigor and severity of discipline, or any
other, that may be introduced into our minds by sedulity, and natural
discretion; yet are not all these that very thing, which is proposed to us in
the image of Jesus Christ: For their aim was no other then to temperate and
govern their bodies under the discipline of honesty, and to keep them in due
order by the moderation of Nature: but in Christ a certain kind of life is
produced, which consists not in nature, but above nature, and unto which the
Wise Gentiles could never arrive, because they were led only by the light of
nature, in which God does only so far operate, and manifest himself, as far as
he can be know out of himself from his creatures, which also has its defects
and limitations, and may be changed: which things are such as are not in God,
because he remains eternally, and abides glorified in his own subsistence and
essence for ever and ever.

Now how much they have written concerning the knowledge of God which is in
Man, and which they have in diverse places attributed to the mind, that arises
not from elsewhere, then from the ingenious principles of the purer wisdom,
a^far forth as they were able to comprehend of it in their more elevated
reason: But they had no light and virtue of a certain real and essential
immutation, as it were in its own self, as being that which manifests it self
far beyond science, and that by this way, our most high God expresses, and
gives forth himself not only notionally, but also essentially in all who
receive him, with a superabundance of those graces, which in his Son he pours
forth upon us; so that our labor, diligence, and studys are plainly useless to
this matter, but the grace of God alone produces this supernatural life, and
new creature in man; the natural man, all this while, together with all his old
age, being utterly silent and condemned, yea dead. Therefore no active power,
nor any life can remain extant in us; for if any such thing shows forth it
self in us, then in truth, we are not dead to our selves, but we yet live in
our own proper work, neglecting the promise and grace which has appeared in
Christ. I do not therefore say thus, because I can contemn and reject that same
honest and tried life of the Heathen: for I wish that we all could subject our
life to such a discipline, and that we could by far outstrip them! There are
not therefore to be deprived of their praise, but rather we ought more commonly
to be filled with shame, seeing that we will boast of a greater grace from the
Lord, and yet are not come to that state of virtue, which was in the heathen,
but we are hurried too and again in all confusion of carnal lusts.

The Lord correct us in his mercy, and help us all seriously to endeavor to
insist on the best ways, even as also I heartily pray in the behalf of those my
Nephews that they being lead thorough their whole youthful age, in the ways of
the Lord, may subject themselves to discipline, and apply the bridle to their
carnal inclinations, even from their tender youth, satisfying their
consciences, and the testimony of a most close examination made before God and
their own Souls; that they may be further advanced by the Lord, if it shall so
please him, to that eminent grace, and expression of his most high glory in the
life of the spirit, which being in a flourishing condition, all things past do
vanish away together with their glory, that all may be renewed by the first
fruits of Christ, and the powerful hand of God, manifested in the Resurrection
of the Lord.

Now therefore I trust in the Lord, that he will effect all things well, and
direct them unto the best end: yet let us employ all the diligence we have,
lest being conquered by sin, we become subjected to our flesh, and may my
Nephews exercise themselves, the most they can, in those endeavors, that they
may learn to repress their youthful and inordinate affections and appetites,
which will without doubt spring up in them at their own season. The Lord
seasonably grant to them to own the witness of their conscience against all
these, that being kept safe from them all, they may never consent to any
depraved inclination.

EPIST. XIX. That there is a certain especial difference between the exalted
rational Zeal, and the Zeal that is pure and Christian.
To the same Person.
My Dr,
I Have recommended thy case and purpose to the Lord, who can safely keep us
all by his Grace, and show to us our errors: for though we are for that purpose
subjected to sufferings, yet nothing is more wholesome for us than a discovery of
our spots and defects, which is not wont to be done without our indignation and
opposition. But if the Spirit of Christ must restore and enliven us all, then
plainly must there be no place left in us for bitterness of spirit against any
one: For this is alone the Doctrine of Christ: Learn of me for I am meek, and
humble in heart. For all hearts that are puffed up, are in his time to be
brought low, even as alas we find it in many. The Lord keep us most miserable
worms, for I never am frighted with greater horror than when behold my self.
The natural man scratcheth to himself by appropriating to him self all things
whatsoever God bestows upon him out of free grace, so that all thing also which
are in themselves pure, by this appropriation, become as it were infected with
poison: Now if Nature were deadned, and the understanding purified then indeed
such usages of Gods gifts would not be so multiplied. But now that evi^ which
we call [I] is so great, and our corrupt Nature, through its own self-pleasing,
is so fallen and sunk into its own self, that we wait not for the time of trials
with some difficulties, and rest^^int, and prayer, together with a hope (...)
the promises of God to be fulfilled in a fit season, as it has been foretold
by the Lord. The Lord be mindful of wretched me that write thus, and be helpful
to thee, according to his own, and not according to my will. I also very
earnestly entreat thee, that thou take not in bad part this my freedom in
writing to thee; for my mind never desisteth from having a kindness for thee.
But high pride of heart, and a contemning esteem of our Neighbor, as also the
doing him injury, never is allowed a place in the Christian State, but rather
that which has a fair show of some sort of Zeal that is natural, mixed with
Mosaical rigor. For nothing has appeared in Christ, but mere sufferings and
death, silence and patience even to the Cross, upon which even to the last gasp
of his life he signalized his obedience, in which he was subjected to his
Father withour murmuring; also that his Majesty of his eternal Godhead he did
not take up again, as he might have done, but rather bore in himself humanity,
and imbecility, and abiding in hu^^^ty, and contempt even to the very death, he
was crowned with Victory. For if the external assaults of his enemies could
have moved the internal nature of his eternal birth, then indeed that which is
immovable, could have been moved by some outward violence, even as alas, it
most commonly happneth to us, that our whole humanity is shocked inwardly and
outwardly, when yet we do think it to be the zeal of the Lord. But before we
can come to the purity of these motions, as it manifested it self in Christ,
against them who dishonored God and profaned his Temple, certainly there are
many things to be eradicated out of our fleshly part, if we would be thought to
be wholly burning in zeal of spirit. But, as I hope, the Lord will, in his
time, manifest these things to us more clearly: for when we are grown old, we
must carry so no things with great pains, which whils^ youth flour sheth with a
flaming zeal we cannot own and undertake: Because all that is talked of death
and dying to young persons, they cannot in good truth come to them, seeing that
their bones and marrow are always full of all fleshliness with that fervent
vigor, together with a full strength of the growing faculty, and voluptuous
tendency, which for the sake of its own power and the glory of self-will, is
wont to oppose it self to God.

But then if any one proceed further, and draws forth all his strength even
unto the top of all his age, then comes decreasing, that we are unwillingly
lead into the will of God, by a manifest other process; and then those
judgments seem to hang over us, which once we decreed to others, and that
youthful life free and wanton, swelling with zeal, is now by the just judment
of God, under the decreasings of old age, condemned to death; but then at
length succeeds understanding and discretion, together with continual
sufferings in the ways of the Lord even unto our death, and the proper sentence
pronounced to us: for just as all that ought to dye, that is possessed of life,
also is that matter here. For God alone, if he be truly in us, is conjoined
with death, but not with our life; because no flesh, how pure so ever it be,
can abide in his sight. For whatever shined forth externally in Christ, even
that by a like death, must be done inwardly in us, if so be we are willing in
the resurrection to be incorporated into a communion of his glory. Otherwise we
stick only but in the flesh of Christ (though glorious) contemplating alone the
life of Christ's humanity not yet glorified, but we hinder the growth of that
fruit which through the death of Christ in the resurrection by the supernatural
birth and a new life is poured forth into us with eternal grace. The Lord open
my mind to you, for here I acknowledge my understanding to be too weak and
slender.

EPIST. XX. An acknowledgment concerning the disputation held at Francfort
between John Calvin, and Justus Velsius, of the power of Man, or of free will.
To A. G.
THe Grace of our Lord, and his mercy be upon thee, and on all those who fear
the Lord and seek his truth.

Most beloved A. concerning what thou did write to me, about that dispute
held at Franckfort betwixt Velsius and Calvin, my opinion is, That Velsius did
stumble therein, whilst he attributed too much to the power of man, for humane
power is judged and condemned by the Lord, if it be before a man is made
partaker of the divine birth, because what is new born is of God, and not of
man, it is eternal and immortal, even as he is who begat it. But on the
contrary Calvin failed in that point wherein he rejected all the powers of man
universally, which indeed I allow to be true, unless that I also judge that
that knowledge which lies hid in man, and convinces him, does yet partake of
reason and humane power, although the Lord does afterward offer to the heart
the light of the Gospel, and the understanding of a man submits it self to
that: But for all that he is not yet one with the light, for no man receives
this light, but he in whom the reason and strength of man are on the Cross
become dead with Christ; now such a one thence-forward, because of the
communion he has received with the death of Christ, is also again raised up by
the same Spirit of Christ, so as the Spirit of Christ thence-forward becomes
his life, his own reason and all his own powers abiding in death, nor is there
a Soul living in him, but by the virtue of God: and thus the man comes to
renounce all his own strength, and all his own righteousness in the sight of
God, and becomes conformed to the righteousness of God in himself, which the
natural man never knows, nor can arrive thereat. Therefore because the
Judgment of Calvin reaches not so far, and he himself is not yet dead to his
own reason and strength, he indeed bore witness against his own self, because
that which in the Epistle to the Romans is demonstrated to be death, by the
Gospel ( Romans 8.10, 11. and 6.5, 6.) keeps him in life; the light of the Gospel
serving him for that purpose, even to his own proper commodity. For the Gospel
was not divulged till after the Resurrection of Christ. And then at length
Christ the Son of God was acknowledged to be in us, otherwise our
acknowledgement was not concerned, but only about the person of Christ
according to the flesh, from whence it is apparent, that we our selves are
still carnal, and though we be not plainly like to the ruder part of the World,
and do account our selves for imitators of Christ who have left all, yet still
we are to be made liker unto Christ, and to be planted into his death.
Furthermore, I here further acknowledge, that no man by the strength of Nature,
derived from Adam, can ever attain unto the eternal mercy of God. That study
indeed, and that labor by which such a man in his solicitous endeavors is
tired our, before he can arrive at the grace of Christ, I acknowledge for
humane, and that it is subject to the Law; but that righteousness, which one
acquireth by this study, is not as yet that righteousness which is prevalent in
Gods sight, for this is, at last, after the Law, constituted in us by Christ.
First therefore a man must labor under the rigor of the Law, even to the
highest perfection of himself, and to the greatest innocence he possibly can;
yet when all this is done, the Soul is to feel, at length, the judgment of God,
and seeing it cannot possibly abide therein, it falls manifestly down into
death, and then at length, is it by Christ raised again into the life of the
Spirit.

But now the acknowledgment of the righteousness of God, in common, is by the
Church, which is nearer to us, proposed in such a manner as this; That God
thorough and by Christ crecteth salvation merely without any addition of works:
which I grant: But because these, under the law, obtained no righteousness by
the benefit of Works, there being put no study or rigor, therefore they also
cannot for Christ; sake renounce, nor forsake their goods, seeing as yet they
had gained none. For they would have them renounce, what they have not, but in
the interim, they suffer loss also in that which they have not yet arrived at.
That therefore which they say, is true, but it is not rightly applied by them,
as all the Scripture does demonstrate, that it is by their own faults, that
they come not to the truth. Nevertheless I am unwilling to deny unto them all
grace for their portion and according to the measure of their gifts (seeing
that they study with all their might for Christ, and by the help of the
Scripture do hear somewhat of him) provided they be faithful in what they
acknowledge, and that to the utmost. He that neglects this, is condemned by his
own proper judgment.

EPIST. XXI. The difference between Repentance and Regeneration, in relation to
a little book of Diederick Phillips, which was printed concerning the New
Creature.
To. J. W.
DEarest John, that acknowledgment of Diederick Phillips concerning the New
Creature, I do partly own for truth, if it be not stretched further then it
reaches, viz. that it can, according to the testimony of Scripture, lead to
Repentance, and to lead a pious life. But if that Repentance, and life so
corrected thereby, he would have to be put for the New Creature, whilst yet the
Conscience is still under the burden of sins, then is it erroneous; for whilst
that no death has as yet happened, and still sin lies so powerfully in the
whole man, that by means of an accusation it often drives the soul into
sadness, the Soul is yet under the Law, for by the Law in our consciences we
are convinced of sin. And though a man may force into silence that accusation,
and that burden of sin that tormenteth our conscience, and that by
Scripturepromises, and so comfort himself, yet it must be confessed, that then
he still abides in the state of the old Man, and is not yet arrived at the
death of it. For the New Creature is not subject to sin, therefore also no
accusation of the Law in the Conscience can touch it, for then a man lives
wholly under grace, and his mind stands in no need to be sustained by the
external comforts of the Scriptures, or also by the absolution from sins,
according to the testimony of Scripture, it should bring forth to him a greater
confidence; for his life is in the Spirit, and consists under the Law of the
grace of God: wherefore also the conscience in its purity enjoys the highest
peace, remaining sealed by the Holy Ghost: but in them who are still under
conscience, the Law of sin still exercises its power, and conscience does
still accuse perpetually for some sins, so that it hence appears openly, that
such are not yet dead to the Law, because the accusation of the Law does still
remain in its power, so long as by the transgression of the Law somewhat is
committed against conscience: and though we will not confess, that we are under
the Law, or under the accusation thereof (notwithstanding, that there can be no
accusation, but by virtue of the Law still reigning here or there) yet is the
thing manifest by conscience its self, which thorough an accusation for sin,
renders us guilty. If therefore we could stand in purity by the blood of
Christ, according to the inward man, then indeed the Law by its virtue, which
it has in the Conscience thorough sin, durst not so assault the Soul of a man,
as that he must seek comfort out of the Scriptures, and to be reconciled with
God, and to be confirmed by a new promise of grace; because grace in the
regenerated has taken most deep root according to its own true nature, so that
such have certainly no need to seek out some remedy out of their own selves.
Which whilst others do, they do in this very point testify that they have not
attained to that of which they boasted, and which they, by the testimonies, of
the Scriptures, attributed to themselves, in the very truth, and according to
the proper essence of the thing. For the old man, who always by force usurpeth
the empire in man with transgression (which indeed is termed a tripping, and is
made light of, yet nevertheless in the sight of God, it can never be tolerated
in the new man, without real mortification) alleges a contrary testimony,
viz. that we yet live the life of the old man, nor as yet are disposed unto
death, because that no sin can be committed against our wills, and without
pleasure or delight. Hence therefore is it manifest, that we still are kept in
the life of the old man, and are not yet arrived at the new life: for a man
comes not to the death of natural strength, in his carnal life, and with the
complacency of proper will, or by the study of proper righteousness and
austerity, but against its own will, viz. it is to be subjected on the cross,
to the obedience of God, by the means of pouring forth of the blood of Christ
Jesus our Lord; into whose communion we are taken by a like death, according to
the inward man, so that on the cross we wholly put off our natural life which
we had in the flesh, being buried with Christ, and afterward raised up again
into another supernatural life: so as the power of the Law, which being as yet
not perfectly killed, lurketh in the members of our natural body, is wholly
enervated in the mind and Soul, and in the whole humanity, having utterly lost
all right in and upon the life of man: For a man is not excited into such a
life, ove^ which the jurisdsction of the Law can domineer with a deadly
accusation, but when it has fully finished this judgment in man by this death,
the man also, by the benefit of the same death, is altogether freed from that
Law.

EPIST. XXII. Being a fundamental Relation, in what properly consists the
Oeconomical Government of the Family of Love.
To the same person.
MY John, I received thy letters together with the books, and having somewhat
perused them, I gained the understanding of the greater part of the opinion,
yet I shall keep the Books till thou come. But the opinion of the Writer is
contrary to my mind, because it consists in the knowledge only of a seeming
divine truth, and not in an essentia^ truth of God. And this is my opinion
seeing no man can be more instructed according to this way, than the Writer
himself of these Books. If I may understand his fundamentals from his Books, it
cannot possibly be, that any of those who are inferior to him, can more
happily explain the thing to me. Yet I am willing, that thou should enquire
how they carry themselves in their conversation, and that thou would as
exactly and as possibly thou can, find out also the rest of their state or
condition, for when thou shall come hither, I shall more fully discover to thee
my opinion concerning those Writings. Now I only ask pardon, seeing that
matters are thus, the cause whereof, if it shall please the Lord, I shall tell
thee, at thy coming. May the merciful and faithful God have mercy on them and
us, that in an acknowledgement of their darkness, they may be led by the Lord
in the straight way unto his essential truth, before which the natural Reason
which inordinately appropriateth God to it self, may utterly perish: whereby I
fear they are still too much bound, though they think themselves clearly set
free therefrom. For all that for which they labor and contend, and which they
account their utmost aim, as far as I can imagine, must yet be judged of God;
for that which reason endeavors to effect with them by knowing, all that,
must be God himself, so that nothing but God can acknowledge himself in us; we
in the mean time, being by a real death of body and soul, as to our creaturely
part, wholly laid aside: and then that life, which ought to be in us, can be
nothing else but Christ, as Paul says likewise, so that after we are buried by
death, we are no more raised up again into Nature, but into the Spirit; For
nature remains condemned upon the Cross, and being once dead, is not again
revived: Now I judge that nature in these people is still egregiously, and in
very deed, and especially alive; although they may think, that they are already
purified, because that they persuade themselves, through their ignorance and
blindness, that they have already plainly conquered that combat of an accusing
conscience. I write all this to thee with the greatest brevity, because thou
did demand my opinion, but when (God permitting) thou shall come thy self, we
will talk more concerning them. My Opinion therefore (as I said) is contrary to
these Writings, and my mind can no ways assent unto them. For that aim (which
the Writer himself calls the Intellect of God) in my sense is indeed nothing
else, than that they would have Nature, as yet not deadned, to become a
propriety to themselves, when indeed Nature before it be dead cannot be
otherwise in it self: for in it the highest death consists. True indeed that
by reading I find somewhat concerning Death, and of the abnegation of the
reason, and the discretion of Nature, so as that the Author would have all
humane wisdom and knowledge overturned, before we can come to the truth of God:
yet nevertheless the Soul of a Man does remain proper to him, yea though he
renounceeth his intellect, so that in this very point the Writer erreth, in
which he taxes others, and in truth far more vilely, seeing that he thereby
would come to a greater knowledge, but especially that he, by the means of his
temerity, would arrive at that, which others seek by means of worship and
ceremonies. For these, from a vow, do love their body, goods, wife and
children, that they may possess the inheritance of heaven: but they do forsake
their natural and humane wisdom and reason, that they may obtain something
that is better, viz. the understanding of God, and yet both of them are still
captivated in that, that their Ipseity or Iness still remains proper to them,
although to some more miserably then to others. Now it is impossible that they
should, this way, arrive at the truth of God, and can possibly be planted into
liberty, as in the sight God* because that they are not lead in tha^ true, and
as it were that essential death* to be found in both Soul and Body, bu^ are
only instructed by knowing (though for this very reason they reject others
(...) of a certain death that is knowable to the humane wisdom. And because a^
to their own strength in which they live they dye not in body and soul, being
wholly condemned before God, henc^ it is that they usurp to themselves, as
their propriety, that intellect of God, that is that they themselves might by
the benefit of that thing conserve life which properly ought to be the
condemning sentence, and the death of their ipseity. For if the Truth of God
should enter into them in and by a certain essential state, it would be
impossible, that a man could endure one spark thereof, without being melted
quite down. Therefore we must dye, not only as to our wisdom in the highest
degree, but as to our own proper Salvation, that God alone may be our Wisdom,
life, and Salvation. This done our ipseity is condemned before God, and thrust
down into a death (according to the flesh) which is as it were essential,
whence nothing can again bud forth, either in respect of God, or of the
Creature, so that whatsoever had bin ours, ought to be altogether made subject
to its death, judgment, and sentence of condemnation. That same small last
Chapter is contrary to that writing, inasmuch as it determines, that sometime
calm seasons may be gained, even according to the flesh (for so I transfer it,
even as the writing its self speaks) so as they then may esteem themselves
pure, because they who are purified, know how to apply all things to a true
use. Which I also affirm, but in its own meaning, but that at which this
writing aims, is contrary to my mind: for the liberty of Christ belongs to
the inward man, and does only affect the mind unto eternal salvation in Divine
Truth, but the flesh is condemned, and suppressed and bound down into death, so
as that no man can then rightly use the Creatures of God, but with grief and
misery, because that in all these a man may behold his own death, in which
formerly he had thought to have found life; and yet with these very things he
is well contented, acknowledging this divine judgment for truth, and so remains
yielded up into death. But the Inward man is then conversant in eternal joy,
being signed or sealed by the Spirit of God.

I have wrote this in haste, that I might satisfy thy desire, according to the
testimony of my mind. The Lord have mercy on them, on us all, and pluck us
quickly out of our errors. Alas! who am I, a miserable wretch who thus writes?
I beg Grace of the Lord, for without his Grace I shall never be advanced, nor
abide in him.

EPIST. XXIII. A further consideration concerning the opinion of H. N.
To his brother A. W.
DEarest Brother, thou may read over this small Treatise, and send it back
again to me, because I must treat something thereof with N. that I may oppose
him somewhat about those things which he accounts for true; for that which he
makes his scope is not pleasing to me, which they call, the Intellect of God,
in which both heaven and earth are indeed locally moved, and every creature
vanishes out of its condition or state; and yet in the same mystery and
inheritance they conclude nature to be left alive; whereas notwithstanding
Nature cannot in and by its life arrive at that pass, but only and alone by the
benefit of its death introduced into it, by Christ our Lord and Savior, and
that in so much verity, that Nature appears no more with its own proper life,
but remains eternally cast off with the death and curse thereof. But that
Nature which they call purged, and dead to its reason, in my opinion, does
indeed only depend on principles of understanding and science, but not on Truth
it self, for hitherto it has not approached to the essence it self, nor is
united therewith, for though Reason lays aside its natural discretion, that
thereby it may be nearer to the divine intellect; yet for all that, the
intellect is not yet then made one with the Essence, but is rather contrary to
it, and as it were, an enemy to Truth, seeing that that spiritualized Nature
hides it self under the show of intellect, but not of essence and is in that
still entertained. Who shall deliver a man from these intricacies? The Lord
have mercy on us an^ My Brother, I therefore write thus, that I may also
discover to thee my opinion for that man is endowed with no sma^^
understanding: yet he is deeply seduced and is deeply wise, but withal he is
deeply to be disputed with. The Lord keep us humble in the Truth, that that
which belongs to death, may be also thrown off into death, but let him reign
and rule to all eternity.

EPIST. XXIV. Being a brief argument, that the foundation of the family of Love
is laid and built upon carnal liberty.
To the same person.
I W. was here, and has utterly and cordially renounced the thing its self,
because he had experienced and found from their presence, that they were
infected with the venom of carnal liberty, and that all issued out of that
fountain. Also I restored to him the books, if happily they might be willing to
have them restored again to them; he also was most fully satisfied, admiring
that so sublime an understanding was subject to errors, for he confessed that
my opinion was, beyond all doubt, true, seeing that a man is always to be
subjected to divine terrors. But that such elevated spirits do fall into
errors, is from thence, that they too much covet their proper security, whence
at length springs up boasting, and pride, and then, after that, a fall. The
Lord preserve us all from evil, according to his great mercy, that seeing it is
of grace that we are saved, so also in grace are we conserved, and not thorough
our own selves.

EPIST. XXV. Concerning the Opinion of Plato.
To the same person.
MY brother, I send thee back the little book concerning Plato, which when I
had read, I found just so as thou writest: For the falling of these (who call
themselves the family of Love) is subtle, though in that small tract they are
mightily defended, all things being interpreted for the better, yet the excuse
relisheth not well with me, except I should say that by their ultimate scope,
to which they think they shall come, by the means of Love, their wisdom is
shameful, as in them, so also in us, yet with this distinction: for what in
them is righteousness, truth, and wisdom, must be to us unrighteousness,
falsness, and foolishness; if so be, that glory to the Lord, must spring up
thorough us: all which yet they are willing to reserve and ascribe to
themselves, as also did the Jews, though in a more excellent degree. Now it
behooveth a Christian to dye as to them both, and by the Lord to be condemned
to death, viz. as to wisdom and righteousness. Moreover, may the Lord also
freely bestow on us his grace, according to his most holy will.

EPIST. XXVI. A Christian consideration concerning the Resurrection.
To the same person.
DEarest brother, we will beg of the Lord, that he may have mercy on us, and
that he will lead us into the power of the Resurrection, every one according to
the measure of his illumination, by the quickening power of his spirit, by the
benefit of whom all seeds do put forth their faculties in growing. For the
natural life, faculty, understanding, wisdom, and sense do all tend to death in
time, and though a man deluded by some fair show, may imagine to himself an
eternal permanency of these things, yet when the sun is risen to a burning
strength, all these will dry up, or wither; nor is it possible for them to
consist or abide the just judgment of God, as being that which melts all
down: yea furthermore the very discretion it self of the soul must dye
likewise, as far as the natural man studyeth to preserve it, if that that man,
according to the testimony of his conscience, is willing to satisfy the Law,
least that soul do tumble down into utter destruction. Now because it is not
the proper disposition of the natural man to lose any thing, but rather with
the top of the life of the Soul, to preserve all things, therefore it is
subjected to the divine judgment, that is, to death: and because he is willing
to conserve life in himself, and in his Soul (now there is life no where but in
God) the soul cannot come at the true nourishment of life, but is to be
deliveral up to death, inasmuch as the natural man properly is death it self
and belongs to death. For they are bound up together into one body, and both,
viz. the body from the soul, and on the other part the soul from the body are
moved together, whether it be to grief, or to joy, yea though it be in the
state of the highest knowledge, unto which the soul, according to the natural
rule of life could possibly ascend. For she cannot be elevated higher in
understanding, unless first as to her knowledge (by which the natural man is
informed by her) she shall dye, so, as that it behooveth both soul and body, as
one man, to dye, after that the spiritual conception is; now out of that
deadned seed, is wont to spring forth a new plant, enriched with divine
fruitfulness, which no death can touch any more, neither according to soul, nor
according to body, because this generation, not of man, but without man, nor
out of his will, but without his will, not with hope, but without all hope,
arriveth at the state of eternity, out of the eternal grace of God, so as that
it is of God, and of life, always abiding, nor is it corruptible, even as also
God is in his own nature. Every thing therefore returns to that, out of which
it first sprung, viz. the natural man, with its perfect body, and in its
sphere, to death without any resurrection at all according to its own proper
nature; and the supernatural man in its perfect sphere, to eternal life,
abiding eternally in God, and yet as a Creature, but glorified in God. He who
comes to this state cannot deny the truth of the thing: but he who partaketh
nothing thereof, also as a natural man utters with truth, that he believes
that there is no resurrection, and although he should confess it, yet even that
confession of the resurrection must dye, because unto the natural man, as such,
there never (even eternally) belonged any resurrection; even as it is
impossible for a seed sown, to come to a perfect death, unless it be wholly
corrupted in its self. If therefore it can be brought to pass, that a man can
give up himself to death, with a hope of receiving forthwith another life, and
as to that state, and according to that rule of his knowledge, wherein he is
dead, a better (for no man can, whilst his present understanding is in being,
attain to another understanding or life, unless the former be first dead) then
indeed there would be no need to proceed to a further death, because it can
only follow that which had been in being before. Now therefore there is here
place for death, when by the benefit of corruption, through the operation of
God, a new plant arises according to the nature of the corruption done, every
thing according to its own kind, as there is example in all creatures, and in
the corruptible propagation of them. So that by how much the more the natural
man affirms that there is no more Resurrection, by so much the more he
confirms it, because he truly is preparing himself for death, and utters
publicly his Testimony concerning his corruption, and his eternal death: for
there is to be no Resurrection of him: and thus also to his, may (together with
the Keepers whom the Pharisees set) a Testimony, concerning the Resurrection of
Christ, be given, which also by this means is mightily confirmed for them, who
stand in the very door to such a state, and do believe it. For when the
Pharisees having sealed up the Sepulcher, had concluded, that they had shut up
a kind of dead Corpse, and to have kept it in that pit of Death, the keepers of
the Sepulcher, who yet were sent to do mischief, became witnesses of his
Resurrection, although it is not believed to this very day, but by his
Disciples (by the Keepers is meant the natural man.) My Brother, this my own
true Epistle will clearly open to thee my mind, and will be to thee, as it
were, the hand of a Dial which thou must well eye and consider, that thou may
likewise write back thy opinion to me, whereby it may appear, wherein we agree,
and wherein we differ, if we are careful concerning this opinion. The Lord look
upon us all in his mercy, and bring us into his own clearness.

EPIST. XXVII. A faithful Admonition concerning the Resurrection of the Flesh.
To his Brother A. W.
MY Brother, Let us go to that man, and let us set before him Death, and Life,
Resurrection, and incorruptibility, all unfolded in their own degree and
nature, and it shall be at his pleasure to make choice of any one of these. For
if he shall choose nature in his life, then in good earnest he must perish in
an eternal death, nor shall he ever arrive at such a life as he seeks: but if
he will approach unto the truth (even as also the thing is) he shall live while
he dies, and he shall acknowledge the true Resurrection, which else is denied
to him. My Brother, May God exhibit to him and to us his mercy according to the
variety of his compassions: nor may he ever leave us in our miseries, but
remember us in this life subject to so many sufferings, in which we cry out
laboriously unto the Lord with many sighs, that by his hand we may be promoted
to incorruptibility; which can by no means be effected, but by our death, which
comprehends in it self the relinquishing of all those things, which we know by
nature, and possess, and love, and in which we live. The power of death shall
be known to all things living, but by so much the more difficulty, by how much
the greater knowledge some have on this earth: for at the time of death, all
things are to be given up to God, and then all things are shut up, and ended in
the truth of God. The Lord unite us with himself, who himself is the beginning
and end; old and new; yet is he one, and immutable, void of all increase in
himself, though in the temporary creature, he is known with increase and
decrease.

As much therefore as we depart from temporariness, so much are we united with
God, in whom there is no time, and in him who is the last and the first, with
an everlasting presence, and in him all Multiplication and Substraction of time
is taken away and made coequal; and all flesh, which is spiritualized, and
which was wont to express it self in time, does melt away before eternity. The
Lord be merciful to us all, as of one flesh, that bidding farewell to that
shadow of time, we may grow in his fear, and let his name be more and more
sanctified over all his creatures in time, and let our life perish and vanish
away like smoke, even as in is evidently done to all flesh: together with
which, all things do tend to corruption, whatever it was that ever sprung from
it, whether they were deeds, or whether there were thoughts. But it is not so
with him, who is godly, for he, with all his works, is preserved, and will grow
and live to Eternity, because every appetite, life, and desire of his, is
nothing else but God, and therefore whatsoever is his, tends to Eternity. As
on the contrary, the desire and scope of a worldly man, is nothing else but
flesh, which alone does also move and direct him: therefore the effect must
perish with the cause, as experience testifies: for the fruit cannot be
otherwise then is the root whence it is sprung. May our eternal Savior Christ
Jesus purify us, that in him we may bring forth true fruit, and according to
the multitude of that his most abundant Grace, which God has richly poured
forth upon us, from the very beginning of the World, we may abide permanent in
him. Amen.

EPIST. XXVIII. Being a most beautiful Admonition, very profitable as unto the
death and departure of Nature.
To a Sick Man.
I Heartily salute thee in the Lord, most dear N. as to what concerns thy
disease, I hope the best of thee, according to the mercy of God, and that his
hand was not in vain lifted up over thee. For he by his Discipline will lead
and conserve us, that no rottenness shall grow in us, but that by his judgment
we be still more and more purified, and cleansed from all impurity of Nature,
bred with us and dead (still lurking in us.) The grace and mercy of the Lord be
with thee, dearest N. in that thy misery and disease, which thou must bear in
the flesh, and may he grant to thee true submission, and yielding up, under his
hand, that with a bowed heart, thou may bear all things in obedience to him,
according to his holy will, concerning thy miserable self; that thou may be
lead in his way, with perseverance to his glory, and be preserved in the death
of thy flesh, whereby the life of the spirit may from day to day, more and more
increase in thee, and be manifested in the heart of thy dying body.

Moreover, I beg of the Lord, that he would strengthen thy Limbs for his
service, so that if they become deficient as to Nature (which yet must be done
by continued labors in the way of the Lord that our essence may in time wax
old, and decrease) yet through Christ they may be raised again to an eternal,
and fresh-springing youth in God, where no fainting, nor old age, nor death can
touch them. The Lord preserve us, and his mercy be present with us, in all our
adversity, lest perhaps that prove able to hinder us in our way, that our
continued anxiety conjoined with the highest danger, to which, in this combat,
we must subject our selves, lest it be in vain, nor draws us back, but rather
may fruitfully promote us to a perpetual progression and success of his grace,
and of divine benediction: may thou remain recommended unto God, who will
free us out of this present Dungeon of this temporary flesh, and imbecility,
according to his own acceptable will; will elevate us into the sublimity of
Eternity, into the life of the spirit, through the Resurrection of Christ, to
whom be the glory to all Eternity.

EPIST. XXIX. How a purified mind ought to bear without any commotion, the
failings of his Neighbor with all patience.
To his Brother D. John W.
DEarest Brother, that that man is affected with such streights, and with such
griefs of heart, that we also must suffer together with him: For in that that
he is always subjected to sufferings, nor can come at any peace, is indeed not
the work of man, but the gift of God, yea a great, and eminent gift to endure
the folly of another, and to cover it over with an unvariable mind toward his
Neighbor. For though we be unduely used or handled by our Neighbor, yet in
truth a purified heart ought not to be moved by it, but must always act
according to the bond of Charity, which is alone its aim, for in that there
arises no suspicion of evil, and although modest reason also may descend to
make an excuse, yet even all that too must be always done without any motion
of mind, for as much as he is such a one as the injury and trouble of no
creature can move him, because he remains confirmed in that which is truly
immovable.

Dearest Brother, I therefore write thus, that if that same trouble should be
reiterated, thou may always have this aim fixed in thy sight. For although
as to the creature the justice is on your part, yet the mind ought to remain
always free, without the use of this right, otherwise there would arise an
enmity from thence, and a bitterness of heart: For thus, that which is earthly,
overwhelmeth that which is heavenly with such a blindness, that it plainly
seems to a man, that he has some divine right; whenas yet God cannot but love,
nor does he require any other thing of us according to the measure of his
Justice. Not as if I would willingly lay some blame upon thee, do I say thus,
but that thy heart may not be, nor that any rule should be wanting to thee; if
you behave your self otherwise, thou will be obnoxious to a heavier judgment,
except thou proceedest with caution. My Brother, strive to have a mind unmoved,
which cannot be hindered, but rather promoted by the enmity of the Creatures.
All things to a just man turn to good, whether it be death, or life, or
dissension, or love: for such a one, overlooking the Creature, takes all, as
from the Creator, whether they be grateful or ungrateful, and though we may not
as yet come thus far, yet is this to be accounted for a rule, and to be
followed with all endeavor. And with this I would have thee recommended to the
Lord, who will be helpful to us all, and keep and promote us all more and more
in his own way.

EPIST. XXX. How a Noble Plant springs up out of the Dead Seed, through the
Divine fuitfulness.
To his Brother A. W.
DEarest Brother! The Herb we have received, The omnipotent Lord who from his
eternal beaming forth has made to come forth the out-flowing powers of all his
Creatures, according to the common and out-streaming operation of the Law of
Nature, replenish thine and the common emptiness of others, with increase in
the blessing of the most noble Plant of God, according to his nature, that that
only Seed, which by the benefit of corruption has utterly lost all its own
propriety, in a deadly and eternal intemperance, and is eternally united with
the earth of an imperserutable perfection, will fructify in thee through God,
contrary to all hope or glory, to the greater glorification in the virtue of
God.

Moreover my Brother, we received all, which are to be brought back again to
God, as to the Original of all, with thansgiving even unto the scope of our
death. Thus we miserable wretches in this our received way, are fallen down into
to that, which we call our propriety, so that when we are to depart from that
our assumed life, we are overwhelmed with sorrows and bitterness; although all
this is done out of the just judgment of God, that all may come unto his truth,
even as the heavens and the earth are called unto the truth, because undeniably
all things must come to this state; and to render their source glorified by
their death, and by their being melted down thereinto. I wish thee my small
portion of health in my state of rejection and disertion from the Lord, which I
suffer, but yet not without mercy; that, which may happen also to thee, but
with real commiseration, according to thy calling, as also to all that are the
holy ones of God. My brother, be mindful of us all, may the mercy of God and
his eternal, and (to all creatures) his incomprehensible grace come upon us
with plenty, that by the virtue thereof, that miracle of the supernatural,
spiritual, and eternal life may be discovered and acknowledged, together with
the spiritual salvation in Christ, his eternal, and only begotten son, in whom
miserable we are depressed down into death with verity.

EPIST. XXXI. Concerning the right uncloathing of self, and of the yielding up
of the soul in all sufferings.
DEarest brother, The Lord be mindful of our misery, and first to behold me the
most miserable one, with commiseration, and offer to himself my heart made bare
and emptied by many pressings together, and that he will renunerate it with the
blessing of fruitfulness, in a divine and eternal redemption, and freedom from
all the Enemies of my heart, who hold it captive in the chains of darkness,
out of the just judgment of God, to whom I am subjected, being ignorant,
whither at last I must go hence, seeing that my anxiety, the longer it is, is
so much the more vehement, so that I must always fall into the hands of the
Lord, seeing all else are fallen away from me. The Lord look upon my nakedness,
and be my preserver, that being kept up by and in him, I may bring forth fruit
to his glory, and to the sanctification of things temporaneous, in the effusion
of the blood of my own proper life, and in the liberty of the divine obedience.
With these I recommend thee to the Lord, who can advance us higher in his ways,
and can fasten us firmly to the cross in true submission and yielding up of our
wills, that in him we may be kept safe all that short space of our faintings in
this time, being in his fear delivered up unto death, according to the
ordination of his judgment impending over us, that so we may be led and get
forwards in his ways and that we may bid farewell with all our might to time,
that eternity may take place in us, and that we may so dye to our selves, that
we may walk here on the earth only as Pilgrims. The Omnipotent God deal with us
in his good pleasure, according to his mercy, and lead us thorough with
Victory, even in our imbecility unto the very end.

EPIST. XXXII. Concerning the death of all created things, and of all those
which are born out of them.
MOst beloved brother! All things do tend to the end, and death of their
created nature, whence do arise many sighs and a most bitter agony. But the
Lord will again bring forth his holy one out of death and the grave, that he
may not see corruption. My brother, thy pressure is great and severe: I know
thou desire comfort, but from God only, who cannot come, but thorough the
death of all creatures, or of the whole created nature; until the last breath
of life be also breathed out, nor can any refreshment of members be hoped for.
Let us in a free communion be made partakers of thy sufferings, with divine
compassion, patiently expecting the accomplishment of the judgment in its own
order; furthermore we will labor according to the will of God, and we will
sweat till we come to the appointed end, even as the hand of the Lord shall
over rule us. May the omnipotent Lord, by his fatherly grace lead us thorough
this most difficult labor, and strengthen us according to the inward man, that
we may forsake that which is external, and deliver it up to eternal corruption,
from out of the first judgment, to his eternal praise and glory, to which we
all aspire everyone of us according to his own manner and service, but not for
our sakes, or for our commodity, as some now unjustly do, and think: wherefore
also this counterfit opinion shall sink down into defect and death together
with the death of the creature, by a most hard and terrible fall. Because all
that, that we possess with a lie, in time, must be yielded up to the eternal
truth, but all to the glory of God, so that at length, one may become a
looking-glass to the other, and God at last may overcome all, and persist
alone, but we in our lies must perish. My brother, the times of our parents,
and forefathers are passed, and labor belongs now to our time, to the end
also of which, all things preparatory are at hand. The Lord stretch out his
hand with mercy, over wretched me, and over us all, that we may be taken into
the order which is pleasing to him, thorough faith, under the obedience of his
eternal will, so that our will, life, and choice being subjected to his
judgment, may be condemned and consumed. May the Lord give to us all, communion
in God, with a consideration of eternity, according to his unspeakable mercy.
Moreover my brother, as to my state or condition, that abides in perpetual
agony of death, with most sharp persecution, performed within me, after various
manners, yet to one only end, for whose sake all must be done. What the Lord
may in time do with me, is known only to himself, and his eternal decree. But
which way soever I turn my self, and whatsoever I consider or behold, nothing
but a vast abyss, and a parching heat of all misery do continually represent
themselves to my eyes. The Lord in his commiseration lead most wretched me, by
his fatherly hand, thorough things present and to come in this unknown,
uncertain, desert, and desolate condition: yet I give thanks to his goodness
that under this his powerful hand, he reveals to me his fatherly mind. The
Lord be my helper, and my conducter in all things, and keep me, and teach me in
his School, and under his discipline. His grace be over us all, together with
his unspeakable mercy. Amen.

EPIST XXXIII. How ignorant Nature well stumble in much disputing, and will
comdemn its neighbor: also how the sense of all Scriptures ought to be
apprehended in our own selves under the cross.
MOst beloved N. I pray the Lord, that he will promote thee in his way, in
which thou may follow most diligently his will, without much disputing by
which the flesh, rather then God's spirit has to do; we therefore must lay out
our time with more advantage. For when, for the most part, we think to speak
from the spirit of God, perchance nature, lurketh under the fair show of the
spirit, so long as we are still clothed about with flesh: so that when we
least believe it, yet we then account of the flesh instead of the spirit.
Therefore we are to walk before the Lord with fear, without any bold
disputings, and we must beware, as much as in us lies, to walk innocently
before God, and before men, lest we fall into our own condemnation, whilst we
are condemning others, if not in words, yet in heart. Moreover most dear N.
that writing which I received pleases me well, although I have not read it
thorough so accurately, by reason of the weakness of my head: For though I
cannot truly reach the sense of any writings, unless I can apprehend the virtue
of them in my own self under the cross, whence the true fruit is manifested,
seeing I tread no further, then unto the state in which I then consist, by
suffering I always follow the steps of Chirst, where the latter always discover
the defect and imperfection of the former: Yet let every man mind his own
calling, and observe it diligently, so all in time will clearly appear, and
come forth into the light. Salute P. N. our friend heartily God will look upon
him to his advantage, and will make his daily sighings fruitful thorough his
eternal mercy, which we are all to expect, none excepted. The Lord endow thee
with wisdom and prudence, that thou may act aright in all things, and that
thou may walk before him with trembling. There are books enough for us to
look into, if we will but perpetually observe our own consciences, that we may
most accurately follow their dictates. Moreover thorough the providence of God
we have the Old and New Testament for our only external rule, but the holy
spirit, above all these, for our alone master, or Teacher. Blessed is he who is
deprived of his own proper wisdom, and is instructed and instigated by the
spirit of the Lord alone. The Lord be with thee and with us. Amen.

EPIST. XXXIV. Concerning a certain danger that hung over that place, by reason
of persecution, unto which he was about to go.
DEarest Brother, may the Omnipotent Lord preserve my mortified body according
to his mercy in his divine will. I have purposed to go to that place, and to
expect the will of God concerning me, beseeching him from the most inward and
deepest bottom of my soul, that he will set me before the enemy, and that the
remnant of my life, which is very small, may not tend to the destruction, but
to the salvation of any one, this I beg from his eternal goodness and mercy,
withal hoping, that this danger will prove destruction to me only, and will go
no further. The Lord make known his will to me in this one desire of mine,
according to his commiseration. If the Lord shall suffer me in this tabernacle,
tolerably to pass through, so as still to subsist, as I have occasion I shall
signify it to thee. But my brother which way soever I turn my self, or look
back, all things renounce me, and of the present there remains no place more
for me. And therefore I convert my self to that, which the forsaking of all
creatures shows unto me. The Omnipotent God take care to secure me under his
own protection.

EPIST. XXXV. An answer sent to his brother, concerning a woman that dyed, also
concerning his own condition, together with a devout exhortation.
MOst beloved brother, a real grief has possessed me, for the departure of
that woman out of this temporary world. I trust in the Lord that all will be
done for a good end, and from him I expect peace, and tranquillity, with
commiserating grace, which we all hunt after, and heartily seek for our Souls,
together with an expectation of an eternity to come. I find in my heart, that I
am now obliged to her children, and I love them with a true tendency of mind,
according to my poor slender ability. May the Lord for his mercy-sake turn all
for the better. Moreover as to what concerns my condition, the same kind of
bonds do always hold me bound, according to the will of God, in a disease and
an infirmity. So long as it shall please the Lord: May he direct my ways, and
bow them down under his fear, in the obedience of his most holy will: and may
he bestow freely his grace on us all, that we may continue our lives in
righteousness with devotion, and a diligent observation of all our works and
counsels, least in all our actions, there be somewhat found, that is contrary
to the will of God. May the Lord give his grace to us all, that we may go
forwards in his way, and bear such fruits as may be pleasing to him.

In the eight following Epistles, is somewhat described of that great misery,
into which the Lord cast him a little before his death.

I.

MY brother, my body has an increase of some strength, just as a man grows,
but very slowly, so as it can scarcely be observed, though yet it proceeds
on. Yet is the purpose of God unknown to me, although like a pestiferous cloud,
a many difficulties and sorrows are set before my eyes, out of which I can spy
no deliverance, but by death, that so I may wholly penetrate even un^^ God:
which will come to pass, if the times shall prove prosperous, yea and further
also, of all means shall fail me. The Lord prepare us all, that we may be, made
fit for his work, in those things, which he himself sees, and judges.

II.

My brother, the condition of my body is tolerable, as it always was, but I
remain unshaken in my heart, and the trust or confidence of my life is so
small, by reason of want of strength in my limbs, that I can only walk up and
down the house, with trembling under the hand of my God. True indeed I remain
like others, as to outward appearance, but at heart, and over my orignal and
root of life, there impends a judgment, and by my unconsidered steps thorough
the terrors of death, it threatens an end, and my departure out of this time:
such is the constitution of my whole life, way, and conversation. May the
merciful Father open the bowels of his paternal inclination to me, a most
wretched creature, that he may keep me safe from the evil one, and preserve us
all by his eternal grace. Be mindful of forsaken and for lorn me, as my
compassionate brother, if perhaps the Lord may be willing to exhibit his mercy
to us.

III.

My brother, mine accustomed infirmity still remains, as long as the Lord
will. The Lord be my promoter in his commiserating grace, and may he preserve
me, and continue to hold me in his discipline, under a suffering obedience of
his holy will. The cause why I have wrote no mere is the weakness of my hand.
According to the Lord my writing is not necessary to thee, seeing that he
himself will operate by his own grace in thy heart, thorough the influence of
his Spirit, from whom all words, and all writings, may be separated, by reason
of his immense and glorious clatitude. The Lord keep and promote you all in his
ways, under his fear, and likewise us, thorough all the time of our earthly
combat. And so I heartily salute you.

IV.

My brother, as to what belongs to my condition, it still conflicts with its
usual and difficult disease, so long as it shall so please God: He, according
to the order of his Justice, put me down into this death of corruption, and
with his own hand plucketh me up again, that I may wait for eternity, which
springs up from out of the seed of this corruptible mortality. May the Lord
freely bestow on us all his mercy, as, with a long-suffering constancy, we hope
from the Lord it will be, that with a heart prepared, and submitted, we may
receive all from his hand, and may, be lead thorough, even unto the end.
Herewith I recommend thee to the Lord, who will lead us all, with all our
strength, and essence, unto the true death in Christ, that he out of this (...)
may build up an eternal life, whi^^ (...) never more be subjected unto any (...)

V

My brother, my condition is the (...) that it was, when you departed: b^^
(...) consideration thereof does shake al^ (...) powers, into a trembling, and
a ter^^^^ because of that evident death, by the (...) of the Lord, which as it
were an ob^^^re cloud of death, I have always before my eyes, even from that
very time wh^^ thou were with me: the reason b^^ (...) its beginning, and of
its end is wh^^ hid from me: the truth it self will b^^^^ it self forth in its
own meaning and o^der. As to my outward body, which respects my disease, I am
not at all chan^^^, but anguishes have taken full possession on all my
faculties. Be thou recommended to the mercy of God.

VI.

My brother, The Lord help us poor w^^^ches in this dangerous condition of this
natural, and mutable life, whom it behooveth to be kept with believing under
all uncertainties, in the fear of God, according to the faith, whereby we
believe that all the certainty, and firmness of our purposes are to be wholly
destroyed, corrupted, and annihilated, that another (...) fruit may spring up,
to eternal life, (...) ^^ising out of the foregoing corruptible seed. The Lord
grant to us his salvation, and grace, that we may adore, or worship (...) in
Spirit, and in Truth, even as he himself desires.

VII.

The Lord in his mercy help us all, and free us from our errors, in his own
time. For I poor wretch do suffer the justice of the Lord, and do bear his
judgment upon me, as long as this carnal spirit, in this my dying nature, still
breaths. May the eternal and merciful God appear to me by his grace, yea and
to us all, and lead us into his own will.

VIII.

My brother, The Lord is my deliverer in my necessity, and will confirm me in
his grace even unto the end. My brother, I am willing thou should know that
my body cannot possibly endure any longer this immense misery, without dying.
God assist me in my sufferings to the last, and receive me into his eternal
rest. My Weakness is great, all things are known to the Lord. Thy brother in
the highest streights, the most wretched in the Lord.

M. W.

To his Sister the ninth day before his death.

DEarest Sister, whilst I am writing this, I am so ordered, that I can write no
more. My dearest sister, be mindful of thy younger brother, and of his wife and
small children, that they may be the most advanced and helped as the time may
need. My most beloved Sister, I am in the highest content in the Lord my God,
and by his grace do bid the farewell with this my dying hand; being according to
the will God bound in so short a chain, as he proposed to himself. The Lord our
God grant peace to our beloved brothers and sisters! And now I turn me to my
present call, viz. to that eternal peace thorough the death of my flesh, which
now hasteneth it self to its end. And now my most beloved Sister, behold my
dying salutation, and my last farewell to thee from the bottom of my heart;
wherewith saluteth thee, as departing out of this life, thy brother.

M. W.
16 April. 1560. He died in the Lord 25 April in the year of our Lord 1560. and
of his own age the 39.



THE END.

