An Exact CHARACTER OR, NARRATIVE OF The late right Noble, and magnificent
LORD, Oliver Cromwell, The Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland;
With the Dominions thereof.

Together with a brief Recapitulation (or Declaration) of His many Miraculous
Victories, Virtues, and Achievements, throughout the three Nations.

With His Decease on Friday, the 3d of September. 1658, being above 60 years of
Age; And the Election of His eldest Son the Lord Richard, to be Lord Protector
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. With the Proclaiming of His Highness on
Saturday, (the 4th instant) throughout the Cities of London, and Westminster.

Written by T. l*W. of the Middle Temple, London, for the present perusal of
all honest Patriots: And allowed on, by special Authority, to be forthwith
Printed and Published.

-- Vivet post funera Virtus. London, Printed for G. E. and C. 1658.

An Exact CHARACTER OF The late Right Noble, and magnificent LORD, Oliver
Cromwell, The Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
HE was born at Huntington, of Honorable Parents, and anciently of the Name
and Family of Williams's, Gentlemen of Note, in the County of Glamorgan in
Southwales; which in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, was changed into the
Name of CROMWELL.

He had his Education in the University of Cambridge, whence he came to
Lincolnes-Inn, where we find him not to have spent over much time in the studdy
of the Laws; but for the bettering of his understanding, rather employed his
studies, in reading of men, then to dwell on the book, as being naturally more
inclined, and affecting the practick part, then the theorick; though in the
Liberal Sciences he was not to seek of a competent share of learning.

Doubtless he was a great proficient, both in the knowledge of men and books,
and a great observer of the General affairs of the World, which appeared not
openly, until opportunity gave him the help, where, and how, to show what he
was, and would be, in the active part, and Military employment, wherein even
from the first beginning, to the last of the late unnatural Wars, on the very
first unsheathing of the Sword, he sided with the Parliament, and constantly
stood firm and trusty in the upholding the established Religion, the Laws of
the Land, and Libertyes of his Country, even to the very period of his days,
and in a most devout profession, and defending of them altogether, with the
privileges of Parliament, of the breach of which, none was more tender, and
fought more Valiantly for their preservation, without the least tergiversation
or backsliding from that party to which he adheared.

At the very beginning of the War, he was no more then a Captain of a Horse
Troop, which out of a public spirit, and zeal to the cause, he first raised
at his own charge, and by degrees (not by leaps) he deservedly came to higher
Commands, having soon attained to the reputation of a most expert, skillful,
vigilent, and indifatigable Soldier, even to the wonder and admiration of his
assistants, and shortly after came to be (by the Parliaments prudent choice)
Commander in chief, his then miraculous achievements considered, both in
absolute finishing, and putting an end to the fury of the War in England, and
stopping of that wide Orifice of blood, which ran throughout most parts of the
Kingdom, during the full term of six years, his then expeditious reducing of
Ireland, and South Wales, with that which is of more remarke, the overthrow of
Duke Hambletons Invading Army, the Kirk Armies at Dunbar, together with the
reducing of all the Kingdom of Scotland, his there defeating of Charles
Stuart's Army at Worcester; and all this done (as we say) in a trice; so that
to attribute these wonderful Victoryes to blind Fortune, would be a derogation
to Gods great providence, which we may safely believe guided him in all these
enterprises.

Neither must we omit, how then he settled the Natives of the 3 Kingdoms, with
those of the Principality, in a firm Peace, contrary to theexpectation of all
men, so that, without flattery, it may be said of him, as it is of Caesar, that
Venit, Vidit, and Vicit, that is, He came, he saw, and he conquered.

His next great work was, the Reformation of the Churches affairs, too much
diseased and disjoynted by the admission thereinto of too many idol, ignorant,
and debauched Ministers; but that which is more remarkable, is, that of
establishing the Peace of the three Kingdoms, under such an Aristocraticall
Government, that every man that will, may securely sleep under his own Vine,
and enjoy their estates, without fear of farther bloodshed, rapine and plunder.

He married into the ancient and noble Family of the Bourchers, sometimes Earls
of Essex, by whom he had two Sons, the Lord Richard, lately made Protector, in
his Father's room, and the Lord Henry, now Lord Deputy of Ireland, Persons, of
great honor, hopes, and abilityes, and four Daughters, all Ladies of eminent
virtues: The Lady Bridget, his eldest, first married to the Lord Ireton,
lately, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and since his Decease, to the right noble Lord
Charles Fleetwood: the Lady Elizabeth, his 2d Daughter, married to the Lord
Claypole, lately deceased: the Lady Mary, his third Daughter, married to the
right honorable the Lord Viscount Fauconberg; the Lady Francis his fourth, and
youngest, Daughter, married to the right honorable Robert Rich, Grandchild to
the right honorable the Earl of Warwick, lately Lord Admiral of England,
during most of the time of the War between the late King and Parliament: And
all these his Children, married and honorably disposed of in his lifetime; so
that we may truly say, that he lived, to be an Eyewitness of God's great Mercy
and Blessings, powered on himself and whole Family, even to admiration, if we
look upon the disasters of other families, wherein we assidually see the
Father, and the Children to be disjoined by death, and left to the wide World,
to seek their livelihoods, out of the cold Charity of Kindred, and such as take
no care either for their Education, or Maintenance.

Now, as to his Person, he was tall, well set, and well proportioned,
throughout the whole Lineaments and Dimensions of his Body, and a most Active,
Vigilan, Wary, and Circumspect Commander, in all his Martial Employments, even
to the wonder of the Times; and of an high extraordinary Head-peece, yet he
dayned not to be counseled, even in most of his lesser Affairs.

As to his Intel'ectuals, Gifts, and Abilities, of his Mind, they were without
compare, suited to that Great Work; whereunto (as we may safely believe)
Almighty God in his great providence, had pre-ordained Him to accomplish, in
vindicating the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of his Country; wherein he acted
the part both of an expert Soldier, a merciful General, a most zealous
defender of Gods Truth, and freed the three Nations from blood, rapine, and
Tyranny, settled and established them all in peace and quietness; which if it
be rightly taken into consideration, manifestly shows, That He alone was by God
appointed to this most Important work, and Herculian Labor; which we see him
to have nobly performed, without vainglory, ostentation, or boasting; but in a
fair, quier, deliberate; and modest temper of mind, and toil of body: for we
find Him not subject to passion, lordlinesse, stateliness, or presumption,
(the common and inseparable flawes and faults of greatness) but of an even,
grave, stayed, patient and affable comportment toward all men, and of all
sorts, whether high or low, especially toward the distressed; yet of a very
high, vast, and incomparable Judgment, without the least tincture of pride,
rage or fury.

He was Uxorious, and exceeding loving toward Her, that had the Honor of His
bed: and a most Tender and Indulgent Father, toward all those which God had
sent Him, by the only dear Consort both of his youth, and old age: a happiness
and blessing seldom seen to accompany old and young to their graves: and to
see their Issues honorably disposed of in his lifetime; which is a visible
sign and argument, that God had bestowed this great blessing upon Him, and His.

He lived to be an eyewitness of the perferment of all his offspring to
honor and greatness, and to leave behind him such a pattern of piety, zeal to
the public interest, and such an abundant example of Charity, toward all men
in distress, as cannot be parrallel'd in any we have known; And although we
have no Monuments of Him left us in Stones, and Structures, yet have we
infinite Presidents of his bounty and liberality to poor maimed Soldiers, and
distressed people of either Sex, which are the Images of the Creator; on whom
it is credibly reported, that out of his innared compassion, he bestowed not so
little as 40000l. per annum, out of his own purse, and the allowance conferd on
Him by the State for the honor of the Nations, and His Court: so that we find
Him not any ways noted of covetousness, yet frugal and sparing all His
expenses; so far as suited with Honor and His place.

He came to be PROTECTOR in a very seasonable time, for the honor and support
of his Country, and at a time when as there was no Steers-man at the Helm; and
it is a question, not easily to be resolved, whether then, there could be any
One found fit to undergo a place of such Unweildinesse and Trust, other then
Himself, which he faithfully underwent, and discharged, with as much Honor,
Integrity, and Applause, (even of his Enemies) as possibly could be expected.

He undertook this Unweildy and Burthensom Place, on the period of the Wars in
all the three Kingdoms, December. 16. 1653. and ended the troublesome course of
his life (at the Age of above 60 years) on the third of September; on which
Day, he obtained those two Admirable Victories, at Dunbar and Worcester; which
same Day, being formerly a day of Trouble to him; God was now graciously
pleased to make it a Day of Rest, by taking him to Himself. He was magnified
and beloved of all honest hearted men; and we believe as little hated of any,
as we have read of, living in the splendor of Command and Greatness; having
reduced the Three Kingdoms in a settled Peace, and Quietness, to the wonder of
the World, and contrary to the general expectation of the best Judgments.

The Lord RICHARD his eldest Son being the next day proclaimed LORD PROTECTOR
of England, Scotland, and Ireland; A Person, on whom the Hopes of the Nations
grow strong, That he (as he succeeds so Illustrious a Father) will not
degenerate from the Virtues of such an unparalleled Parent.

To speak more in his praise, would be a lessening to his Worth and Merits, and
happily a means to draw envy on the Author, who has written this little (much
too scanty) for his great and miraculous Achievements, his famous Victories,
and everlasting praise; which in times to come will (doubtless) be augmented
to a Volume; which happily the Nation shall shortly see.

God in his great mercy so bless and prosper his Hopeful Successor, that he
may be a Religions Imitator of Him, who is at Rest; and that he may be to these
Nations such a Patriot, as preceded him, in the Government. Which is cordially
wished by him, who subscribes

T. L. W. of the Middle Temple, London.

FINIS.

