Mercurius Coelicus: OR, A CAVEAT To all people of the KINGDOM, That now have,
or shall hereafter happen to read the counterfeit, and most pernicious
Pamphlet written under the name of NAWORTH: OR, A New Almanacke, AND
Prognostication For the year of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST 1644. (Said
in the Title Page thereof to be) Printed at Oxford by His Majesty's Command.

London, Printed by J. Raworth, for John Partridge.

Mercurius Coelicus, OR A Caveat to all the People, etc.
I Suppose you are all furnished with Yours have furnished but a few this year.
Almanacks and Prognostications for this whole year ensuing, before this time;
At leastwise, I hope you will not bestow your money on so lying a Pamphlet, or
spend your time so vainly in reading so notorious Untruths as this counterfeit
Spell my name, and confess your Ignorance.
Naworth would fain persuade you to believe. As for the Chronologicall part
thereof, which he styles thus, With a breife Chronology of the most remarkable
Occurrences since the beginning of this Rebellion: Calculated exactly for the
Latitude and Meridian of the famous University and City of Oxford; I must
entreat you to believe me; for the very London Truth, whereto you had need beg
assent.
truth is. All that Infamous Chronology is nothing else but a Collection of
Untruths, raked out of the Dunghill of Mercurius Aulicus his abominable lying
Legend; which, like the Infections Disease now raging at Oxford, and other the
Western parts of the Kingdom, had like to have poisoned all the people
thereof, had not his Anti-Mercury, our friend Britannicus, seasonably given
them an Antidote to purge and cure the Melancholy gotten by that malignant
Aulicus. I believe he has calculated it exactly for the Meridian of Oxford;
for it can serve no other place of the Kingdom: The Yes they daily tell you
(in plain English) you are Rebels and Traitors to His Majesty.
people there, dare not speak truth; And how then, think you, dare they
write? His reckoning up of (fained) Victories at this and that place, are all
false Calculations: Methinks the very You mistake. The sight of them could not.
thought of Keynton, Edgehill, or Newbury, should strike him dead. I could
tell him of Reckon up you gains, and spare your Thanksgivings.
Alton, Gainsborough, Arundell, etc. If h Nay I Will try if you can do that, you
have seen the way.
he would but tell us of their (our enemies) true Losses, as well as of their
fained Victories are ours, Fictions yours.
Victories, in which (to their perpetual shame) they so much boast, the
Kingdom would be more sensible of the blood that They at Westminster.
they have caused to be spilt, and unanimously rise to suppress their cruel
Tyranny, l Remember your purchase of Eccleshall-Castle, and Arundell. It Is
easier with you to purchase, then conquer.
their bloody and inhumane cruelties. How dares he write of Victories? If ever
they (for whom that Almanac was calculated) got any, it was by Treachery. As
for the word Rebel he so often mentions in that lying Chronology, surely (if I
be not mistaken in my Figure (which I seldom do) he means himself, and those
that live in that Clymate where he calculated his Erra-Pater (for he is of very
near kindred to Now you honor me.
Mercurius Aulicus, who is the son of Pater Errorum) together with those
inhumane bloody Those that your pretended ^ouses sent over to suppress the
Rebellion there, (whilst themselves had raised a worse here) are now returned
to secure His Majesty from their more Bloody hands.
Irish Rebels, who before and since the Cessation in that unhappy Kingdom of
Ireland, are come over, and joined with the Atheistical and Papisticall people
of that, this, and other Kingdoms, To destroy the King and Parliament, subvert
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; To bring in Tyranny, Slavery, Popery, and
all the misery that ever this Nation suffered: Surely, if ever there were
Rebels these are they, Of the off spring of Cain, very Cannibals: I have gotten
these base words by reading of him; And therefore, lest I be infected with this
Oxford-Malady, I send him his It seems they have wrought, For since you took
my Dose, you have vomited filthy^ Humors. I hope e're long to cure you.
words again, which he shall never claw off till he amend his Calculation and
beg I need none, if I did* it might be drawn at London, but must be sealed at
Oxford.
pardon of the King and Parliament for his so grossly abusing them, and
endeavoring to seduce the whole Kingdom; But, I doubt, A great Seal, which
he says (falsely) is at Oxford will do them little good: And for the other the
Great Seal, which Yes truly, the King and His Chancellor be at London, by the
Statute of Articuli super Chartas An 28. E. 1. Chapter 5 But as they are both here,
and you have counterfeited another Seal there Read at leisure (and for your
comfort) that other Statute. An. 25. E. 3.
truly is here, I hope the Parliament will make such use of it, that all those
whom I named before (Rebels) shall, ere long, receive their just reward.
Reader, believe it, There was never so many Lies heaped together in so short
and few lines, since the word Almanac was used

But stay Master G. N. I have not done with you yet, in your Astronomicall
Observations. If you be the same Naworth of West Aukland, that wrote an
Almanac for the years 1641. and 1642. and referred it to the Latitude of
Durham, I honor you, and now give you thanks for your Remembrance (in one of
them I then saw before it was printed) of some Observations I made upon the
Eclipse of the Sun in May, 1639. which you had published to the whole world,
had not some of the Bishops Chaplains, Baker, Bray, Wikes, Heywood, or some of
their fellows, made an Index Expugatorius thereof, as they usually did in my
Almanacks. But me thinks you should not be he that then wrote; for in the
year 1642. you understood your self very well when in that years Revolution,
and the Effects of the two Eclipses of the Moon, you said thus (for I will use
your own You do well in rehearsing of them: For they deeply concern your
Pretended 2. Houses, and City: as being the Authors of all the Miseries therein
meant, and since verified.
words) Mixing the Effects of the Eclipses with the Lunateous, and other
powerful Aspects which the Ambassadors of Heaven pronounce unto us, The
Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, the 15 of May, And of Saturn and Mars the 30;
We cannot clear our selves in general or particular of many strange
Accidents, (which will amaze and distract diverse;) for the Moon is (at the
middle of either Eclipse) in the eighth House of the Heavens, in domo mortis,
etc. Mars is Almuten, or chief Ruler at the first Eclipse of the Moon; And
Mercury of the second; And both of them in Signis humanis: If therefore we
escape sharp tertian Fevers, War, Famine, Pestilence, House-breakings, Rapes,
Depopulations, Man-slaughters, secret Sediditions, Banishments, Imprisonments,
violent and unexpected deaths, Robberies, Thefts, and pyraticall Invasions; If
also Libellers, and Distempered Letters be forestalled and intercepted. Let the
Glory be to God, For when Villainy is unmasked, Virtue shines: Busy tongues,
and variable Rumors will seduce or induce many; but nothing for their good,
etc. Thus far are your own words: And now, Master Naworth, let me entreat you
to remember what I mentioned at that Conjunction of Mars and Jupiter the same
15 of May you speak of, 1642, in these words, Praefectos bellorum cautos hic
esse decebit, quod Res ipsa loquetur. About which time the Illegal Commission
of Array was put in execution; And at, or near the same time, the Militia of
the Kingdom was settled by the happy Council and Advice of this For 1.
Murder: 2. Sacrilege and 3. Robbery, etc.
Thrice honored (never to be forgotten) Parliament: As likewise that other
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in the end of May, where I used these words,
Circa hoc Tempus Bellica Stratagemata audientur: Just at that time when Hull
was sorely threatened; but (blessed be God) it is yet, and I hope will be kept
out of the Enemies possession. Though there has been used much Art and
Subtilty for the betraying thereof, to, and by them, to whose Care and Trust it
was then committed; In due time You mean the two Hothams. First, hang them for
being Traitors to His Majesty, and then do what you please with them for their
Treachery to you.
they will be dealt with as they deserve. You may please to remember the 23 of
October 1641 (which with you 1642 is called. The grand Rebellion) It is very
true, the 23 of October, 1641, The unparalled Grand Rebellion of Ireland
burst forth, for which God punished you that very day twelve-moneth, over
against which very day and time in my Almanac for that year 1642, I had noted
thus much upon the Opposition of the Sun and Mars, Ventorum murmura generabit
aura inquieta, Caedes quoque cruentae and lites atrae hinc inde per^rebescent.
That very time you lost so much Noble Blood you speak of; And were so soundly
beaten between You made them 2 Battles when you spoke of your Victories. P. 2.
lin. 2.
Keinton and Edge hill, by the truly Valiant Robert Earl of Essex, The
Parltaments Lord General, etc.

You Will say, It was pretty well ghest, Good wits may from off a Ladder yours may.
Iumpe, I do not love to rub the Galled Horse back, you know my meaning (as
well there, as in many other places of my Almanac) well enough; But you are
turned Court-parasite, you, and I must part Kindred; Yet me thinks we should
agree about the Effects of the last Great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter,
which happened on the Origanus tells you the 20.
sixteenth of February the last year: You calculate Had you done it rightly
forwards, you had saved me that Labor.
Backwards, of things done, and past: I tell you of what is to come (which is
the true end of Almanacks) Has the small difference of latitude between Oxford
and Durham, so much altered you? Sure you came by Sea, for fear the Scots
should Look to your Money, they'^ first catch that.
catch you, Et sic Animum mutasti: I must tell you in that Great Conjuction. If
I I can prove you do neither.
understand my Authors, or my self, Jupiter was predominant, as you say about
(Malignant) Saturn (a name properly given to your self, and your frinds.) And
no doubt as Messahala an Author, I know as well as your self, who says, Cum
Jupiter fortior fuerit Saturno, significabit bonum in eadem Conjunctione (as in
this Conjunction he is) Remember your Title page
I agree with you, and that it portends much good to England, and all other the
places you speak off; But England, and all other those places, etc. must first
be His Majesty intends it no doubt:
purged of the Malignant humors, before the Benign and Wholesome can come in
their stead. I told you what Alsted had foretold many years since upon that
Great Conjunction, I laid it was a Forerunner of a I told you so too, in my
Prognostication for this year P. ult. l. n. 16.
through Reformation; And he said Hujus Conjunctionis Ignis consumet omnes
scorias and Faeces Vrbis Romae; you see since that Conjunction what Effects it
has wrought; Remember Did Alsted tell you of the demolishing of
Cheap-side-Crosse?
Cheapside-Crosse, Anno Dom. 1643. On that day you call Inventio Crucis; And
let me tell you what was done the eighteenth day of January, this very year,
upon that very place, where Cheapside-Crosse once stood, There was many
Idolatrous and Superstitious Pictures, and Images, Crucifixes, Crosses, Popish
Books, Whips, and other your Roman-Archi-Episco-Papisticall Trinkets^ in a
flame; The Witnesses (besides many thousand other People) were no less then
the Parliament, The Honorable the Lords and Commons, the Lord General, the
Lord Admiral, with many other Colonels and Commanders, the Reverend Assembly
of Divines, the Scotch Commissioners, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Council of London, passing from Those that founded that Church and
dedicated it to Christ, thought not of demolishing the Cross.
Christ Church, to Merchant Tailors Hall, guarded by the Regiments of the
Trained Bands of London; I say, That day many Popish Relics were consumed to
ashes, which (no doubt, though it will In earnest I tell you the Popes glad of
it, and will be a gainer by it.
displease the Pope; yea, and your Friends at Oxford, and elsewhere), It will
be acceptable to God, and all good men; Such a sight and day, you had not at
They are better taught and implored there, then to pull down Crosses, deface
Churches, or to rake amongst the ashes of the dead for Treasure, as many of
your Hellish crew have done.
Oxford, nor ever was there such a day, since Inventio Crucis; you see now to
what height the That fire has been long a coming to Oxford, (yea, before
that Conjunction happened) yet came never nigher then Tame.
fire of this Conjunction flames, it is coming to Oxford very shortly; you had
best shift for your self, For believe it, the Universities must be That Is done
already. We have not a Rogue (like your self) left (that dare show his head)
in a^ the City.
purged, you see what a necessary Element fire is, Newcastle-Coale is coming;
you would fain persuade and seduce the people to believe that this Conjunction,
which Authors call Conjunctio Planetarum maxima, Quippe Let Latin alone, you
see you cannot spell it.
qua reguntur leges Imperia Regiones, and that it does Praemonstrare res magnas
and mirandas venturas in mundo, yet you say it has no signification of War;
I think it had not of this War which you and your friends (our Enemies) at
Oxford) have raised; For there was many years before, strange Terrestrial,
Ecccesiasticall, Political Conjunctions, Conspiracies, Confederacies, I know
not what to call them; you know Causa praecedit effectum, and who were the
Planets that ruled in those times, and what a Malignant Influence they had over
this Kingdom, Ireland, Scotland, etc. And what they have producced from other
Foreign States; But I must tell you again, That this late Celestial
Conjunction has got the predominancie, and all the Christian World will feel
the effects thereof, more and more every day. Shall I tell you what I think of
that Great Conjunction you speak of, which was at Westminster the third of
November 1640. The which God be blessed They cannot continue long: They are in
a Cadent House already, you know the Term.
continues yet; though some Stars of the first Magnitude have fallen since, and
others have proved Errant indeed, yea, and though the Terrestrial Moon has
Sir, Meddle not with Eclipses: You want Arithmetic, Geometry, and the
Opticke. The Terrestrial Moon, (by which you mean the Qu. Majesty) she is as
much above your malice as your slanders.
Eclipsed our Sun, for as Solest Rex Planetarum, so Rex est Sol Parliamenti)
and other Stars, Stellae peregrina, nebulosae have mixed their Beams, and
deprived us of the sweet and ordinary Benefit we use to receive by His
presence: yet it will check your Opposition at Oxford, that I hope the Kingdom
shall not be hurt one jot by the Malignant Influence thereof; I mean your
Anti-Parliament there, will prove a mere Meteor, an Ignis Fatuus, A nothing.
And though you may there force Votes to Murder the Kings Liege People; Commit
Perjuries, Profane the Sabbath, Assemble all the false Priests, Papists,
Atheists, and Jesuits, in the Kingdom; Keep the King from coming to His
Parliament; Yet I trust that conjunction which was in November. at Westminster,
co operating with that other of February, will work a Through Reformation
indeed, throughout this Realm, by a timely purging it, of all Atheists,
Papists, Jesuits, Bloody Irish Rebels, and others, the enemies of God, and
true Religion; and bring the Authors of this bloody War they have raised, to
condign punishment. And as the Stars of Heaven in their Courses fought
against Sisera, so no question, But these Stars at Westminster (where that more
notable and more greater Conjunction was, you speak of) though they have a
sharp Combat with cruel Enemies, they shall have a Noble and Glorious
Victory.

As for that Homo trium Literarum, which I bid the Kingdom beware of, if you
have not Erasmus his Adages, you may please to search in some of the Colleges
(if the Books be not pawned) be sure you may have it in Bodleys Library; and
therein in his Title De contemptu and Vilitate, you shall find these words.
Homo trium Literarum; Per Ironiam dici potest in eum qui generosus ac
ingenuosus Videri cupiat, Inde natum, quod olim ingenui nomen, praenomen, and
Agnomen in literis aut Insignibus suis tribus literis notare soleant; Vt pro
Quinto Valerio Maximo. Q V M. Plautus in Aulularia jocum alio detersit, nempe
in servum Furacem, Subjicit enim: F V R trifurcifer: In this sense I understood
it, And thereby meant your Cavaliers would turn Thieves and Robbers, as you
may easily understand, by the residue which follows my Premonition; But because
you have corrupted the Text, (as you use to do) and have construed Homo trium
Literarum, to be You are used to Lie, I construed it to be Say or Pym.
Rex; I shall heartily desire, and pray God, That His Majesty would not hearken
any longer to you at Oxford, but return to Nathaniell Fiennes ha^h another
exposition.
His Parliament at London; and then that place of Scripture you mention as a
Donation to him (at the end of your Legend in December) will be performed; But
till that be done, I shall tell you of an (Ablation) another place of
Scripture, Proverbs 25. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and his
Throne shall be established in Righteousness. I say, till this be done, I do
not foresee that honorable Greeting, which you say, Paulus Iovius saluted
Charles the Great with, will happen this Revolution to our King Charles. And
therefore Master G. N. because you and your friend Aulicus may not any longer
abuse the Kingdom; you by your lying Almanac, and he by his lying Pamphlet. I
will give you both one Character; you shall find it in the same Erasmus, a
little before Homo trium Literarum, your Companion Homo Trioboli, pro Homine
nequissimo, planeque nullius pretii: The English whereof, is truly your name,
No worth, or a Man worth nothing. And so I wish you leave calculating for
Oxford, and return to Durham, where the Durham wi^h its Neighbors will make
the Scots return.
Scots are approaching; and upon your submission, they may happily remit you
your Errors; But believe me, if they 'Twere good you were as well resolved as
we are.
take You, and Aulicus together at Oxford, you cannot receive the Benefit of
the Seal, you say is there; For the truth is, you are both impardonable.

John Booker.
24 January. 1643-44

