Bellum Hybernicale: OR, IRELAND'S WAR Astrologically demonstrated, from the
late Celestiall-congresse of the two Malevolent Planets, Saturn and Mars, in
Taurus, the Ascendent of that KINGDOM.

Wherein likewise, their future opposition in the Signs Sagittary and Gemini,
(most ominous to London, and many other of the South and West parts of England)
is Mathematically handled.

The Jgnorance, Malice, Mistakes, Errors, Insolences, and Impertinencies, of
John Booker, (in his Astrologicall Observations upon the said Conjunction, in a
late Pamphlet of his, styled, A Bloody Irish Almanac, etc.) discovered,
corrected, refuted, and retorted: AND The Author further vindicated, from his,
and Master Lilly's former frivolous, false, and malicious Aspersions,
throughout the whole Discourse.

By Capt. GEO: WHARTON, Student in Astronomy.

-- Ego (...) tumultum,
Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente Caesare terras.
Printed in the Year* 1647.

TO THE IMPARTIAL, AND Juditious Reader.
IT is high time, now, after so many affronts, and such multiplicity of
railing, and scornful Language, uttered against me, in several silly
Pamphlets, by that professed Mountebanke in Astrology, (John Books,) to
vindicate my self from the Calumnies, Scandalls, and false Accusations, which
his unsatiable Ambition, and implacable malice, has most wickedly accused me
of: And thereby I shall discover, how much his Envy, (to my Pen and Person)
has transported him beyond the bound of modesty, and rendered him incapable
both of Reason and Knowledge, in the Art, whereof be professes himself to be a
Master. I have in part answered M. Lilly, in my Prognostication for the ensuing
year 1647. And here, (according to my promise) I shall Catechize John Booker,
and both of them, as occasion serves. The subject or matter, here intended, is,
the notable Conjunction of the 2. Malevolent Planets in the Sign Taurus, upon
the 12. of June this year, 1646. the effects whereby will be in great force,
until the 21. day of October 1647. Which Conjunction has lately been most
ignorantly treated of, by John Booker in a certain Pamphlet of his styled A
Bloody Irish Almanacke, etc. and many false observations he has drawn thence,
and published; not upon any real grounds in Astrology, but merely out of his
inveterate malice, and hatred to the Kingdom of Ireland; whereby both that and
this Kingdom have been deluded, and Astrology shamefully perverted and
defamed. In which respect (as likewise (upon this occasion) to free my self,
from his former Aspertions) I have published the following discourse, wherein
the same Conjunction of Saturn, and Mars, is more Artificially handled: and
also their future Opposition; (with a touch concerning their next Conjunction,
which will happen in the Sign Gemini, (the Ascendent of London) which will be
far more terrible, and of greater concernment to London, and other parts of
this Kingdom; then the Conjunction in Taurus can be to Ireland: I have
palpably unmasked his malice, discovered his ignorance, divulged and corrected
his Errors, and misapplications of the Effects of this celestial meeting: If
his immodest Language, has any where incited me to too much freedom of
speech; I shall crave his excuse, when he beggs my Pardon, for his former
Insolences: I hate not his (or any man's) person, but his Sin. The method is
Rough cast, (like my self) if the matter be better polished, I care not: I
know, I shall not please all (neither would I) some for want of judgment, and
some for want of Love, and others for lack of Loyalty will condemn me; but
none of these do I regard: It is to the impartial, and juditious I appeal,
and to their judgment (only) will I submit. And if they please to adventure
but their Patience, as I have done my Pains, (which is not a little) I doubt
not of the issue: I have no ungodly ends, in this, or any other of my writings,
my Wishes are full as good, as John Bookers: I wish all happiness to the King
and Queens Majesty, and the Royal Progeny, and an end to the Miseries of this
languishing Kingdom. I love, and wish for the Book of Common Prayer again,
that was Sealed with the Blood of so many Martyrs, till which be, I expect not
to see Religion in its Pristine purity. I delight not in War, not can I pray
for an unjust or Dishonorable Peace.

From my Study in an honest Cavaliers house in Yorkshire, the 10. of September.
1646. So says a true, and freeborn Englishman, an abhorrer of all manner of
Treasons, and Rebellions, one that loves all manner of Christians, and us a
great honourer of True and Lawful Parliaments, Geo: Wharton.

Bellum Hybernicale, etc.
NOt many days, before the famous and sometimes flourishing University, and
City of Oxford was sacrificed as a Peace Offering (by some of the more
Pacificall Lords) and accordingly surrendered (upon Articles) otherwise
honorable) into the sacrilegious hands of the Sectaries and Schismatiques of
this Kingdom: (viz.) in this year 1646. (which is from the Creation of the
world, 5595. (to omit all other frivolous and fruitless computations and
Chronologies, wherewith Booker has foolishly stuffd, and crammed up a
malicious lying Pamphlet, by him styled A Bloody Irish Almanac, etc.) upon
Friday the twelfe day of June, there happened a notable Conjunction of the two
malevolent Planets, Saturn and Mars: Which Conjunction, notwithstanding it did
not manifest it self, with any storms, thunder or lightning, as John Booker
prognosticated in his un-sainted state-lying-Kalender: nor has been the
Prodromus of such loss, ruin, destruction, and desolation to the Kingdom of
Ireland, as is mentioned in the said Pamphlet; yet questionless the effects of
that malicious meeting, have already been notably showed both in Ireland, and
in many other Kingdom and Countries, Cities, and Towns, and upon particular
Persons who had any congruencie therewith in the Radix or Revolution of their
Nativities: But to the intent that this barking mungrell may not delude the
ignorant with his pedling trash, nor detract from, or otherwise abuse a whole
Nation, with his nauceous, and menacing expressions: I have assumed a liberty
of publishing this following Discourse, which is void of all envy, malice, or
partiality, but freely, modestly, and sincerely, relating whatsoever concerns
this Celestial meeting, according to the rules of Art, and the judgment of
the most approved Astrologers, ancient, and modern: wherein the judicious and
indifferent Readers may plainly and orderly perceive the ignorance and malice
of this trifling parasite: and rightly understand, the nature and quality of
the effects of this celestial congresse, when they shall begin to operate,
how long continue, what Nations, or Countries are therein principally
concerned, and how far the Kingdom of Ireland in particular; concluding,
whether or no, that (so long) oppressed Kingdom, be ordained for the stage,
whereon such bloudy-minded hel-hounds (as himself) are to perpetrate their
cruelty.

I will not trouble the judicious Reader with any examples of such events, as
have formerly happened in England or elsewhere, upon the like Conjunctions: For
that I acknowledge him to have collect^d in part.

But I will first examine the foundation, whereupon he has raised this so
deformed a structure, and accordingly proceed, either by adhering to him where
he has stumbled on any truth, or in dissenting from, and correcting him, where
I meet with his mistakes, ignorance and malice.

And first, I will artificially erect the Figure of heaven, according to the
doctrine of Regio montanus, to the true, or apparent time of this Conjunction,
and afterward compare it with that, which Booker has published (for I dare
not take this (or any other) upon trust either from him or M. Lilly) whereby,
I shall presume, not not only to discover his want of skill, in this ordinary
piece of Astronomy, but likewise to benefit some others as ignorant as
himself, (if any such can be) who desire to learn the exact manner of erecting
the Figure of heaven (by this one example) for any moment of time, out of the
Tables of Directions.

First then, we are to enquire, at what time these two Planets are conjoined.
I perceive that Booker has endeavored to follow Eichstadius, and so shall I
do (his tables being the most exact of any extant.)

degrees. min. June the 12 Saturn is direct in Taurus 14. 25. 13 14. 31. The
difference, which is Saturns diurn. motion, is 00. 06. June the 12 Mars is
direct in Taurus 14. 11. 13 14. 54.

The difference which is Mars his dium. motion, is 00. 43.

The excess, or difference of their diurn. motion, is 00. 37.

The intervall, or distance in long 'twixt Sat. and Mars, is 00. 14.

Then I say, If the excess 37. min. give 24. hours, what shall 14. min. the
intervall?

Facit her. 9. min. 5 which is the mean^, or equal time of this Conjunction in
the Meridian of Vraniburge, for which Eichstadius has calculated his
Ephimerides.

At which time, the Planets are thus in longitude and latitude.

degrees. min. Long. Sol in Canc. 01. 16. Lun. in Scor. 03. 12. Sat. in Tau. 14.
27. Mar. Iup. in Canc. 13. 38. Ven. in Tau. 16. 27. Mer. in Gem. 14. 47. Drag.
in Leo. 04. 0. degrees. min. Lat. Lun. 5. 11. MD. Sat. 2. 15. M. A. Iup. 0. 12. S.
A. Mar. 0. 46. M. D. Ven. 2. 17. M. A. Mer. 3. 28. M. A.

Now to know the difference of Meridians betwixt the City of Vraniburge and
Dublin (in Ireland, for which place Booker pretends to have erected his
Scheme) I seek out the longitude of Vraniburge, which (according to the
observation of Long^m^ntanm) was found to be 36. degrees. 45. min. as may be seen,
in his Astronomia Danica.

The longitude of Dublin (as our Countryman (M. Hues) has it, (in his treatise
of Globes, most excellently translated out of Latin into English, by M. John
Chilmead of Christ-Church in Oxford) is 16. degrees. 40. min. But I shall take it
as Booker has done, 17. degrees and a half, because it is not much above 3.
min. difference in time:) And I find 19. degrees. 15. min. difference in longitude,
answering, to one hour and 17. min. of time; which being subtracted from 9.
hours and 5. min. (because Vraniburge lies so much more Eastward then Dublin)
there remains 7. ho. 48. min. for the mean, or equal time of this
Conjunction in the Meridian of Dublin.

The (...) or equation of time, (to be added) is 6. min. 41. sec.

So, the true, or apparent time of this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, in the
Meridian of Dublin, is 7. ho. 54. min. and 41. seconds.

And to this moment of time, we are to erect the Figure of heaven, according
to the doctrine of Regiomontanus; which is done as follows: viz.

degrees. min. The true place of the Sun is, in Cancer 001. 16. His right
ascension, is, 091. 24. The right ascension of time, is, 118. 41. The right
ascension of the Mid-heaven, is, 210. 04. degrees. min. The Oblique ascension of
the 11. House is 240. 04. 12 270. 04. 1. 300. 04. 2. 330. 04. 3. 000. 04.

The Elevation of the Pole at Dublin, according to M. Hues, is 53. degrees. 10.
min. but I shall take it as Booker has done 53. degrees. and a half, (for he does
all by halves) and according to this latitude, we must find out the elevation
of the 11. 3. 12. and 2d. Houses, by the rational table of Houses, in
Regiomontanus.

degrees. degrees. min. The elevation of the Pole of the 11. and 3. houses Lat. 53. is
33. 34. 54. is 34. 32. 12. and 2. houses, Lat. 53. is 48. 59. 54. is 50. 01.
The First Difference, is, 00. 58. min. Second 01. 02. min.

1. Then I say, (by the rule of Proportion)

If 1. degrees. (or 60. min of Latitude) give 58. min. difference, what shall 30.
minutes?

Facit 29. min. which being added to 33. degrees. 34. min. gives 34. degrees. 3. min.
for the elevation of the 11. and 3. houses.

2. Again, I say, If 1. degrees. of latitude, give 1. degrees. 2. min. difference, what
shall 30. minutes?

Facit 31. min. which being added to 48. degrees. 59. min. makes 59. degrees. 30. min.
for the elevatton of the 12. and 2. houses.

So that now we have the Elevation of degrees. min. The 11. and 3. Houses 34. 03.
12. and 2. 49. 30. whereby we shall quickly find the degrees. and min. of the
Ecliptique, answerable to the ascentions of the respective houses, before
mentioned; in this following manner.

Pro cuspide X.
degrees. min. Ascentio recta M. C. est 210. 04. degrees. min. Scorp. degrees. min. Proxime
major 210. 46. 3 210. 04. Proxime minor 209. 49. 2 209. 49. Different. 0. 57.
1. 0. 15. 57. 60. 15. 900. (1. 60. 57. 900. 330. (5. Gradus Zodiaci est 2.
Scorp. 57. P. P. est 16. min. fere A. 285 45.

Vera cuspis X. M 2. 2. 16. fere

Pro cuspide XI. Ascens. 240. 4. Lat. 34. 3. ^ ^

Vora Cuspis XI. est Scorp. 19. 59.

Pro Cuspide XII. Ascen. 270. 4. Lat. 49. 30. ^ ^

Vera Cuspis XII. est Sagit. 5. 1.

Pro^^sp. 1. Ascon. 300. 4. Lat. 53. 30. ^ ^

Vera Cu^pis I. est Sagit. 24. 45.

Pro Cuspis II. Ascen. 330. 4. Lat. 49. 30. ^ ^

Vera Cuspis II. est Aquar. 3. 17.

Pro cusp. III. Ascen. 0. 4. Lat. 34. 3. ^

Collectio Cuspidum.
degrees. min. degrees. min X. 2. 16. Scorp. Taur. 2. 16. IV. XI. 19. 59. Scorp. Taur.
19. 59..V XII. 5. 1. Sagit. Gem. 5. 1. VI. I. 24. 45. Sagit. Gem. 24. 45. VII.
II. 3. 37. Aquar. Leon. 3. 37. VIII. III. 0. 6. Ariet Libr. 0. 6. IX. Thoema
coeleste, ex tabulis Directionum Regiomontani ad tempas Apparens Con^junctionis
Saturni et Martis; Anno Domini 1646


What think you now (M. Booker) have I not just cause to distrust, and
diligently to examine your work: and to call call your judgment in question,
which is grounded upon a wrong Basis? Do you not blush to see your ignorance,
your errors, your impudence, your malice, thus palp^bly discovered? Have you
not most grossly mistaken 2. degrees 25. min. in the twelfe and sixth Houses; 2.
degrees. 35. min. in the Ascend. and seventh house; 2. degrees. 59. min. in the
eleventh and fi^^ houses; 3. degrees. 46. min. in the tenth and fourth; four
degrees 47. min. in the eighth and second: and no less then 6. dee. and 10.
mm. in the third and ninth houses?

Is any man, so much beside himself, as to give credit to any of your
Progno^^^ques, when not one scruple of certainty, can be found in your
Calculations? And are not you and M. Lillis alike ashamed, to account your
selves Masters in Astrology; when I have made it appear, that neither of you
have yet attained so much skill, as to set a Figure of Heaven exactly? Will any
man of understanding think you fit to Prognosticate the effects of the Planets
and Stars, who are not of your selves able to calculate their true places,
motions, and aspects; but are forced to take them upon trust from others? For
so M. Lilly himself confesses, in his Englands Prophetical Merline, page 23.
in these words: viz. Having entreated my loving friend M. Matthew Fiske, to give
me the true Scheme, of the great conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 1603.
(for it was so) he gave me the positure aforesaid (exactly done) by the
Rodolphine Tables, etc.

And Page 76. of the same Book; I conceive it possible, and do believe, I have
the conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in 164^. exquisitely done by the same
learned hand; and that either he, or any as able as himself, may compass the
true moment of any Conjunction.

This is a modest and ingenous acknowledgement of M. Lillies want of skill in
Astronomy, for you see, he was fain to be beholden to M. Fiske for calculating
the Conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter, in 1603. and 164^. or else he knew not
where to have had them: And he confesses that he does but believe the last of
them to be exquisitely done: he cannot tell how to determine whether it be so,
or not, of his own knowledge.

And by this I see, it is no wonder, that M. Lilly should mistake so grossly of
late, in all the Schemes which he has published; having lost no less then his
right hand with the death of M. Fiske: Since which, he has done all things
sinisterly, and Annually perplexed us with a hotch-potch of his own
left-handed-worke, to his perpetual shame, and the discredit of better-handed
Ar^ists, in this curious knowledge.

For be it from me to conceive otherwise, but that M. Matthew F^ske (whose
memory I honor) was a most excellent Artist, (for the Genesis I have been with
several times, and conversed with him before these unh^ppy differences were)
and I am ^ble (though M. Lilly be not) to calculate the Motions of the
Rudolphine (or any other) Tables, and therefore am confident (I had said sure
if I would have taken the pains) that he has calculated the places of the
Planets truly, (if M. Lilly have so printed them:) but I believe M. Fiske left
the setting of the Figure to M. Lilly: For I am very sure the latter of them,
is very erroneous, as will appear to every man, that will take the pains to
examine the Cuspes of each house according to the time set down: For examine i^
but thus far.

degrees. min. The place of the Sun there, is in Sagittary. 26. 2. (For the seconds
can make no sensible difference.) His right ascension, is 265. 40. The right
ascen. of the time there posited, is, 290. 15. which being added to the right
Ascension of the Sun, and the whole Circle deducted, leaves the right
ascension of the tenth house, 195. 55.

To which agrees the 17. degrees. and 17. min. of Libra, for the Cuspe of the
tenth house: whereby it appears that M. Lilly has erred 13. minutes in the
Cuspes of the tenth and fourth houses.

degrees. min Now add 9. degrees. to the right ascension of the tenth house, and you
have the Oblique Ascension of the Horoscope 285. 55. To which agrees in the
Latitude of 51. degrees. 32. min. which is generally received for the Latitude of
London libr. 15. 24.

Which is the true degree and minute, ascending at that time, so that M. Lilly
has likewise mistaken eight minutes in the Cuspes of the first and fourth
houses.

And yet for all this, I will not blame M. Lilly, so much as this ignor^nt
Puppy Booker: because he freely (...) his own insufficiency, and to whom he was
beholden for his helps: whereas this impudent Clown, will neither acknowledge,
nor amend his errors, nor make use of any learned Artist to rectify and assist
him. And this is the right way, to continue in the wrong, -- march on Jacke --

But why do I discourage the poor Snap, for alas! If he should not be doing
something (though to never so little purpose) he would quickly be undone; for,
writing of un-Sainted Almanacks, and Figur^-casting, for stolen goods, and such
like Q^estions, is all the trade he has to live by; wherein commonly his
judgment, is as certain, as his Figures are true: yet thus much I could
willingly allow the silly fellow, would he but forbear thus frequently, and
ridiculously to befool himself in Print: I will not deny, but that many things
of that nature, may be performed by Astrology, with an able Artist: but far
be it from me to be so idle, as to think such things can be possibly done by
lack Booker. I my self have had experience of many Queries of this nature,
which I have answered (at the request of some particular friends) to my own,
and the Querents admiration: but I ev^r abhorred (like him) to make a
profession and living of it: indeed for Nativities (wherein I have been most
conversant) I commonly followed Cardanu^ his rule; I never wrought without a
reward, Non sine pretio, nec cum ^x^guo pretio: And I condemn any knowing man
that (...) otherwise; for he that truly labors in the tediousnes of a
Nativity, d^s^^ves no small reward: and whosoever bargains with the Artist,
(like a nigard) defaces his own stamps: It is none of the least blessings
bestowed upon man (by the Providence of God) that he may be forewarned of a
mischief impending: in that he has the benefit of time offered him, wherein
he may possibly diverse, or at leastwise mitigate any evil, or otherwise with
joy and thankefullnes expect and receive any blessing portended by the Planets
and Stars.

But it is a curse to run blind-sold, and headlong into any mischance or
misery, being neither sensible or mindful thereof. I pity those Cowards, who
(like some that use to wink^, when they fight) are afraid to foresee any evil
of themselves, as though their nescience (or non-visibility) of the evil, were
sufficient to divert, or secure them from the danger.

But I have deviated to ^^far from the matter I intend, being first to handle
the effects of this Conjunction, and therein to show John Booker his errors,
and the world his (and M. Lillies) unpar^lleld malic^: to which limit, I shall
now confine my self, with all candor and impartiality.

This Conjunction (whereof we are now to treat) falls out in the 14. degrees. and
27. min. of Taurus (as you may see by the Scheme) the first Sign of the second
Quadrangle of the Zodiaque; a Cold and Dry, Melancholy, Feminine and
Meridional Sign: which is within 5. degrees opposite to that point of Scorpio,
wherein the Come^ that appeared Anno 1618. was first observed.

The Ascendent is the 24 degree 45. min. of Sagitary, the 2. degrees. and 16. min.
of Scorpio colminates, and the whole Scheme not much diff^ring from that of the
last great Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, Anno 164^. And in the sign which
beholds the Dodecatemorie of that great Conjunction, with a Sextile Aspect.

Messahalah (the Arabian) to whom we are much beholden for this kind of
learning) a most excellent and ancient Astrologer) in the eleventh Chapter of
his Book, entitled, De ratione circuli, ot stellarum, et qualiter operantur
in hoc seculo; delivers us this general rule: Conjunctio (says he) Saturni et
Martis, significat accidentia Bellorum, atque guerrarum contrarietates: cumque
volueris scire eadem accidentia, scit^ dominantem in figura little
Conjunctionis, qui si fuerit fortuna, significabit bonum, et aptationem esse,
Et si fuerit malus, significat malum, et ejus impedimentum. Scias etiam, quod
Conjunctio eorum in signis hominum, significat multitudinem infirmit atum eorum
et conjunctio eorum in alique angulorum anni, significet contrarietatem
divitum, vel regum, et guerrarum multitudinem, et durabit res, donec jungantur
alia vice, et conjunctio eorum in igneis significat siccitatem, et terrae
sterilitatem, et in aereis ventos, in aquaticis vero multitudinem pluviarum, et
in terreis gelu et uivem, et frigoris multitudinem. Scias etiam quod fortunae
cum aspexerint, minuent malum, et mali angebunt. Proba, quemadmodum narravi
tibi: et invenies, si Deus voluerit.

To which purpose (if we follow this approved rule) it will be necessary, that
we first collect the particular Fortitudes, and debilities of the Planets,
according to their situation and places in the Figure: whereby we may know,
which of them is strongest, and which w^akest, and accordingly pronounce
judgment, good or bad, as the Rule enjoyne^.

The dignities and debilities of the Planets, in the Figure of this Conjunction.
Saturnes Fortitudes.
Being in the fourth house 4. Free from combustion 5. Direct in motion 4 Swift
2. Oriental 2 Conjunction with Venus 5. Sextile with Jupiter 3. 25.
Saturnes Debilities.
Peregrine 5. Conjunction with Mars 5. 10.
Jupiters Fortitudes.
Exaltation 5. Being in the 7. house 4. In Sextile with Venus 3. Swift in
motion 2. Direction motion 4. 18.
Jupiters Debilities.
Subradiis 4. Occidentall 2. 6.
Mars his Fortitudes.
Being in the 4. house 4 Free from Combustion 5 Direct in motion 4 Swift in
motion 2. Oriental 2. Conjunction with Venus 5. Sextile with Jupiter 3. 25
Mars his Debilities.
Peregrine 5. In his detriment 5. Conjunction with Saturn 5. 15.
Sun's Fortitude.
Being in the 7. House 4
Sun's Debilities.
Peregrin^ 5. Slow motion 2. Terms of Mars. 2. 9.
Venus her Fortitudes.
Being in the 5. house 3. Triplicitie 3. Free from Combustion 5. Direct in
motion 4. Sextile with Jupiter 3. In her house 5. In Gaudio 1. In terms of
Jupiter 2. 26.
Venus her Debilities.
Orientality 2. Conjunction with Saturn. and Mars. 5. Slow in motion. 2. 9.
Mercuries Fortitudes.
Being in his House 5. Triplicitie 3. Free from combustion 5. Direct in motion
4. In terms of Venus 2. 19.
Mercuries Debilities.
Being in the 6. House 4. Slow in motion 2. Oriental 2. 8.
The Moon her Fortitudes.
Being in the tenth house 5. Free from Combustion 5. Increasing in light 2. 12.
The Moon her Debilities.
Peregrine 5. In her fall 4. Slow motion ^. In the terms of Mars 2. 13.



Saturn has Fortitudes 15 Jupiter has Fortitudes 12 Mars has Fortitudes 10
Sol has Debilities 5 Venus has Fortitudes 17 Mercury has Fortitudes 11 Luna
has Debilities 1


By which it appears, that the benign and bountiful Planet Venus, is
Almuten, or chief dominatrix in this Conjunction; in that she excedeth all
the rest of the Planets, in number of Fortitudes: Saturn is next, as having
15. testimonies of strength: Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury, are likewise all very
powerful. The Moon is very unfortunate, and the Sun is the weakest in the
Figure, being out of all his essential dignities, slow in motion, and in the
terms of Mars, having no other considerable testimony of strength, but only
his accidental position, in the West Angle.

Thus much being rightly known, and understood, it will be no difficult matter
to foresee, what (in all probability) may be the natural quality of the
effects of this Conjunction, if we stick but close to the known rules of Art,
(whence both M. Lilly and Booker do ordinarily deviate) and avoid the vain
and tedious loquacity, wherewith they so often, and much torment us: you see
(M. Lilly) I have followed Origanus in not making Venus and Mercury fortifyed
by their Orientality; (as I did, Anno 1645. upon my Astrologicall judgment, 7.
May, according to Pez^lius, (who makes no distinction, as you may see, Page
47.) because I would avoid all future cavills upon this occasion: But (by the
way) I shall exhort you and John Booker to suspend your usual snarling,
touching the fallibility of that Discourse; for your opprobrious speeches
cannot injure me with men of moderate judgment; nor can the frequent and eager
reiterating thereof, cloak or excuse your ignorance in point of Art: what I
then writ, was according to a supposed time taken, and delivered me (by a Capt.
E. A;
Gentleman of quality.) And you know, in this case, the Tempus aestimatum is
not to be rectified as in Nativities: I know no true Trutina for that (Sirs.)
And a few minutes error in time, will alter the whole face of heaven; which
must needs vary the judgment, being derived from a different position; I was
requested to deliver my opinion according to the time given me, which was as
you saw: yet I never intended it for the Press, had not the importunity of
some friends prevailed with me. And I am able to maintain the same opinion (in
point of Art) according to the time supposed, against the proudest
State-pleaser that date oppose me. But admit what what you would have the world
to believe, That it had been an error of judgment, without relation had to any
mistake in time; why (I pray Sirs) is not an error in the Astrologer, as
tolerable as in the Divine, Physician, or Lawyer, or in men of any other
profession? Is the Divines judgment always Gospel? Does the Physician always
cure? Is the Lawyers opinion ever infallible? Does the L^gician still prove? O^
the Rhetorician always persuade? So long as we are men, we must be subject to
infirmities, over-sights, and errors; Humanum est errare. And (which is more)
it is the pleasure of God, many times, to frustrate the portents of heaven, for
the sins of the people; who otherwise might partake of their natural
sweetness and benignity. It was a wise saying of a learned Divine, yet living,
That When God will have a people beaten, he ties their hands behind them. And
this (I am sure) has been the unhappiness of the Loyal party: But shall
therefore the Astrologer be blamed for adhering to the Rules and Principles of
his Art? I wonder with what truth M. Lilly in July last, prognosticated of
loss to the Parliament, and of any Motion of their Army Westward; and of so
much action there, when all men know their party prevailed in every place of
the Kingdom by one means or other; and that they had no need of sending any
Forces into the West. And in the same month of July, what intended he, think
you, where he tatled of an Army wandering near Oxford? You see by the course of
Heaven, he conceived Oxford should have been holden still by the Kings Forces,
when (notwithstanding) it was surrendered in June before. I could instance many
hundreds more of his errors in the rest of his foolish Pamphlets, as his
Merlinus Augli^us Junior, the Starry Messenger, and especially in his fabulous,
and most ridiculous Prophecy of the White King and Dreadful Deadman; which me
think he should not think of without a blush, there being not so much as one
sentence in it, derived from lawful Art; nor which has answered one jot of
his expectation: I shall pass by his Supernatural sights and Appariti^ns, (so
much laughed at) because it has Imprimatur John Booker in the front of it: I
shall not meddle with his Mother Shipton, nor his story of the dumb woman,
because they are all of them foolish, frivolous, and false, and cannot become a
Scholar. Do but compare Bookers bloody Prognostiques against the Kingdom of
Ireland upon this Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus, with the
wonderful success the Irish have had against their enemies (whether English
or Scots) ever since; and you shall find, that John Booker has been grossly
mistaken in his Astrology: But this his error, is, merely in the rules of Art,
which is no way excusable: for whatsoever I delivered, was rightly grounded
upon Art: and I duly cited my Authors for it, for the Readers better
satisfaction, which I conceive sufficient for any Artist, whether the event be
answerable or not: For as it is not enough for an Artist to content himself
alone with the Rules and Observations of his Predecessors, but that he ought to
add something of his own, whereby to propagate the Learning which he studies:
No more is it lawful for any man to delude the world with the foolishness of
his own deluded fancy, and idle conceptions alone, as both Master Lilly and
Booker have frequently done, without any Reason given, or Authority quoted for
their Opinions.

As for the mistake (I will not say malice) of that Practicioner in the
Mathematiques, M. Henry Harflete, in his Vox coelorum, or Predictions defended,
etc. who in the 49. page of that Book, does wrongfully intimate (to my
disparagement) as if I should say, that a Fixed Star might properly be said to
be Aspected with any Planet: I must tell him, that accusation of his is very
untrue: and whether it proceeded from his misguided and incon^iderate zeal to
Master Lilly, or out of any disaffection to me, deserves a gentle lash, in that
I am most certain, he cannot produce any such assertion of mine, either in
word or writing. It is true, that Master Lilly taxed me for saying that Mars
was in a Sextile Aspect with Caput Draconis, in my Almanac 1645. which was an
error of the Press: (the Character of Caput Draconis being mistaken for the
Character of Leo, as I have sufficiently proved in my Answer to M. Lilly,
printed with my Prognostication for 1647.) but that I ever mentioned any Fixed
Star to be aspected by any Planet, in that, or any other of my Writings,
(unless M. Harflete will say that the Dragons head is a fixed star) is both
frivolous and false: And therefore I shall desire that Critical Gentleman to
examine the words of my Prognostication for that year, and my aforesaid
Answers to M. Lilly's Objections, and I presume he will show me so much
civility as to revoke that his unadvised censure, and excuse me of ignorance in
that particular: And yet I could have stopped Master Lilly's mouth with these
words of Leapoldus, Tract. 5. de annorum revolutionibus, viz. Mali aspectus ad
Caud. Drac. significant famem, frigus, and pestilentiam. Nor is this Author an
Vtopian, or single in that expression: But I am of a different opinion, and
therefore shall not insist longer on these trivialties, which are fitter for M.
Booker to instruct his daughter A child of his so named in memory of the
victory near York.
Victoria in, then to be thought on by men of riper judgments. But to return
to the matter in hand: I shall requite John Booker with a more honest and
accurate examination of some special passages in his Bloody Irish Almanac,
whereupon he raises this fond and false judgment of his, and so proceed.

The first I meet with, is, the first of his Observations, Page 36. where he
says, That Saturn and Mars are Culminating with that Fatal Star Caput
Algol, or the head of Medusa, etc. This (Jack) is both an improper, and a False
expression of yours.

Scheme) the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars happens near the end of the 4.
House of the Heavens, from the Ascendent; In imo coeli, the lowest part, or
bottom of Heaven: Now (Sir) how any Planet or Star in this part of the
Heavens, can be said properly to be in Culmine coeli, in the top, or highest
part of Heaven in respect of Dublin in Ireland, is far beyound my reading,
and requires John Bookers further explication: For my part, I cannot devise,
how he can avoid or excuse this improper Phrase of his, unless he tell me, The
Worlds turned up-side-downe, and in that sense he chokes me, and I am bound to
credit him, and cry him mercy.

Astrologers, because you instance the proximitie of Saturn and Mars to Caput
Algol (in the word With) to annexe a Debilitie more, to each of them, then
really they have: For, and so far are they from that Fixed and violent
Star, that it is not to be accounted for any D^bilitie by the opinion of any
Astrologer that ever I read, they being above 7. degrees distant from it: for
Saturn and Mars (as before we noted) are in 14. degrees 27. min. And (according
to Copernicus) Caput Algol is in 21. degr. 39. m. of Taurus, which is 7. degr.
and 13. min. difference: And according to Origanus, Page 540. Garcaeus Page
249. Pezelius Page 48. And all other Astrologers both ancient and Modern, the
Planets are never truly said to be debilitated by Caput Algol, unless they be
Intra distantiam quinque graduum A. vel P. which you see these planets are not.

The next thing I shall desire the indifferent Reader to take notice of, is,
his own Scheme of this Conjunction, and in it the Cuspe of the 5. house, as he
has made it; and you may observe that Saturn and Mars, are but 2. degrees 33.
min. distant from the same: Yet yeverthelesse in the 37. page of his Pamphlet,
he takes his judgment from the 4. House, which is contrary to Origanus, and
diverse other Authors, and to M. Lilly likewise, who allow 5. degrees. preceding,
and 5. degrees. subsequent for the Cuspe of each House: according to which Rule, he
ought to have given judgment from the 5. House, and not from the 4. You
remember (Jack) how M. Lilly spit his venom at me, in the 35. page of his
Anglicus for 1645. for giving judgment of Jupiters being in the 4. and Mars in
the 6. (according to the opinion of Rhemetius) when they were within less then
5. degrees. of the Cuspes of the 5. and 7. House. Now, I wonder much, how you dare
dissent from your loving friend M. Lilly, especially in this particular,
considering what you said in your last page of your Epistle to the Reader, viz.
That M. Lilly and you have the same principles in Art, and that your judgments
in the general will have answerable success. And, that M. Lilly may see, it
is no mistake in you, but mere opinion, let him peruse your Prog. for this
year 1646. and in the Spring-Quarter he shall find you giving judgment upon
Mercury's being in the 10. House; when in M. Lilly's own Scheme (erected for
the same Latitude, Meridian, and moment of time) he wants but 2. degrees. and 9.
min. of the 11. House. And now (lack) do you think M. Lilly will not shake his
head at you, for this gross contradiction? would he have thought it possible
that his fellow-champion (in State-Astrologie) John Booker, would have
contradicted him, and joined in opinion with those two Malignants, Naworth and
Wharton at Oxford? O tempora, O mores! I cannot pretermit another of his errors
in the same Quarter and page of his Prog. where he says that Jupiter is free
from all impediments, save only his Detriment: And yet Jupiter is there both
Per^grine, and Occidentall of the Sun. I wonder (M. Lilly) that you will
suffer this Idiot in Astrology, to profess himself joynt-purchaser with you,
in your Principles, that has not yet learned the A. B. C. of Astronomy.

But have your judgments answerable success? I will examine that also.

If M. Lilly had handled the Scheme of this Conjunction, or if you (Jack) had
followed his Principles, it is evident by what I have said, that the judgment
should have been deduced from the 5. house and not from the 4. which (according
to Haly, Part. 8. c. 7.) would have afforded thus much for the Irish. viz. Si
quando Saturnus fuerit in domo quinta fortunatus significat quod homines
gaudebunt suis filiis, and quod senes multo^um dierum, and praepositi villarum
habebunt bonum and utilitatem, ex part altertus gentis, and ex part filiorum.
Which is (in effect) That when Saturn shall be fortunate in the 5. house, he
signifies, that men shall rejoice in their Children; And that Aged men, and
Head-Officers (or Magistrates) of Towns shall reap much good and commodity by
the help of another nation, and by means of their Children.

And this is the judgment which should have been given upon that position, if
you had followed M. Lilly's Principles.

Here (by the way) I beseech the indifferent Reader to take notice of Bookers
inveterate hatred and malice to the distressed Kingdom of Ireland: For, as he
neither will, nor dare speak or write one jot of truth, which may seem any
whit fatal to the States: so he is fully resolved to smother all things that
tend to the good and safety of Ireland.

For, if he had taken his judgment from the 5. House (as Master Lilly will
acknowledge he ought to have done) he must of necessity have delivered us the
precedent judgment; but that, he conceived to be too good for that Kingdom:
For (thought John Booker) that Aphorism says, they shall take pleasure in
their children, and intimates much joy and assistance to them: as though some
Nation were resolved to come in to their help, and engage in the War against
the States: which I must not mention; for by that means, I may disanimate the
States-Soldiers, which are to be sent thither, if they should perceive Ireland
to be so powerful: And on the other side, I should encourage Ireland to pursue
their design with greater Policy, Courage and Resolution. No, No, the thing
which I am to endeavor, is to tumble out Victory upon Victory to the States,
and make mention of nothing but utter ruin, desolation, and confusion to that
barbarous Nation, And assure such of the Brethren as have contributed toward
the ma^agerie of the Godly and blessed War against Ireland, shall have Land
by the Belly: And therefore, though it be never so repugnant to my Rules, He
rather take my judgment from the unfortunate position of Saturn in the fourth
house; and so I shall have matter enough, and meet for the purpose: For,
Saturnus in quarta demo, and ibi malificus significat quodres, and adificia
cadent, minuentur plantationes, and abscindentur aquae, etc. He there
signifies, that Houses and Buildings shall fall, come to decay and perish,
planting or setting shall be diminished, waters cut off, the people shall be
lessened, or abated, there shall be poverty to them, and the people of that
Country shall be obsessed, or besieged, they shall not dare to go out of their
Town, (Cities, Castles, or Countries) by reason of the fear they shall have of
their enemies: and this shall be more certain, if the 4. house shall be a
fixed sign, and the hurt (damage) or loss shall be more strong or durable.

And this is the scope of Bookers business, and agrees verbatim with the sense
of the House.

And he further says, this (last) Aphorism agrees exactly with the position
of the Maglignant Planet Saturn in every respect: Which is an apparent
falsehood: For the Aphorism takes no place, unless Saturn were virtually in
the Fourth house, which he is not according to M. Lillys principles in this
figure of his; Or if he were, yet is it not in force, except (likewise) that
Saturn were found unfortunate in the fourth house: Neither of which he is, by
his Position in Bookers figure, for (as I have formerly demonstrated) Saturn
is the strongest save one, of all the Planets in the figure, having fifteen
testimonies of strength, whereby he is very much fortified and powerful.

Now the genuine signification of Saturnes being Locally, virtually and
fortunately placed in the 4. house, (as he now is in the Figure, which I have
exactly corrected) according to the opinion of Haly Part. 8. c. 7. is this, Si
quando Saturnus fuerit quarta d^mo, and fuerit potens, significat aedificare,
et propagare agriculturam, and quod homines hoc diligent, and de eo mult^^m
erunt soliciti: that is, when Saturn shall be in the fourth House, and strong,
(or powerful) he signifies that men shall betake themselves to building of
houses, and till^ge, (or husbandry) and that they shall be much in love
therewith, and very careful thereof: And moreover Haly tells us, Part. 8. Cap
25. Quando Mars junctus fuerit cum Saturn^, struet quilibet alteri frauds, and
deceptiones, and erunt inter homines percussiones, and vulnera, maxim si
fuerit in signo humaeno, etc. In brief, both Haly, Guido, Messahalah, and all
other sound Astrologers tell us, that this meeting of the two Malevolents, has
signification of Wars, Contentions, and strifes, fraudulent dealing, etc. And
that there shall be much banging and slashing amongst men, especially if the
Conjunction happen in a humane sign (humane signs Gemini, Libra, Virgo,
Aquarius, and the first half of Sagittari) that the King shall receive
hinderance and trouble, by means of some person, that is of the Country, or
Nation subject to the sign, wherein the Conjunction happens.

This I say, and no other, is the true signification of this Conjunction in the
fourth house, and all men know, that a great part thereof has already been
fulfilled in that oppressed Kingdom of Ireland, since the Conjunction
happened: and much more will be there yet manifested: But what, shall it
therefore follow, that the Wars there, must inevitably ruin and destroy that
bleeding Nation? That they (of all People) must become a prey, and prize to the
Blood-thirsty, and be utterly extirpated? Truly, and verily, and sincerely, and
forsooth Jack, I speak like a Brother, Sir, the Heavens display no such Banner:
For I beseech you recollect your self but a little, and upon examination you
shall find, that the benign Planet, Venus, dispos^th of this Conjunction; that
she is Lady of the Figure, and likewise corporally there present: Vincunt enim
semper plura testimonia, sive boni venturi, sive maliilla fuerint in
Predictionibus Astrologicis. Moreover Mars, who is Lord of the tenth House,
(which is the house that has signification of Kings, Emperors, Princes,
Generals of Armies, Governors of Cities, Castles, and Towns, and all other
Commanders, etc.) is exceeding strong, and powerful, being very much assisted
by the comfortable Beams of the benign and bountiful Planets Jupiter, and
Venus; and the Moon, (who naturally has signification of the Commonalty) is in
mutual reception with Mars: But the Ascendent and his Lord have principal
signification of the People: Nota, quod asc^ndens, and Luna, and domini eorum
sunt significatores Populi. Haly, Page 380. The Sign Sagittary ascends, and
Jupiter Lord thereof, is in Cancer, the place of his Exaltation, very strong,
beholding the Conjunctionall Degree, with a Sextile Aspect: Mars likewise
disposes of the place of the Moon, and a great part of the Ascendant, having
there the dignities of Exaltation and term, in the intercepted Sign Capricorn.

These several Positions and configurations, being carefully weighed, induce
me to believe, that the Kingdom of Ireland, shall never suffer that misery and
ruin, which Booker (out of his gall) does threaten them with: It is very true,
that much strife, cottention, quarrelling, and bloodshed is portended unto
them by this meeting of Saturn and Mars, and we know they have tasted of it
already, and some body else have been sharers with them: But I tell you (Jack)
it has been, and is still likely (for the most part) to be with much advantage
to the Catholic party: they will gain, and then you know (Jack) who must
lose: The Figure tells me, that their Nobility, and prime Commanders, shall be
very prudent, powerful, and prosperous in their actions: That they shall
unanimously accord to repel the enemy, and work their own Freedom: That the
People, (signified by the Ascendent (which is here free and safe from the
Malevolents) and Jupiter Lord thereof, and the Moon) shall voluntarily, and
freely assist, and contribute to the maintenance of the War: That thereby they
shall be much impoverished in their estates, for the Dragons tail afflicts the
house of Substance, and the Moon is approaching (though slowly) to opposition
with the Conjunctionall-degree: Yet there is a Prohibition, for she comes
first to the Trine of Jupiter, which will abate much of the evil threatened by
her unfortunate Positure: And it is evident, that they shall have liberty and
leisure to raise themselves Houses, to till their ground, sow and reap, maugre
all their enemies malice, power, and Plots: in truth, (if any thing may be
termed good that is gotten by the Sword) this Conjunction has signification of
much good generally to befall that Kingdom by means of this War: I confess
it would have been more terrible to them, if it had been in a humane Sign,
which now it is not: For Taurus is a Bestiall-Sign, it may do harm to their
Oxen and Sheep. Et multiplicatur mors in muli^ribus, and vincet cholera super
eas: There shall be many falsehoods and terrible rumors spread abroad; the
waters shall be increased, but not cut off, as Booker tells us: It fore-shewes
the death of many excellent and eminent persons; that the inferior sort shall
be somewhat oppressed and undervalued: That Women shall wax impudent and
^alacious: That Horses shall be dear: And there shall be a great destruction
of Fruits and Trees, through the abundance of he^te: This is the (...)
Albumasar: But I see not any reason why they should (...) much pestered, either
with Famine, or the Plague, only (...) and Mars in T^uro, infirmabuntur
mulieres in (...), and viri in testiculis, and vesica. Aid they have (...) in
abundance from Foreign parts, whereby their (...) not been frustrated, as John
Booker divineth, page (...) interposition of those friendly beams of the Sun,
and (...), does promise much more unto them; You see Jack, they (...) in
Cancer, the Ascendant of Scotland: You would think strange, if Ireland should
have cause to thank Scotland for some such thing: And I dare aver upon good
grounds of Art, that there is some such thing intended by the Heavens: I have
some reasons for this my conjecture, which you M. John Booker, cannot
apprehend, or judge of.

But I know no reason why you should subject the Kingdom of Ireland, to the
ill influence of Saturn, more then any other Nation that is under the division
of Taurus, Scorpio, Aquarius, and Lev: for we know, Helvetia, Cyclades Islands,
Russia, Asia, Cyprus the lesser, Media, Parthia, a great part of Sweadland,
Lor^ign, Campania, Rhetia, Franconia, Persia, and many more Kingdoms, and
particular towns and Cities are in the same division, and as much, or rather
more concerned then Ireland: All that can be truly said, is only, that Ireland
is like to participate with the rest of the Kingdoms, etc. before mentioned,
in the influence of this Conjuction, whether it be for good or evil.

For you to say, that in regard of the horrid murders that have been there
committed upon the Protestants of that Kingdom, it is likelyest to undergo the
divine justice of God, more then the rest; it is no Astrologicall reason, nor
(for ought you know) may some of the other Kingdoms before named, be less
guilty of the same sins then Ireland: or deserve a less share of the ill
influence of this Conjunction: I pray Jack, let you and I suspend our
judgments from intermedling, much more determining, things of that nature. It
is more proper for Divines then Astrologers.

That which we ought to do, ^ to contain our selves within the limits of
nature: and it is questionable whether the English, Irish or Scots, have been
the Authors of that Barbarism, and bloodshed you mention: For he that will
lay aside passion, and private interest, and rightly consider the real and
radical causes of the Irish insurrection, may find others besides the Irish,
as much, if not more guilty of the blood of those many thousands of Christians,
which has been shed since the beginning of that bloody War.

But this is Wormwood to an Orange Scarfs and Feather: Yet for their better
satisfaction, I would advise them to peruse that moderate and judicious
Philaerenus, Mercurius Hybernicale, and there they shall have the naked truth
clearly and impartially related: I have been intimate with many of that Nation
of several qualities, yet could I never discover any more inherent cruelty or
Barbarism in them, then in our selves, but for the most part, (...) them to be
men of singular good education, and naturally averse to all inhumanity. The
truth is, they hate to live in bondage, or to have their consciences enforced:
and indeed, the settling religion by bloodshed, is none of the best
State-policies: Such Divines as have tongues to their consciences will tell you
so: or ought I know, every man's Religion ought to be dearer to him then his
life, and I know no reason why the Irish may not challenge as much freedom and
privilege in the enjoyment of their Religion, as is allowed the Independants,
Anabaptists, Brownists, and at the least a hundred more Sects, and Schisms,
within the Lines of Communication: who have liberty without any restraint or
limitation, to exercise their Gifts, (as they term it) both publicly and
privately: To preach and write what they please, and even to cloy the Press
with their Heresies, and Schisms.

And if we look back upon the original ground of the Irish insurrection; was
it not high time (think you) for the Irish (after they were denied any
reasonable answer to their Propositions, which were sent and delivered in an
humble and peaceable manner to the Parliament, by Commissioners of that
Kingdom, who were dismissed hence without any hopes of having their grievances
redressed, which (notwithstanding) were far greater, and more intolerable,
then those which the Scots pretended: when they clearly perceived so many
pernicious Plots, and damnable designs daily inventing against them, and with
what Acrimony the Roman Catholics here were proceeded against after the third
of November 1640. After so much swearing and forswearing to take off the Earl
of Strafords head: And the Parliament electing a new Deputy of their own mould,
and metal, to be sent over in his stead: And his Majesty's Person in
continual hazard, by the frequent tumults of the Sectarists, and
Schismatiques: was it not time (I say) their Nation being thus neglected, and
threatened, (his Majesty's Person being not exempt from danger) and all this
occasioned by their own fellow Subjects) to associate and unite themselves: and
to stand upon their guard, for the preservation of their Religion, Lives and
liberties? And was it more Rebellion in them, by the known Laws of this or
that Land, to raise Forces for the necessary defense of their Kingdom: then in
the English, or Scots, to raise so many great Armies, that have fought against
his Majesty under the pretense of fighting for him: whilst yet there has been
no body to oppose him, but themselves? I remember a few verses that were
written (by some body) Anno 1641. they resemble the form of a Petition,
directed to his Majesty, by the considerate Catholics of Ireland: they are
pretty ones, and therefore I will here give you them, as I had them from a
friend.

MOst gracious Sovereign, grant that we may have
Our ancient Land and Faith: it is all we crave.
Your English, and your Scots, (not so content)
Claim all that is Yours, by Act of Parliament.
Their Tyranny we hate: confess your right:
It Is not against you, it is against them we fight.
Whilst you were King, we were your Subjects: scorn,
To be their Slaves: we are Fellow Subjects borne.
Heavens bless your Majesty, increase your Powers:
You being your Self again, we still are Yours.
But to return again to John Booker, (for I will not lose him yet) I would
gladly demand a Reason from him in Art, for his menacing of France, or Spain,
with vengeance for assisting the Irish: or why the Pope should come in any
danger of hazarding his Triple-Crowne in the Quarrel: unless the States
intend to advance for Italy: If they do, they may do well to transmit the
Directory to Rome, as the pre-cursor of a new Reformation there: but I am
afraid Sir Thomas his courage will cool at the conceit. Nor is it pertinent
to the handling of this Conjunction, for Booker to tell us an old story of the
Spanish Armade in 88. or of the Gunpowder Treason 1605. The wickedness of
those Devilish attempts are both thought on, and abhorred by every true English
Christian.

Or of what concernment is the Decollation of Mary, Queen of Scots, Anno 1587.
to the Kingdom of Ireland, because that when she was beheaded, Saturn was in
Taurus, as now he is?

Or of Saturn and Mars their being conjoined in the year 1588. a little
before the Spanish Armado appeared upon the English Coast? Does not John Booker
here most wretchedly confound himself? Instead of going about to prove
Saturnes progress through Taurus ominous to Ireland, he contrarily produces
examples, which prove that Position dangerous to England and Scotland. For
(what ever his meaning be) he instances not any one thing hurtful to Ireland
in either of those years: And then he robs Sir Christopher Heydon of more then
a whole Page, concerning the general Occurrences in the world, which happened
in 88. without any mention made of that most learned and judicious Knight. And
so he proceeds (to fill up the remainder of his malicious Pamphlet) with
railing at the Irish, telling them, how they have ever been most rebellious and
treacherous to the English Nation, and have most barbarously and inhumanely
murdered many thousand souls, etc. But we know of another Kingdom that has
sometimes been more rebellious and treacherous then they, for less cause. But
I never heard of any Souls that ever either of them murdered. I speak not
this to justify or maintain any inhumane action in Ireland, or elsewhere,
(for my nature abhors all manner of cruelty to the worst of men; I think I
could not harm either M. Lilly or John Booker in word or deed, if I had them
in my power, but rather use them with all civil respect and courtesy, if they
were worse then they be) nor to countenance Treason and Rebellion: that I need
not, it has been sufficiently done by a far greater power. But the thing I
aim at, is, to unmaske Bookers inveterate hatred to that distressed Nation;
who if he were but half so charitable, as he is either unreasonable, or
ignorant, he would not attempt to Assassine the Honor of a whole Nation, with
his invectives, but rather suspend these his rash censures, and wish a happy
union, then the confusion of so many Christians.

The remainder of his Pamphlet tends to the defense of Astrologis, (wherein he
still plays the thief with Sir Chr: Heydon) and of the Planet Venus her
appearance in the day time, at the birth of our most hopeful Prince Charles,
which he says (if she presignifieth any thing) was the miseries of this
Kingdom: Because (says he) it is usual, and an ordinary thing, for Venus to
be seen in the day time. I grant him, that it is both usual, and ordinary;
but not always at the birth of Princes. It is both usual and ordinary for
Saturn and Mars to be in Conjunction, and shall we therefore say it
presignifies nothing? I confess I have not seen any Authors that handle such
Appearances, nor has Booker any other Authority, then his foolish Fancy, for
saying she was the Prodromus of these unhappy differences in England: But he
that shall make inspection into the Positure of the Heavens, when Venus was in
Apog. Eccentrici, or in her greatest distance from the Sun, shall find matter
more then ordinary, whereon to fix his Contemplations. And I am of opinion,
that her glorious appearance at the Nativity of our hopeful Prince Charles,
did presignifie things (not yet thought upon) that may ere long amaze the
unjust usurpers of his Royal Fathers Birthright. But no more of that, this
ye^re.

I will not trouble my self much longer with this malicious fellows errors
and impertinencies, nor with his scurrilous language belched out against an
Irish Gentleman, who writ an Almanac Printed at Waterford in Ireland. I never
saw the Book, and therefore I cannot judge of any thing in it, nor admit of any
such thing as Booker pretends to have corrected him in. For I have it from good
hands, that the Gentleman is so knowing a Scholar, that it is incredible he
should be guilty of such gross errors, as Booker has charged him with. And
you have seen how able a man Booker is to correct any body: But were I that
Manapian he speaks of, I would reward him with another Scheme for the future
Opposition of the same Planets, which happens upon the 21. day of October 1647.
at half an hour past 6. a clock in the morning, Saturn being then in 0. degrees.
27. min. of Gemini, (the Ascendent of London) and Mars in 0. degrees. 27. min. of
Sagit* as appears by the Figure, which I have calculated exactly for the
Meridian of London, because it will much concern the South and West parts of
England, and that in a higher measure then the Conjunction (before treated of)
does the Kingdom of Ireland.

See the Scheme*

et ^abente Anno. 1647. Octobr. 20 Hor. min. sec. 18 4 18 Post meridiem.
Latitud. 51. 32



And until the time of this Opposition, do the effects of the Conjunction
vigorously extend themselves, and then they have lasted 496. days, which wants
but 8. days of a year and an half, after which time the effects of this
Opposition shall begin and forceably operate, until their next Conjunction,
which will happen again upon the 28. day of June, 1643. in the 11. degrees. of
Gemini, which will be very ominous to some parts of England, and especially the
City of London: for I cannot say, the effects of the Opposition shall cease,
when the Mathematical circuit of their Conjunction finishes, because that next
Conjunction does likewise happen in the Sign Gemini, wherein Saturn is at the
time of his Opposition to Mars, which will not much differ in signification:
Although it be a received Truth, that the effects of the Opposition of these
two Planets do commonly work more violently and quick. Nam diametrae
radiationes (quemadmodum and Tetragonismi) mortes repentinas, and violentas
mutationes faciunt, congressus vero generalia accidentia. And Haly (the
Arabian) in his 8. Part. Cap. 6. says, Quod Oppositio Saturni and Martis, est
deterior eorum conjunctione, and deteriores, ac maligniores significationes
demonstrant: And indeed this is very malicious, in that they are both unhappily
affectted and afflicted, Saturn being unfortunate, and Mars out of all his
Essentiall-Dignities, and otherwise but meanly fortified: Haec oppositio
significat quod homines in se invicem discordabunt, and prosequentur se mutuo
odio; and cessabunt se familiariter invisere, and detrahet quilibet alteri.
Haly Part. 8. cap. 25. This Opposition signifies that Men shall wrangle one
with another, and shall prosequute themselves mutually with hatred: And they
shall forbear to visit one another familiarly: And every one shall back-bite,
or speak evil of another.

It further praemonstrates great Pestilence and Mortality, especially amongst
Old men: many Thefts and Roberies, much deceitful dealing: and that
(generally) men shall betray their Trust. That many unjust and unreasonable
Taxes shall be imposed, under several specious pretenses, to the undoing of
many: Far worse then that of Shippe-money: I have taken the pains to set
Booker the Scheme rightly for London: and if he do not too much play the
Fool, or the Knave, he needs must exceedingly terrify the people, subject to
the Sign Gemini: wherein Saturn is at the time of this Opposition, in the 8.
House, (the House of Death) and Venus who is Lady of the 8. House, is with the
Moon in the latter end of the 2. House, where likewise Mars afflicts. The 4.
degrees. of Leo culminates: Jupiter is in the latter end of the 10. House: But
Saturn and Mars do strongly besiege him: he is miserably afflicted by their
hateful square: and is also in his Detriment. Look now to your selves you of
the Presbyterian-Cut: the people are weary of your extemporary nonsense: You
Judges, Officers, and Magistrates, who have betrayed or forsaken your Master,
and perverted the Law to serve your own wills, expect to render an account of
your actions. I unfainedly protest, you are all strongly threatened. From the
Sun and Mercury expect your comfort, or none: They cast a friendly Sextile to
Jupiter, and they are free from the Malevolents, though in the most viperous
Sign of the Zodiaque. The Sun nere represents his Majesty of England as
being both Lord of the 10. house, and natural Significator of Kings. Mercury,
as he is with the Sun, has signification of the Masters of the Houses of
Princes, and great Lords, and their Secretaries and Stewards. And they are both
(if not only) Angular in the Figure. This promises well to His Majesty and his
Servants* and not one jot of ill to Ireland. By this time a Man may call a
Spade, a Spade. Let me see the face of him dare call the Queens Majesty a
Traitor. But the States have voted her so, for her Love so exemplarily showed
to the King her Husband: Is there not one Lord, nor Ten Commoners yet ashamed
of it? Yes, some Blush, others are bold, and impudent, some stupidly
Senseless, others wrangling away their lives by strange and Noisome diseases,
some are threatened by Prodigious Births, (and those too of their own
begetting:) And what not to render a People palpably accursed, miserably and
fully wretched?

Ireland now demands a reason for the -- Ordnance of the 24 of October 1644.
And asks if you will buy any Land there? Scotland tells you, they have as great
an Interest in the King as England, and will in some of the Lands, too if you
will needs. --

In a word, we all look back, and say, Lord* what have we done, and been a
doing, for 7. years? Some make question, whether they be awake, or in a
dream: All men are at a stand, yet still in Action* The besotted Crew do quake
and murmr, say little, but think mischievously.

Furorna (...), an rapit vis acrior?
An culpa? Responsum (...).
Tacent: and or a pallor albus inf^cit:
Mentesque perculsa stupent.
Does fury blind? or greater power command?
Is sin the cause? Oh let me understand.
They silent are: their checkes are paler made,
And fears their horror-strucken minds invade.
But it is the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars upon the 28. of June, 1648.
(before mentioned) will be assuredly fatal to London, and many other places of
England: I pray God avert the judgments thereby threatened, and incline the
hearts of his Majesty's Subjects; that as they are (or ought to be) all
Christians, so to be of one mind, and cordially to unite in obedience to God,
and loyalty to him, their Pious Sovereign. I have set the Scheme here that (in
case John Booker have occasion to write of it) he may have it exactly done,
ready to his hand, for the Meridian of London, and publish it, without fear of
further correction.

Thema Coelicum eoc tabulis Directionum. Regiomontani ad tempus. Apparens et
die Mercurij, Junij 28 1648 Hor. min. Sec* 1 58 7 Latitud. P. M 51 32.



You see Sir, the Regal Sign Leo culminates, the Sun, who is Lord thereof,
and Venus and Mercury are in the ninth house of the Figure, and Jupiter
possesses the mid-heaven. The Conjunction happens in the eleventh degrees. and
eight min. of Gemini, (the Ascen. of London) and in the eight house, which is
the house of death, labors, sadness, and heritage of dead men: and Mars is Lord
of the Ascend. for the 3. degrees. and 29. min. of Scorpio ascends at the time of
this meeting: And he likewise disposes of the second House, where the Dragons
tail also miserably afflicts: I shall leave the judgment to John Booker:
only I shall tell him thus much, that I think the Cavaliers will (by this
time) challenge a better esteem from the City of London, then now they dare,
and perhaps enjoy their own without Composition. I shall say no more, but
conclude with an Application of that pertinent and pious complaint of the
Acquitaines, (occasioned upon the Deposing of King Richard the second) to the
present condition of this wretched Kingdom. O good God! Where is the world
become? Saints are turned to Serpents, and Doves into Devils: The English
Nation which has been accounted fierce, only against their Foes, and always
faithful to their Friends, are now become both fierce and faithless against
their lawful and loving Prince, and have most barbarously betrayed him. Who
would ever have thought that Christians, that civil People, that any men would
thus have violated all Religion, all Laws, and all honest and civil demeanor?
And although the Heavens blush at the view, and the earth sweats at the burden
of so vile a villainy, and all men proclaim, and exclaim upon shame and
confusion against them; yet they neither feel the horror, nor shrink at the
shame, nor fear the revenge; but stand upon terms, some of defense for the
lawfulnes of their dealing, and some of excuse for the necessity. Well, let
them be able to blind the world, and to resist man's revenge; yet shall they
never be able to escape either the fight, or vengeance of Almighty God, which
we daily expect, and earnestly desire to be powered upon them: Alas good King
Charles, thy nature was too gentle, and thy government too mild for so stiff
and stubborn a People: what King will ever repose any trust in such
unnaturall-Subjects, but fetter them with Laws, as Thieves are with Irons?
What carriage hereafter can recover their credit? What time will be sufficient
to blot out this blemish? What other action could they have done, more joyful
to their enemies, more woeful to their friends, and more shameful to
themselves? O corruption of times* O conditions of men!

Hor. lib. 1. Ode 3* 5. Eheu, cicatricum, and sceleri^ pudet,
Fratrumque Quid nos dura refugimus
Aetas? quid i^tactum nefasti
Linquimus? unde manus juventus
Metu Deorum continuit? quibus
Pepercit ar^^? --

FINIS.

