Novum Lumen Chirurgicum Extinctum; OR, Med. COLBATCH 's New Light of
Surgery Put out.

WHEREIN The dangerous and uncertain Wound-Curing of the Pretending Med. and
the Base Imposture of his Quack Medicines, are impartially examined, described,
and evidently confuted: And the Method and Medicines formerly received, and
successfully practiced, are rationally vindicated from the Calumnies of his
ignorant and malicious Aspersions.

His Experiments which he mentions, convicted of Falsehood; and others what
their Miscarriages are, annexed; which he had craftily and knowingly suppressed.

By W. W. Surgeon.

London, Printed, and sold by Andrew Bell at the Cross-Keys in the Poultrey,
1695.

To the Honble WILLIAM BLATHWAYT Esquire Secretary of War, etc.
Honored Sir,
WERE Might and Power the inseparable Companions of Truth, these following
Sheets need fear no Injury; but since by the Self-interest of some, and
Ignorance of others, they are like to meet with so many Enemies in the World, I
shall thankfully own Providence in my happy Choice of, and readily recommend
Truth unto your Zealous and Powerful Protection.

The Detecting of Imposture, which (concealed) would render our Age ridiculous
to all succeeding; and Vindicating of Truth, from the malicious and
unreasonable Calumnies of upstart Pretenders, is my real Design, and I do
verily believe the powerfullest Motive to persuade your Acceptance.

I shall mention Flattery and Prolixity (the two Diseases of Dedication) with
no other design than to avoid them both; the one being as injurious to your
known Ingenuity and Modesty, as the other would be impertinent in interrupting
your more serious and fruitful Thoughts, so assiduously and successfully
employed for the Honor and Advantage of your Prince and Country: With whose
joint Affections that you may ever continue to be blessed, shall always be the
hearty Prayer of,

Honored Sir, Yours in all humble Duty, and sincere Inclination, W. W.

In Amicum vere doctum, Authorem Luminis Chirurgici extincti, qui novaturientis
de nomine Medici parum just gloriantis, insolentiam, and inscitiam, modeste
redarguit, and nervose refutavit.
CVm Sciolus, nimium jactans captator avarus,
Se quaerens, populo verba dolosa daret.
Qui sibi cum soli saperet, nova dogmata ponens,
Sanandi innocuos improbat iste modos.
Contempsit veterum curas, quas non capiebat,
Dignus qui canibus pharmaca sola paret.
En praeclarus adest Author, qui falsa refellens
Mendacis calami monstra maligna fugans.
Accinctus very clypeo simul atque stetisset,
Mergitur in tenebris Lumen inane suis.
Jurgia vannescunt; chymice medicina probatur,
Pharmacaque ignari pulverulenta cadunt.
Celementi nimium debet canicida patrono,
Nec tamen imprudens desinit esse petax.
Haec nimium lenis, doctusque retexuit Author,
Quod contra blateret nil medicaster habet.
G. A.

In Amicum doctum, G. W. Autorem Luminis Chirurgici extincti.
SIccine Decoctor stat Pharmacopaeus in armis,
Indicens medico bella cruenta Choro.
Nec pudet hunc, futilem Regi sacrare libellum,
Cui nec inest very mica minuta salis.
Author adest, flatu nova lumina dissipat: ipse
Accensor fugiens territa terga dedit.
Et tua quam jactas medicina soluta facessit,
Scommataque Exemplum corruit omne tuum.
Macte potens vindex, vigeas doctissime victor,
Comprecor ut foelix progrediare, vale.
I. A.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THIS is not designed for thy hand before the Perusal of a little Book, with a
great Name, viz. Novum Lumen Chirurgicum: I shall not much quarrel about the
Name, nor use any sinister Endeavors to obnubilate this pretended Luminary,
other than by an impartial Examen with how much Justice it is entitled to such a
Name, or the Author to such large and specious Pretensions equally famous for
nothing else: But I am willing to believe the Name was given at the
Bookseller's Request, for a Set-of to the Merchandise, there being little hopes
of a Second Impression. However, he gives thee a large Account of the hearty
and vigorous Prosecution of his Studies, for no less than seven Years, in order
to his Attainment of this famous Nothing, and I hope will give us leave to say,
Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.

Nevertheless, if the Pretense of a good Intention be meritorious to the
Justification of a World of Untruths, here is one of a thousand; viz. the
Relief of those Worthies who from a Principle of Love and Bravery, are daily
exposing their Lives for the Service of their King and Country; who before the
finding out of his Medicines (though but scratched with the Point of a Bodkin)
were always irrecoverably lost.

His first Experiments were upon Dogs, and such like; and I do verily believe
it had been a singular Kindness done the World never to have raised them
higher, those Animals being but too too good Subjects for such an Operator. He
says he had above an hundred of them, and wounded them all desperately. I am
fully satisfied they all died save one, who had his Leg cut off.

As for those three Experiments made before my Lord Cutts, I shall give thee
the Relation of Matter of Fact from a Person of both undoubted Honor and
Ingenuity, viz. Lieutenant Colonel Newton, then Lieutenant Colonel to my Lord:
With whom I being in Company one day in Southwark, some few days after the
Trial of these Experiments, I desired him to give me such Account of that
Matter as I might depend upon: He told me himself had been present at them, and
that two of the three were already dead; but that the Doctor (as he called him)
told him the third was alive, though run away; however, he believed him to have
accompanied the rest, and likewise told the Doctor that it was like to prove a
fatal Campaign for Brutes, but hoped it would be a better for Mankind. He
withal told me, that my Lord was sufficiently weary of his Experiments, and
believed he would take no farther notice of him: As for the Soldier, all that
knew his Condition, believed his greatest Danger to consist in that of his
having fallen into such Hands, whatever Excuse he is able to coin to the
contrary.

I believe he speaks true in saying, that his Failing in his Pretensions was
the Cause why his Majesty did not then employ him. I am sure if he be right
informed, he has the same or more still.

He says of all the Patients he had in Flanders, there was but one died. And
truly that was no great Wonder, considering the Smalness of their Number:
however, perhaps it may be found to be a Mistake by and by.

I am so far from doubting the Truth of Mr. Cowper's Discovering his External
Medicine to be a considerable Caustic, that I am able to demonstrate it
against all Opposition; for until by its frequent Application there be a Crust
or Eschare induced upon the Part, his Patients never fail to complain of
intolerable gnawing Pains: By which he fearing his Medicine's falling into
Disgrace, was generally obliged to allay its Sharpness by a little Smart-Money,
as we shall hear by and by.

In his next Paragraph he says, his Medicines cure all Wounds without
Suppuration; but Suppuration once begun, they are incomparable Digestives. But
this is no more than one of his accustomed Contradictions, in saying, that a
thing is the most improper, and yet the most proper for producing the same
effect.

As for his treating of Gunshot Wounds where the Bones are shattered, he says,
by his Method, the bringing away of the Splinters is neither hazardous nor
troublesome. By which I understand he is changeable in his Opinion; for my self,
and several others not long since, have heard him affirm, that there was no
Occasion for the Removal of any such Splinters; for that by Virtue of his
Medicine, he could bring them to a Reunion in a very small time. But his ninth
Experiment seems to have taught him more Wit: He says he might have enlarged
the Number of his Experiments: And truly so he might, with the same Justice he
has used them, as we shall see hereafter. As for his Stopping great Fluxes of
Blood, we shall refer him to his thirteeenth Experiment.

But as for his being poisoned, I could never find even his best Friends
inclinable to give any Credit to it, further than believing him (by a Mistake)
to have upon a certain time taken some of his own Tincture, for the trial of an
Experiment; and it is very probable that his two Friends might be as ignorant as
himself: however, it is certain that it is capable to produce all those
Symptoms of Poisoning, which either himself or his Friends pretended to have.
Nor was it at all likely that any Person (how wicked soever) should either
trouble or hazard themselves by such an Action, considering that any one
(though never so short-sighted) must needs discover the Period of his already
expiring Pretensions: Nevertheless, himself cannot disown his having very ill
deserved of several, or almost all Persons of that Profession. For instance; A
Soldier in the English Guards having received a considerable Wound in the
Breast, his Officer sent for Mr. Colbatch: But in the interim, Mr. Harris,
Surgeon to the Regiment, came and dressed the Patient after the usual
Method. Soon after Mr. Colbatch came; who without any regard to the former
Dressing, was going to make his Application. But not being suffered by Mr.
Harris, he went away and maliciously reported to many Persons in the Camp, that
the Man was dead for want of his Application: Besides others, he reported this
to the Major and two Captains of the Fusileers; who sending next Morning to
inform themselves of the Truth, were satisfied to his no small Disgrace, that
the Soldier had not only escaped all Danger of Death, but even that of his
Hands: But this is but one of many.

The Reason, as he says, why he has used so few Terms of Art, is, because he
designs Plainness; but I say it is, because he had none, except he has very
lately got them. In my Opinion he is very excusable in not mentioning what his
Medicines are, because the Knowledge of them would not only derogate from their
Reputation, which is principally supported by this Secrecy, but also impede
their Vending, which is the Author's chief Design.

Now at last he is designed to give the World an extraordinary Taste of his
Modesty and Civility, in vouchsafing to rank himself amongst such Persons as
Helmont, Willis, Needham; and does tell us, that his Authority is no less
sufficient to recommend a Medicine (though unknown to the World, and even
himself too) than any of theirs was.

Novum Lumen Chirurgicum extinctum.
THE far greater Part of this Treatise (which I am now about to make some
Remarks upon) seems rather designed for the Amusement of the unthinking Reader,
and swelling of the Book to such a convenient Bulk, as may in some measure
conceal the Defect and Barrenness of its Author's Inventions, than either the
support of an old, or the laying down of any new Hypothesis; which though he
readily promises, he no where performs that which he pretends to, being no more
than an incoherent, inconsistent, mangled, nay even murdered Parcel of
Collections, and many of those neither from the first nor best hands.

After some, as silly as impertinent Reflections upon Surgeons and their
Methods, etc. he says, that his present Undertaking will be altogether maimed
and imperfect, without giving us first some Account of Nutrition; and truly I
may say so it is with it.

At first glance I expected he would begin with the Nutrition of a Foetus in
the Womb; but I doubt he was afraid of an Abortion, which has made him change
his Subject into that of an Adult.

in his 3d and 5th Pages he goes on with this Account, without the least
mentioning any of those Authors Names from whom he stole it.

In his 6th and 7th Pages, he talks confusedly of Fire in the Blood, and seems
to incline somewhat to the Belief of it; but not daring to allow it either
Wood, Turff, or Sea-Coal, is not a little troubled to find a Pabulum for it.

In his 8th and 9th Pages, he has taken too much pains in making and answering
an Objection, which must by and by fall together. For if by Matter he means
that which is suppurated from Wounds, the Objection is altogether false; for so
soon as a Wound begins to matter, the Fever for the most past remits. If this
be not his Meaning, I doubt neither of us know it. He seems likewise at no
small loss about the Reasons of so great and sudden Waste made upon fat Persons
by violent Fevers, if there be no Flame in the Blood: but that proceeds from
his Ignorance of the Animal Economy, together with his Forgetfulness of
Sanctorius's Experiment, which himself is to mention by and by.

In the 10th he goes on with his Story, more confused than the Liquor he is
there pleased to term so.

But I cannot omit taking notice of his Civility to Sanctorius in his 11th
Page, in allowing him the Honor of his own Observation, because it is more
than he has done to any other Person hitherto in all his Account, either of
Sanguification or Nutrition, though it be all at best but borrowed, and much of
it at second hand.

In his 12th he carries on his Conjecture of Nutrition by the Serum; but has
borrowed so much Modesty as to own his Ignorance of Nature's adapting the Pores
and Particles to each other for that Purpose; by which Means he has saved me
the labor of doing it for him.

His 13th, 14th and 15th, are taken up with Three Experiments, which he brings
for the Proof of all Vegetables being nourished by Water only: the first seems
to be from some Honest Gardener, the second is Helmont's, and the third the
Famous Boyle's.

I am fully satisfied they are the truest and best part of his Book; and
therefore shall neither repeat nor quarrel at them, they being already
sufficiently injured by coming through his hands.

In his 16th, when the danger is almost over, he is fallen into an inextricable
Difficulty; which since himself pretends no where to remove, I hope will have
the Patience to see the total Subversion and utter Ruin of his ill built, and
worse supported Hypothesis.

The Difficulty is this; That notwithstanding all Vegetables have their
Nutrition and Increase from Water only, do nevertheless afford us such
Substances as are neither easily mixed with, nor indeed obtainable from Water.

In his 17th Page he says, that he thinks there is no Difference, only secundum
Majus and Minus, between those Wastes made by insensible Transpiration which
are natural, and a Wound made by Force which is preternatural. Had he not said
he thought, I should have thought he spoke ironically, meaning all the
Difference in the World: I am sure I think so, for

First, There is a material Difference; that which we waste by insensible
Transpiration being thin, volatile and excrementitious; but this which Nature
does supply for the reunion of a divided Substance, a Juice Balsamic fixed,
and necessary.

Secondly, There is a formal Difference: for,

In insensible Transpiration the Effluvia can make no Digression in their
Passage along the Fibers, until they escape by the Pores of the Cuticle; but in
a Wound the mentioned Juice drilling along the Fibers after its accustomed
manner, until it comes to the Division, where it immediately drops down,
without some previous Information from his Almighty Powder.

But now he seems to design some faint Approaches to the Matter: he supposes a
Wound to be made, etc.

But here are so many suppositions, that they require to be summed up together:

In the 17th, When there is a Division made.

In the 18th, Suppose a Division to be made, and it is no matter where.

In the same Page, Now let a Wound be made where it will, and how, it matters
not.

Now in the 20th, we are come to the fourth, and I hope last Supposition: for
the other three have been very useless and impertinent.

He says, Let a Division be made in any of the Parts of the Body, which we call
a Wound; and how it is made it matters not, etc.

The nutritious Juice is immediately brought to the Ends of the wounded
Vessels: For their Reparation and Reunion, which (as he says) would soon be
effected were not Nature oppressed, and her regular Operations impeded, by the
common Methods and Medicines of Chirurgions.

Now although almost every Page be larded with such groundless Aspersions upon
Chirurgions and their Medicines, I shall this once for all, a little weigh and
consider the Reasons which he has brought against the common Methods and
Medicines; as also those which may be brought against his particular Method and
Medicine.

And first he says, the common are of that Nature that they greatly relax the
divided Fibers; so that they cannot contain the nutritive Matter brought to
them, but let it pass into the Wound: where it is by the same Medicines,
corrupted and turned into Matter.

I answer; If by relaxing, he means mollifying, restoring, and reducing the
Ends of these Fibers; who being irritated by the Sense of some external Injury,
had convulsed and retired themselves from their proper Situation and Offices;
we shall make no great Difficulty to acknowledge it both the Effect, and some
part of the Design of our common Medicine.

But if by relaxing, he means the enlarging of the Fibers to a more than
ordinary or convenient Wideness: I answer; They have but little Tendency so to
do, because the most part of our digestive Medicines consist of considerably
Restringent, Anodyne and Emplastick Parts: and therefore (except very well
malaxed) are not capable of insinuating themselves into the Fibers to that
degree which is even convenient for the Exclusion of the sharper part of the
Air, the Admission of which is oftentimes the Cause of a total Obstruction.

But next, when the Matter is passed into the Wound, let us see what Power the
aforesaid Medicine has to bring it to Corruption; which himself says, cannot
be brought to pass without a Fermentation.

We shall suppose our common Medicine to be Turpentine, and the Yolk of an Egg:
Now every one knows that neither of these apart, nor both of them together,
have the least Tendency to the producing of any of the five Sorts of
Fermentation; nay, (as was hinted before) they consisting of such Parts, are so
far from being the Cause of, that they naturally and powerfully oppose
themselves unto, the very least Appearance sof it, even in the nutritive Juice
it self sometimes disposed that way.

Nor is there any thing more reasonable, considering that the Branches of the
Sulphur are at all times ready to engage, sheath and detain the sharppointed
Acids; by which there necessarily follows a Coagulation, the most opposite Act
in Nature to Fermentation.

I have one thing more to add concerning our common Medicine; and it is, that
neither Tincture, Solution, nor Powder, nor any other thing of a different
Body, is either able to supply its Place, or answer its Intention in any
Flesh-Wound, where there is considerable loss of Substance.

For by its analogous Substance and Convenience of Body, it in some measure
supplies the loss of Substance by giving a Convenience to the Fibers to enlarge
themselves betwixt the Branches of its Body; and by this means not only
cherishes them by its natural Warmth, but supports their (as yet young and
tender) Texture, until the Reunion be wholly perfected. An Instance of which is
plainly to be seen where the Application of our Medicine is continued (though
never so short while) beyond its due time, in encouraging Incarnation to a more
than convenient degree.

Now since I have (as I hope) more than sufficiently vindicated our Medicine,
both by Experience and Reason, from those unjust Aspersions which our
Antagonist has cast upon it without either, it may not be improper to take a
View of the Effects of his Medicine also in this place.

In the first place I shall readily discharge it from the first Particular
which our Meidcine is charged with, viz. Relaxing of the Fibers, and shall make
appear it only corrodes them.

Let us know, secondly, whether it corrupts the nutritive Juice by causing a
Fermentation.

I am sure if a corrosive Acid, that is ready to quarrel with even Metals
themselves, can contribute, it is not wanting: But if once it enter into the
Mass of Blood, instead of dividing its Texture, it will go near to petrify it;
and after that, there is no fear of a Fever either intermitting or continual.

I shall sum up its Effects in a few words; being applied to a recent Wound,
the Acid Particles immediately fix themselves into the most sensible Parts,
causing them to retire by way of Convulsion as far as it is possible for them,
and forcing them to excern all they contain in or about their Orifices: if the
first fails, a second Application induces an Eschar, except it be diluted with
an extraordinary quantity of Water; and then it only keeps the Place raw, and
as himself says, without any good Digestion; but if applied to a Bone, it is
infallibly condemned to a perpetual Exfoliation, as you may see in his 9th
Experiment.

I have scarce any room or time now to take notice of his Complaisance to the
Gentleman who writ that late Learned Treatise of Intermitting Fevers, since he
absolutely pretends to be the only competent Judge; I shall only say that he who
has the Honor of his good Opinion, is not so much obliged to him for it, as
those who have formerly treated of that Subject, are unmannerly and ignorantly
censured by him.

He goes on in his 23d and 24th Pages with a deal of false Suppositions,
without the least Pretense to either Justice or Reason, and therefore shall
receive no Answer.

But now he comes to another silly supposition; the Ground of which wehave
already removed, and it is this:

And if those Hazards attend the Cure of external Flesh-Wounds, what is to be
expected in Wounds within the Cavity of the Body, where the Lungs, Liver, etc.
are wounded?

I answer; I look upon them at least to be mortal if they meet with no other
Treatment than what either he or his Medicine is able to afford them.

He likewise says, that if any such Accident come to be cured, the Surgeon
looks upon it as a Miracle, and in no respect to be attributed either to his
own Intention or Judgment.

I answer; His Mistake proceeds from his little Reading, and less Converse with
Men of Sense and Experience in that Profession; any one of them being able to
give him more Instances of Cures of that Nature, and Reasons for them, than
ever he saw Wounds.

But to bring a Wound in the Lungs, Liver or Guts, etc. to Suppuration, he
says, brings certain Death.

If the poor Man knew what Suppuration were, he would never harp so much upon
that string, it being no more than what himself has frequently owned, though
under another Name, viz. the bringing of the nutritious Juice to the Ends of
the divided Fibers, or the ouzing out of some little Blood, or other Liquor,
from their proper Vessels.

But perhaps he will object, That it is not the bringing of it to the
Extremities, but its passing into the Wound which he quarrels at.

I answer; To suppose that Juice or other Liquor to have been naturally
accustomed to drill along the Fibers before their Division, and now to stop
exactly at the Division, and go no further, were to allow it a greater share of
Sense, nay Reason, than himself can pretend to.

The rest of the Page is not worth reading, further than to let one know that
it is so. But here comes the Difficulty in the twenty 6th Page, how to stop the
Blood when a large Blood-Vessel is wounded.

I answer; It must be by other means than his Powder; for although it be a
considerable Caustic, it is not sufficient for that purpose, as we shall see
in the 13th Experiment, and elsewhere.

He is much mistaken when he says, that upon the slightest Occasion we always
confine our Patients to a low Diet, and let them blood: For we never do either,
without apparent Reasons.

In his twenty 7th he has a notable Dish of Billingsgate, and ought to have
had Oister-Sauce e're it had been presented the King's Table.

He omits Bandages as being altogether unnecessary;a nd truly so they are to
his Intention, except it were one to hang himself withal so soon as he is a
little more fully discovered to the World.

In his twenty 9th Page he gives an Account of his Method of Cure. Which has
several Pieces of Rarity in it.

For First, It never was nor will be made use of by any other Person besides
himself.

Secondly, He stitches close up all Wounds without distinction, even Gunshot
Wounds themselves.

The rest of his Book (for want of better Stuff) is filled up with a parcel of
as false as unreasonable Assertions, praising his own, and condemning of our
Medicines; but of those enough already.

I shall only touch a few of them as we go along, by retorting some, and
laughing at others.

First, His external Medicine causes excessive Pain when first applied.

Secondly, There is always a considerable deal of Pain afterward, and the
Parts so stiff and sore, as if they never would be well.

Thirdly, If there has been no Pain at all before, it never fails in a few
Moments after the Application to bring a troop of ill Symptoms upon the Part;
such as Swellings, Inflammodons, etc. which (by the way) is a sure Argument
that it is a sharp Medicine, and a Caustic, though he deny it.

Fourthly, His Medicine has always a Fever for its Companion: for several
People who have been wounded, and by our Medicine brought to a fair way of
Recovery, have in a very small time by the use of his Medicine been thrown into
Fevers, accompanied with violent Pains in the Parts.

And again; The same Persons by quitting of his Method and Medicine, and using
of ours, have been as suddenly recovered: As may be seen in our 15th Remark.
The fifth being only a Repetition, I shall take no notice of it.

In his thirty 4th Page he makes and answers a terrible Objection, viz. How
it is possible for him, without bringing a Wound to Suppuration, to obtain the
Discharge of extraneous Bodies; such as Bullets, Clothes, Splinters, etc.

I shall soon answer that for him: He has in his Method of Cure stitched them
all hard up long ago, for fear they should have been kept open by tenting.
Passing his other Repetitions, we come to his Instance in the thirty 6th Page
of two Officers of the Fusileers; the Matter of Fact to my certain Knowledge was
thus:

Lieutenant Fletcher, the Subject of hsi 4th Experiment, being one of them, we
shall refer him to the Remark upon that Experiment; the other was wounded with
a hollow Blade, the Point entered a little above the Carpus, or Wrist, on the
under and inside; so passing under the Artery, and rubbing upon several of the
Tendons and Radius, came out about five or six Inches upwards from its Entrance.

These two Gentlemen were wounded at one time; and although the Doctor is
pleased to show his Judgment in saying the latter was slightly wounded, he will
nevertheless to any unprejudiced Person plainly appear to have been more
dangerously wounded than the other: He was dressed by the Surgeon to the
Regiment; and although about the fourteenth Day there came a Swelling, and some
Inflammation upon the Part, and that by the Gentleman's owned Neglect, yet that
was in less than twenty four Hours removed, and the Gentleman (whatever the
Doctor falsely and maliciously reports to the contrary) was in less than three
Weeks perfectly well.

He goes on in the thirty 7th and thirty 8th Pages with the already threadbare
Encomiums of his Medicine; and after a needless Caution, forbidding us to
believe that he can work Miracles, he refers us for the Proof of all to the
fourteen following SExperiments; which are to him like Sampson's Locks: but I
suppose with this Difference, that if once they be cut off, they are never like
to grow again.

Although some part of the following Experiments have been hitherto Stranger to
my Ears, (though always upon the Place where they pretend to have been acted) I
shall not therefore conclude that there never were such Person in being as the
Subjects of them: nevertheless, I may (I hope) without breach of either Modesty
or Charity, be bold to affirm, (and that uupon good Grounds) that the Matter of
Fact in all of them is very much different from that Relation the Learned
Author is here pleased to make us: For,

First, Such of his Experiments which either my own Eyes, or those of my
unquestionable Evidences have been Witnesses to, are as far from being true as
reasonable; as we shall see in their proper place.

Secondly, The Names of, and his Experiments upon all Persons who have
miscarried under his hand, (especially such as every one may easily inform
themselves of the Truth of) are by him utterly suppressed and concealed.

Thirdly, The Improbability, nay Impossibility, which attends the greatest part
of his Relations must needs be no small Impediment to their Credit, with any
considerate and judicious Person.

Nevertheless, I shall not any where in my Remarks upon his following
Experiments, contradict his pretended Matter of Fact, excepting such as I am
able to bring undoubted Proof to the contrary.

For the rest, I shall only (en passant) observe some few of his many as well
Improbabilities as Inconsistencies.

Remarks upon his First Experiement.
THis Experiment tells us of a Person run through the Left-arm, and into the
Lungs: The Person says he found the Sword pass into the very inmost part of his
Breast; and I am sure the Doctor was obliged to take his word, since he will
not allow Sounding by Probe. By its entering betwixt the second and third Rib, I
hope he reckons upwards; and then instead of the Lungs, the Guts lay next to
hand: But suppose the worst; he walked that very Day six Miles (I hope he means
Flemish) on foot with the Army, without being in the least disordred; Si
credere fas sit.

Remarks upon his Second Experiment.
HEre is a Relation which I have heard far otherwist from several Gentlemen of
that Regiment; but suppose the Matter of Fact true, I do not find it any the
least of kin to a Miracle.

The Person was, as he says, run into the Belly about two Inches above the
Navel on the right-side; the Sword, as himself, and other Spectators say,
entered at least seven or eight Inches.

I must needs say, that both the Person himself, and the Spectators too, had
either a deal of presence of Mind, or good Mathematical Eyes; otherwise the
Person who made the Thrust was so deliberate in the Action, as would easily
have proved premeditated Malice, had he been tried at the Old Bailey.

He says he believes the Symptoms that attended him, do plainly demonstrate
that both Liver and Intestines were wounded: But for my part, I do not.

For neither Vomiting, nor Pain in his Belly, nor Restlesness, nor even the
Stooling of bloody Excrement, (which are all the Symptoms himself gives) are
sufficient to demonstrate the Intestines to be wounded; the last oftener
proceeding from Bruiss, etc. than any thing else. However, by the Use of the
Powder and Tiucture, he was presently well; and indeed who would not work a
little Miracle when their whole Reputation lies at stake?

Remarks upon his Third Experiment.
WE are now come to that Experiment which gave rise (though underservedly) to
all its Author's Reputation, and that more by the Ignorance, or at least
Inadvertency of some other Surgeons, than either his own Ingenuity or Conduct.

The Matter of Fact is; The Person of the same Name and Regiment which he
relates, was run into the Breast: the Surgeon to the Regiment sounding of the
Wound with his Probe, and being alarmed with the rebutting of it by the Systole
and Diastole of the Heart, did thence rashly and inconsiderately conclude that
the Wound must necessarily penetrate into the Cavity; never considering that
even the laying of a Probe (or the like) upon the Region of the Heart (though
without the Skin) will give it a considerable Motion; but much more if thrust
into, or pressed upon its more contiguous Muscles. The Surgeon (as is said)
being surprised, gave the Standers-by but little hopes of his Life; whereupon
our Doctor was sent for, and I do believe cured him, thugh not in so short time
as he relates.

For I am very well assured by two credible Persons, that the Cure was no less
than six Weeks long; which is more than thrice the time it needed, considering
it neither pentrated, nor was accompained with any considerable Hemorogy of
Blood: As for such a Number of Surgeons coming and pulling off his Dressings,
the Person himself will not own.

Remarks upon his Fourth Experiment.
IT seems the Author was afraid of coming short in the Number of his
Experiments, otherwise he would never have inserted this amongst his Miracles,
being no more than a Wound with a Sword in the fleshy part of the Thigh; and
although I have spoke with several Persons that saw it, I cannot find it to
have been half so large as he reports: But suppose it were, that could but
little retard the Cure, since neither Blood-Vessel nor Tendon was wounded. He
does well in assigning no definite time for the Cure; because the Gentleman at
that time was obliged to go to the Garrison e're that was effected, and (as I
can make appear) was not fit to come to Camp for several Months after.

Remarks upon his Fifth Experiment.
THis Experiment gives account of a Person wounded in the Stomach with a Sword;
but his Medicines being used according to the usual Method, immediately removed
all the Symptoms; and amongst others his Convulsions, which were very great,
were, ictu oculi, by the Use of his Tincture, taken away; which (by the way) is
no small Wonder: For to my certain Knowledge that very Tincture has at other
times brought Convulsions even unto Death, upon Persons who otherwise had no
Tendency that way; as we shall see in the Case of Capt. Rogers, etc.
nevertheless it cured him, and so we leave him.

Remarks upon his Sixth Experiment.
HEre we are told of a Person who had his Sternum, or Breastbone divided with a
Sword; but whither according to its Length or Breadth, we have no Account:
However, the Sword passed on into the Lungs (as he says); but it seems 'twas
lent with Mr. Chomley, for he was not strong enough to keep on the Dressings
against such violent Eruptions of Blood and Air. Here is a new Mode of
Stitching, the which is hardly reconcilable; and more than that, here is a
small Mistake in the Relation of Matter of Fast: For,

First, The Lungs were not touched, nor could we find any certain Sign that
ever the Wound had penetrated.

And, Secondly, he was so far from being recovered when he come to the
Hospital, that had he not thet with better Treatment there than he did from
him, he had never recovered.

Remarks upon his Seventh Experiment.
HEre is another Person wounded in the Lungs, and given over for dead by
several Surgeons; his Wound had been a Fortnight received, and he in a very bad
Condition: nevertheless by twice applying his Powder, he was cured. By which, I
perceive that his Powder mends upon his hand; for formerly it used to work no
Wonders, except it were first applied: However, (to the best of my Remembrance)
I was told of this Accident by the Surgeon to the Regiment, that not with
standing his Use of both Powder and Tincture, and even that of more effectual
Medicines, the Person was never like to be well.

Remarks upon his Eighth Experiment.
WE are here told of a forth Person wounded in the Lungs; which in my Opinion
is not a little strange, that amongst fourteen Accidents four of them should be
upon the Lungs; though I can affirm that I have seen five hundred at one time
wounded, and not so many among them all: But perhaps these have been sent by
some special piece of Providence for the trial of his Experiments, although I
am apter to believe that with him all Wounds in the Breast are judged to be in
the Lungs; and indeed he is in some measure excusable, since he works by guess,
and finds it against his Conscience to allow of Sounding: nor is there here any
clear Symptoms of this Person's being wounded in the Lungs; his spitting of
Blood and Shortness of Breath being more applicable to his former Cough than
his present Wound. But he is pretty modest here in assigning him no determinate
time for his Cure.

Remarks upon his Ninth Experiment.
WE come now to the Wonder of the whole Book: A Person shot with a Bullet
through the back part of his Hand, and the Bones of the Metacarp all shattered,
and Tendons much torn; and yet by some few Applications of his Powder, he was
soon cured.

I should be unpardonable if I suffered the World to be imposed upon in this
and the following Experiment, having been Eyewitness to the whole Matter of
Fact in both: this present was thus: One John Wyles in the Regiment of the
Honorable Lord George Hamilton, in the Company of Capt. Hay's, was upon the
twenty first of July Old Style, sher in the Back of the Hand; the Bullet entered
betwixt that Bone of the Metacarp which sustains the Middle and that which
sustains the Ring-finger, grasing upon the latter as it entered, broke the
former, and in coming out rubbed upon that which sustains the Forefinger. I
went with one of his Officers to see him next Morning; and he told me he had
been dressed, but complained of intolerable Pain: Three days after I made him
another visit, but he had not then been dressed a second time. However, the
first had so tinged the Bandage, and every thing else about it, that it was no
hard matter to conclude it a Vitriolike Medicine. I saw it several times after
wards, but always the same color, and a perpetual Flux of crude undigested
Matter coming from it: When I saw it about a Fortnight after, both Orifices
were much contracted, and some little spungy Excrescences in the Form of small
Bramble-berries, showing themselves about its Circumference, with still the
same quantity and sort of Matter; and the Patient always complaining of
intolerable Pains after dressing, which had then been performed four times; and
then the Hand began to swell considerably.

I visited him again the Twentieth of August, with the Chaplain to the Regiment
and several others: I then found his Hand prodigiously swelled so, that he
could not so much as move one of his Fingers. I asked him how he found it? He
answered me very well, to my no small Admiration: But looking about, and seeing
some of his Tent-mates, I asked them if he was not distracted? But they
(laughing) told me, that e're I came the Doctor had been there, and given him
two Shillings upon Condition he should make that Answer to any one who should
ask him how he did. The Person himself being taxed with it, could not deny it;
but this he did also to his Comerade in the next Experiment, and several others.

This was at the Camp at Winingham, and after the long March which he mentions;
neither had it at that time discharged any of that vast number of Bones which
himself says it discharged afterward, nor do I believe it is well to this day.

Remarks upon his Tenth Experiment.
ANdrew Christy, in the same Regiment and Company, was wounded at the same time
with the former. For the most part I visited them both together: He was shot
with a Brace of Bullets; one of them grazed, but very superficially, betwixt
two of his Ribs; the other after having grazed a little way lodged, but very
superficially also. This, as the other always, complained of excessive Pain.
After Dressing (as himself says) they always discharged a great quantity of
serous Matter. I visited him the Fourth of August, Old Style, and took also
several others along with me; when he not only complained of excessive Pains in
that Side, but likewise over all the rest of his Body; was very feverish: and I
am fully satisfied (although the Doctor says he was but three Weeks under Cure)
that he was above a Month from that time.

Remarks upon his Eleventh, Twelfth, and Fourteenth Experiments.
THese three Experiments I confess I am altogether a Stranger to; but if there
be either any such Persons or matter of Fact, I shall in a very little time be
able to give a full and unquestionable Account of them, and they shall be
published by way of Advertisements, either in the Gazette or elsewhere:
However, suppose his own Relation to be in all Points true, (which I do believe
is more than any reasonable Person will do, considering the rest have been
generally false) I have known far greater Cures done with less than half the
noise.

Remarks upon his Thirteenth Experiment.
THe Maker has got as little Reputation by this Experiment, as he has used
Truth in the Relation of it.

The Gentleman's Name was Lorring, in the Honorable Brigadeer Lumley's
Regiment: He says he received a slight Wound under the right Arm-pit, the
Axillary Artery being also pricked, upon which ensued a large Flux of Blood.

A notable piece of Inconsistency; a slight Wound, and yet the Axillary Artery
pricked.

He says the Blood was soon stopped, or rather pent in by Mr. English Surgeon to
the Regiment; however, it was more than he could do afterward, by all his big
Pretensions.

It Is true, that after some time there happened a fresh Flux of Blood, which
was the Occasion that he was called, but (at least) mistakes when he says they
used red hot irons to stop it; though I do believe they had better done it,
than trusted to his Powder, as they did to the (at least) anticipating their
Patient's Destruction.

His Arm was but little swelled, and not at all mortified; nor did he lost
(before that time) one sixth part of the Blood which he mentions. When he came
first to the Patient, he was asked by Mr. Hall, whether any thing that had been
formerly applied might hinder the Effect of his Medicine? He readily answered,
Not at all; and, immediately proceeded to his Application, which he repeated
once and again with the same Success, and then gave him a Dose of his Tincture,
which did not fail of its wonted Effect, in convulsing the Patient to that
degree, that he was not relieved without the utmost Care and Industry of the
Surgeons, and other Gentlemen there present.

However, his repeating his Applications so many times, and as often slacking
the Turneke to see whether it had taken effect, cause such an additional
Expense of Blood and Pain, that in about three hours after he died in the
Doctor's own Presence; who had the Mortification to see not only his own, but
all the Spectators Hopes eluded: being never in the least able so much as to
check the Hemorogy without the Use of the Turneke. This is Matter of Fact, and
certified by so many Witnesses that there is not the least Ground of Suspicion
left.

Remarks upon his 15th Experiment.
THere are several other Experiments no less considerable than the former;
which the Doctor's either Modesty or Memory has not served him to insert: I
shall do him that Service, and subjoin them to the rest, lest his Treatise
should want so much of being complete.

The first of them is an Experiment made upon a Man in St. Bartholomew's
Hospital; whose diseased Arm was amputated above the Elbow: but for above a
quarter of an Hour's time many succesless Applications of his Stiptick were
made, and at length a small Tent dipped in the Powder it self inserted into the
Extremity of the bleeding Artery, before the Flux of Blood would admit the
Application of Bandage.

A few hours after, a fresh Flux of Blood appeared; which obliged them to have
recourse to their ordinary Method upon such Occasions.

Remarks upon his 16th Experiment.
THat same Morning and Place the abovementioned Amputation was made, a Boy
about 12 Years of Age had his Leg taken off below the Knee; who had many and
repeated succesless Applications of this pretended Stiptick made to his
bleeding Stump, before it could be got bound up; and in less than an Hour
after, a fresh Flux of Blood was to be seen, and not to be restrained without
some more effectual Methods.

Some few Hours after the Operations, both these Patients suffered excessive
Pains.

Three Days after, when the Applications were taken off, had any Person, a
Stranger to what had been done, seen the Stumps, he would have supposed that
nothing less than the Application of an actual Cautery could have caused such
large Eschars and horrid Appearances; which did sufficiently demonstrate this
his Anodyne Powder (as he calls it) to be a violent Caustic.

The Doctor can here make no Objection; for his Powder was applied with all
imaginable Fairness, in his own Presence: nor has he any Reason to believe
that those Surgeons who used it in the Hospital, had the least design to hinder
its Success, since it is well known they were rather prejudiced in its favor
than to the contrary.

This Account was printed in the Philosophical Transactions for Feb. 1693/4.
and attested by so many Persons then present, that it is beyond the Power or
Malice of Man to render it suspected.

Remarks upon his 17th Experiment.
CApt. Rogers, in my Lord Castleton's Regiment, upon the 18th of August Old
Style, Twelve at Night, being near the King's Quarters at Winingham in a
Coffee-Tent, in a Rencounter received a slight Thrust into the Belly, a little
below the Navel. Amongst other Gentlemen, Col. Tidcomb was there present; who
having some of Mr. Colbatch's Powder about him, caused it immediately to be
applied by one of the Gentlemen there present, according to the Directions he
had received with it; and immediately sent for Mr. Colbatch himself, who sent
his Friend who had formerly done all his Business. He gave him some of his
Tincture in a Glass of Sack, as usual; which being several times repeated in
some few hours, brought the Gentleman into a raging Fever, and soon after into
such violent Convulsions as cost him his Life.

He died the next Morning; and although the Wound was made by an indifferent
broad Sword, yet it was not to be traced into the Cavity of the Abdomen by the
finest 'Probe.

It was unanimously concluded by all there present, that the Tincture, together
with the large quantit^ of Wine which he received it in, was the only Cause of
his Death; and in my Judgment very reasonably, considering that it is next to
impossible that any such Wound in that Place, should have done it (if at all)
in a good many days. I was present my self, and took this Account in my
Pocketbook, and could insert the Names of many very worthy Gentlemen; but
shall be so mannerly at present to forbear, and do think I have given the
Inquisitive already light enough to find out the Matter.

Remarks upon his 18th Experiment.
ONe Mr. Edward Dunn, belonging to the Cockpit, being wounded in the Hand by a
Cock's Spur; and being drawn to Mr. Colbatch by the loud Report of his famous
Powder, promised himself a more than ordinary safe and speedy Cure: The Doctor
did no less; and having applied his Powder, promised him there should be no
occasion for a second Application; and truly he had like to have played the
Prophet: for (to use the Patient's own Words) instead of a Cure, he was forced
to go to Mr. Johnson a Surgeon in Sheer-lane to take care of it, otherwise he
must have lost his Hand; for that Application so swelled and inflamed his Hand,
that the Pain of it threw him into a Fever. I have used his own Words, in a
Certificate to me under his own Hand.

I have mentioned this, and some of the foregoing Observations, because they
are at the door, and every one may easily inform themselves of the Truth of
them: But this in particular, because being a slight Wound, and the Person of a
good habit of Body, that were not his Medicine the very bane of Nature, it
could never produce such horrible Effects.

I could add several other Observations as little for his Reputation as the
former; but do believe these enough for both the Satisfaction and Information
of any considerate and unprejudiced Person.

The Description of his Powder and Tincture.
IT IS a hard matter peremptorily to assert what Ingredients, and in what
Proportion almost any Composition consists of; but according to the several
Experiments made upon this Powder both by my self, and several other Persons,
(whose Judgments are not a little to be reverenced, whose proper Profession it
is to be conversant in chemical Matters) the Powder consists of a Vitriol of
Copper, and that either Roman, which is purely so; or Dantzick, which has a
small Mixture of Iron. By its Sweetness it seems to have some Sugar of Lead in
it, rather for its disguising than bettering. As for its Preparation, take
which Vitriol you please; and expose it to a hot and dry Air, free from Dust,
(having first grossly bruised it) and 'twill turn in a small time to a whitish
impalpable Powder. As for its Incarnate Gloss, that may easily be given it by
either Sanguis draconis, or any other red Body. Any Person will easily be
convinced of the Truth of what I say, if he will but take a piece of polished
Iron, and wetting it with his Spittle, and rub a little of his Powder upon it,
'twill immediately turn to a copperish Color; or if he precipitates a Solution
of it by some few Drops of Spiritus salis Armoniaci, or the like, he will find
the Vitriol immediately fall to bottom; leaving that other body, with^^^ which
'twas tinged swimming on the top of the Water, or adhering to the sides.

I am nevertheless apter to believe the Vitriol rather to be a Dantzick than a
Roman, because the former is cheaper than the latter, though one would think
the exorbitant Rate of his Medicine might be able to reach the dearest of them.
By what has been said in the Description of it, I suppose the best Way of
applying of it will easily appear to be to throw it into some nasty Puddle of
Water; which by its Filth, is excused from the use of Man and Beast.

As for the Tincture, if we had no other, himself has given us some Light into
the Matter; for he says, in a Sheet published by him last Year, that it is of
the same family with the Powder, (to say Truth, it is pity two should be
troubled with them).

It certainly consists of a Mixture of Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of Wine; as
may easily be discovered both by its Smell and Taste. It Is an Acid, because of
its Effervescence with Volatile Salts. That it has a Mixture of Spirit of
Wine, appears by dipping your Finger in it, and touching it with the Flame of a
Candle; for it immediately conceives Flame, which continues to the Consumption
of the Spirit, and leaves your Finger only wet with the Flagme.

But it is sometimes no more than a Solution of his Powder, and then one may
easily precipitate the Vitriol from it. As for its Color, that may be given it
so many ways, and is so little essential to the Medicine, that it is not worth
Inquiry.

Though the Tincture be of the same family, yet it is not so ancient as the
Powder; for it was not so much as heard of at these Experiments in St.
Bartholomew's Hospital, though its Author had never more need of it: But I do
verily believe Necessity was the Mother of that Invention; for his Powder being
there so publicly disgraced, he was obliged to trump up another Medicine to
supply its Defect, and make up the Pair.

FINIS.

