map of the British Isles with chariot. Edenburg

Dublin

LONDON



TOuching this Emblem that pourtrayed we see,
Take it, as it is, a lantskip for to be,
In midst of which, the Stygian god amain
Is hurried along by Dragons twain,
Fully resolved within himself to see
How matters handled were in Britanie.
And as he posts along, his eye does cast
Upon the neighboring Isles about him placed,
Strictly observing what he now might find
That might be pleasing to his divellish mind.
Each Kingdom is distinguished in brief,
By that same city is its head, or chief.
GRAND PLUTO'S Progress through Great Britain, And Ireland.

BEING A Diarie, or exact Iournall of all his Observations during the time of
his walking to and fro in the said Kingdoms.

Found on Dunsmore Heath, and translated out of infernal characters into
English Verse.

By G. W. alias Philoparthen Esdras.

Proper. Lib. 3. Fortuna miseras auximus art vias. Printed in the Year 1647.

Pluto's Progress THROUGH GREAT BRITAIN.
The Argument.
He that in a Serpents hide
Inflamed our Grandam Eve with pride,
To be like God; forsaking hell,
Does visit earth, where mortals dwell;
Arrived in England;
Anglia, joys to see
Fury, pride and luxury
Predominant; that from the Crown
Unto the rigid rustic clown,
He was adored, by his sons
Of various religions:
He does appland their evil lives,
And for to urge them forward strives.
Then to Ireland.
Hibernia takes his way,
Talks with the Rebels, whose dismay
He mitigateth, vaunting, he
Will both their Guide and Captain be.
He vieweth Scotland, but in ire
Departs thence, and does retire
Amongst the Wales.
Cambrians, likes their acts,
Promises to reward their facts:
Returns, to fill his fiery throne.
The Author makes conclusion.
THe Prince of darkness, in his flaming Car,
The same he rode in, when he seized on Proserpine.
Her
He after made his Queen, of cole-black hew,
And mistie-footed, were the jades him drew,
Ascends the earth, and gallops up and down
Great Britains continent, in every town
He passes, and unseene himself does shroud,
As Venus once Aeneas in a cloud:
'Bout him a Role he bare, in which he writ
What he then saw for to remember it:
And having taken his progress quite throughout
Great Britain.
Britannia Major, he began to doubt,
That if he staid too long, the feinds of Hell
Against him might combine and eke rebel:
He held it best no longer for to stay,
Sentence.
Knowing that danger still waits on delay;
And therefore he gave to his steeds the reine,
Who hurried him like Phaeton amain:
His chariots joulting so amazed his sense,
That he let fall his penned intelligence:
And till he came into the shades below,
That he had lost his scrole, he did not know.
Johnsons prophetic A comedy, written by B. Johnson so termed.
Play is come to pass,
Who Will now not say, the Devil is an ass.
A friend of mine as he by chance rid ore
That dismal Dunsmore-Heath, not to explore
As many do, to plunder those they meet,
Beheld a role of paper at his feet;
Taking it up and viewing of it well,
He found, to read it, did his wit excel,
As the Egiptians, ere they Letters found,
Had all their books in Hierogliphicks bound:
Such mistick writing did the scrole include,
Which uncouth piece when he to me had showed,
With pain, and study undefagitable
I here have rendered as my muse, was able.
Plutos Narratien.
With great desire to know what things were done
On earth, and whether mortals did not shun
The dire suggestions of my Agents there,
I Hell forsook that I the truth might hear;
Arrived on earth I praised my own abode,
Knew my own good to be the Stygian God; The state of the world at this present.

For there I all things out of order found,
But there is order underneath the ground.
There each man studies evil against his Brother,
But there the Feinds do never harm each other.
One of the Furies.
Aenyo, I had thought her dwelling had
In Tartarus, but there I found her clad
In bloody garments, shaking of her light,
And wooing all men to the bloody fight.
Vile A^e there her mansion has made,
Contention who the Poets write to throw a golden apple, Juno, Venus, Minerva,
biding the most beauteous of the three Goddesses to take it, etc.
And exercises her destroying trade:
All things go arsey-versey, quite contrary,
And in ill-boding acts they strive to vary.
They wrest the Balance from fair Justice fist,
And make her Instruments do what they list,
And truth to say (if ere I truth did tell)
There Is the Effigies of distracted Hell.
His Observations in England
The Nations with white Rocks, who are surrounded,
Who are by Neptunes billows, each way bounded,
Whom I had feared, had hated me so sore,
They would not harken to my hellish lore;
Henceforth my fears are taken clear away,
Hereafter I Will not doubt their souls decay.
I came at first into a country town,
Doubting my entertainment with the clown, Citizens,

I Would thought their plain rigid Rusticitie
Had furnished them with such simplicity
That they were void of those crimes cleave to them
Who a man only The Goddess of Plenty, according to the Poets.
as his clothes esteem
But even there the thrasher vying was
With him who erst did mow the verdant grass:
There were two farmers who in wealth did flow,
Ceres, and twice borne The God of Wine, said to be twice borne of Semele, and
again of Joves thigh.
Bacchus did allow
Them corn and wine abundance, their focks were great,
Rich Autumn filled their barns with corn complete:
Yet emulation did so far prevail,
They grudged each others good; and would assail,
With sturdy blows, each other, when they met,
And toiles, to trap each others flock, would set:
And when by chance, his Neighbors horse he found,
Broke from his Master, grazing on his ground,
He with a knife would wound him, hoping now
He nere again should draw the crooked Plow.
I like ye, ye dull Swains, and joy to see,
That you in envy are so like to me.
Another Town next day I came unto,
Where all the inhabitants were prompt to do
What ere my agents should bring in their brain;
But for to do ought virtuous held it vain.
They had lived long in blinded ignorance,
My Enemies Gods Pastors, who advance
This Kingdom above mine, they never had,
And that they then them wanted, were most glad:
Their right hand from their left, they never knew,
Nor yet a reason of their faith could show,
O my true servants, you 'bove all I love,
Who for to live in darkness do approve,
And hate the light; the knowledge of the truth
It Is that it is that alone does work me ruth:
"For had not learned men the truth discovered,
"But that behind a cloud it still had hovered
"How many thousands that are now in glee,
"Had been copartners of my fact, with me?
"I have no better prop stays up my throne,
"Then Ignorance, nurse of confusion:
"And therefore I full wisely have provided,
"That learned men should be by fools derided:
"The learning lives in penury, and bare,
"While fools grow rich and feed on diantiest fare:
"That no man should be honored for his wit,
"But only golden oar should purchase it:
"That if great Homer, Hesiod, Mare, Nas^,
" Ariosto, Spenser, ^ar renowned Tass^,
"Were now on earth, " Homer and Hesiod two Greek Poets, living, as some
write, in one age: Virgil and Ovid, two Latin Poets lived at one and the same
time. Ariosto and Tasso, two most excellent Italian Poets, the one flourished
in the days of K. Henry the eight, the other in the days of his daughter
Queen Mary. Spencer the best and most excellent of English Poets that ever was
flourished in the days of Queen Elizabeth ^^^^^sed memory.
they should not be regarded,
"But fools before them respected and rewarded.
Proceed dull Swads, still hate all learned men,
But above all those that do use their pen,
Compiling volumnes of Theology,
Reading high Lectures of Divinity;
For those if you should them respect, would dare
Still for to make you of their good to share:
And you by their instructions, so might be
Partakers of great Joves felicity.
And next be sure, that you never fail to spite
All those that do of humane Arts indite,
Of Logic, Rhetoric, Philosophy,
Writing their minds in Prose or Poesy:
"If you love me, as I am sure you do,
"Then you will hate those that do hate me too;
Never peruse the Grammar key of Arts,
Nor he that does of Logic treat the parts:
Oflie queint Rhetoric, for that will move
You for to be with humane arts in love,
Which as a key to you most sure will serve
TO unlock the Scriptures, from which now you swerve.
His observations in London.
Luds famous Town I next beheld in view,
And to my joy the nearer I it drew,
The more I heard a loud and clamorous noise
Of those that uttered a distracted voice,
While some bawled out, we will not be subject
Unto our betters, Ovid de Ponto: Ipse licet venias musis comitatus Homere. Nil
tamen attuleris ibis Homere for as.
nor will yield respect
To one more then another; were we not
All of one man, even Adam first begot?
Shall any tread on us, and make us thrall,
"For they esteem all Laws tyrannical:
We Will each man be commander of his wealth,
And each one be a Law unto himself,
And if we list to brawle, to fight, or slay,
There Is none therefore shall ought unto us say:
The sturdie Ox, the lovely Cow does mount,
Not dreaming to be called to account,
The valiant horse performs natures Laws,
Not fearing he laws rigor on him draws;
And is man more enslaved then beasts, whose state
Is unto his great power subordinate;
We will be eased of Laws and bindings over,
The Golden Age we will again recover,
The happy time is come, that we shall be
Restored to our restrained Liberty.
Do so my zealous sons, and imitate
Me your great Master, who extremely hate
To be subjected, else I sure never
Had left the highest for the lowest Sphere:
Why should you of stern Judges stand in awe,
And for offenses dread the injurious Law?
Why should you be restrained from your desire,
When with my Furies I do you inspire?
I do pronounce your thoughts and deeds to be
As I would with most pleasing unto me;
You shall be sure, when you in hell reside,
My Torritories shall be amplifi'd
For you, you there Cum Privilegio may
Refuse both God and man for to obey;
There you in dalliance may spend the time,
And never fear amercement for your crime,
With beauteous The wicked wife of wicked Ahab.
Iezabel and fairest A Whore of Rome, who dying made the people of that City
her heirs, who after her death worshipped her with divine honors.
Flora,
Her whom the Gallants of Athens would feign have had Diogenes to have dallied
with: But he replied to her and them that he would not buy sin at so dear a
rate.
Lais and A famous Whore of Rome.
Thais, stately Queen of Egypt and whore to Julius Caesar.
Clopatra,
With diverse other far renowned whores,
Of whom my Kingdom now affords store:
There you may dance Corantoes, Orpheus shall
Strike on his Harp with you, the Furies all
Shall hand in hand upon a burning hearth
Change their Lavaltoes as if upon earth.
Near there another Troop alowd did cry,
And with their ecchoing voices rent the sky;
How long shall we want that was promised us,
And with vain hopes be still deluded thus?
When will it be that those cursed men shall die,
Who have occasioned our calamity.
We feign would drink your blood with full crowned cups
Even as the great Balena water sups.
And to devour them now we could outvie,
With the man-eating Anthropophagi;
You are my dearest sons that feign would see
Your brethren butchered, and desire to be
Spectators of their tragic falls, O ever
May you add to your ire, and still persever,
And lest your thirst forblood the least decay,
I Will send unto you my Rhamnusia,
Who still shall prompt you, till your selves you make
Fit of my gloomie glories to partake:
But when night drew her curtain over the world,
And darkness over the Hemisphere was hurled,
I came to that same The Tower of London.
Tower, whereas once three
Princes were slain by Richards cruelty.
His discourse with I. L. in the Tower.
And there imprisoned in a cage of stone,
All in a melancholy passion,
I saw one walking, unto whom I went,
And did audacious The first King Henry the sixth stabbed with a dagger by
Richard then Duke of Gloucester, the other two were his brothers sons, who by
his procurement were there murdered.
Penree represent;
Saying, O thou whom swords nor gibbets fears,
Thou who have set three Kingdoms by the ears,
Who have the Lords Anointed so reviled,
That thou our English Shimei may be styled,
Who have broached errors, a sufficient crew
To damn this Age and that which shall ensue, A Libeller in the days of Q.
Elizabeth.

Who have malign'd God, railed against all Law,
One like to thee no former age e're saw;
And if we heed Pithagoras relation,
My soul does dwell in thee by transmigrarion:
I in Elizas days wrote Libells many,
Were before thine never paralleled by any;
So that in evil we are brethren both,
At this he began to wax wondrous wrath:
And said, Penree I scorn that thou should be
My Rival, or by any ranked with me,
It is my glory, that 'bove all ere dared
To rail against Church and State, they if compared
With me were puny Traitors, I am one
Shall eclipse all their glories, and when gone,
Posterity when they my Books shall view,
Shall stand amazed, I durst such boldness show;
Their eyes they shall not credit, some shall think
It piety to force their eyes to wink,
And not behold my lines, (when as so high)
I saw his irreligious words to fly,
As I unseen came thither, Pluto leaves the Tower, and comes again into the
City.
so from thence
Away I flew for more intelligence:
And standing in the corner of a street,
I there beheld a Merchants man to meet
A beauteous Satin Dame, whose husband was
One fit with Spensers.
Collins Malbeeco to pass,
On whom she smirked, and embraced him saying,
O I have been heart-sick for thy delaying:
My dearest, come let us embrace and be
Here on the earth another Gemini;
Away they went invoking Fained to be the Goddess of beauty, and protectresse
of lust.
Venus aid,
Lustful A Spirit having to do with women.
Asmotheus both their minds then swaid,
And to a house they came, where an old woman
Kept many wenches private, who were common,
There he his Masters gold about let fly,
Spending some hundred pounds luxuriously,
Just twenty pieces must buy her a gown,
And twenty pieces more be swallowed down
In wine and sweet meats, do so still my son,
Bring soul and body to confusion;
This is the bait with which most men I catch,
Save those that over their faculties do watch,
Wine and
Bacchus and Women.
Venus are the cords which draw
Men's souls to hell. Next unto these I saw
A fellow laughing in his sleeve, that he
So neatly could guild over his fallacy
That it was not discerned, and so could seem,
That men him as upright and just did deem,
And did exalt him for to be their Teacher,
And hearkened to him as a virtuous Preacher,
While he mean time was only seeming good,
And Lobsters and Eringoes made his food,
That he unto the height his whores might please
In Venus game their burning lust to ease,
Rejoiced in sin, and gloried that he
Could with the worst of sinners wicked be.
Ha, ha, why so? I like this wondrous well,
Rejoice ye Furies and make glee in hell,
All crimes are in this town predominant,
Then how can you many Associates want:
Many of these I shall to you prefer,
You know the saw, the more the merrier.
Not far from these a crew were seated round,
A Cobbler who began for to expound, A Cobbler Preaching.

He knew the length of all their feet and he
Would not to humor them a Preacher be:
Lord what an hurly burly was there there,
Among those that came this man devout to hear,
While some applauded him, some him gain said:
Not far from these there by a River staid
A multitude of maids and wives who strove
Who should the first the waters might approve, Anabaptists.

And be baptized anew, while some were drenched,
Their hot and fiery humors well were quenched;
Some adding fuel were unto the fire,
And Brothers giving Sisters their desire:
Not far from these, stood many richly decked
In gay apparel, and with all respect
Adored, whose forefathers were but clowns,
Who tilled the earth, or kept sheep on the Downs:
And those did come out of noble progeny
Stood by them, all in rags and penury:
Near these a sort of Ruffians closely set,
Were quaffing healths, while wine did wine beget:
They drank to Pluto, I requited them,
And pledged a bowl of sulphur to the brim.
In a by-place I saw some Ladies lying
Upon their backs, while their Baboones were trying
To please their lustful Appetites, whom they
On purpose highly fed, to give them play.
The Venus said to be conceived of the foame of the Sea.
Cyprian Queen by Neptunes froth conceived,
Homer, and Maro, Naso, have deceived
The World, divulging by her instigation,
Lust is conceived, alas it is Derivation
It has from me, I do the bellows blow,
And make men with lascivious heats to glow.
I Have turned the good, Jehovah did ordain,
For Man and wife, to dreery care and pain.
Eve, by my she persuasion I brought on
To bring all Mankind to confusion.
Has any mind to circumvent his foeman?
Let him but take the counsel of a woman,
And she will tell him, how to bring to pass,
No horrid act ere without woman was.
But how is hell deluded? I had thought,
Britannias Monarch I so low had brought,
That the three Megaera, Tysiphone, and Alecto, said to entice men to evil
acts.
Furies had inspired so
The giddie Commons, to his overthrow,
That in their errors they would have gone on
Disloyally, their Sovereign to dis-throne,
And would till death, esteem it their chief glory,
To be recorded Traitors, upon story.
But he that thunders with the powerful voice
Whose breath shall melt the world, commanded Cornet Joyce
Joyce
To be a loyal Subject to his King,
And from a house into a camp to bring;
And for the fact, that his great The renowned Sir Thomas Fairfax.
General
Should be his guardian, lest that he fall
By them who storm, the Fates do with them wrestle,
And that their King is not in Warwick castle,
Who do the Pious Kings, such as is our Sovereign L. K. Charles, are truly
termed pater patriae, fathers of their country.
Father of their Country hate,
And viper like their appetites would sat
With their own Mothers blood, but I Will reward them,
A race of furies I Will appoint to guard them,
As they were wont on earth, and each of these
Shall be the souls of famous prentices.
Is there no way (ye powers of hell) to make
Fairfax his Sovereigns welfare to forsake?
I Will throw ye Princes, from your diadems,
Lest you invent by some new stratagem,
To take him off and turn his Loyal heart
To seek (like some) his Country to subvert.
But oh! it cannot be, he is firmly bent,
Not to prove false, Not for a Parliament:
He wisely guesses that the King is he
That must (next God) his sole protector be;
And that these clouds, when once dispelled and gone,
He shall grow great, being planted near his Throne.
Who looked for this but till Jehovah will,
Who at his pleasure me controleth still.
His Observations in Ireland.
From England then I posted to the clime,
Where by St. Patricks wondrous If we may credit Thyraeus, ^iffroenatos animos
infernalium poenarum terrore emolliebat, ut sicad fidem invitos compellaret
incredul^s enim de damnatorum poenis ac suppliciis dubitantibus, and visible
testimonium pet^^^ibus signum, hoc sicut traditio fidel^^, multique non
ignobiles Authors referunt, ostendit circulum in terra fecit, intra cujus
ambitum hiatus ingens aspectu horribilis apparuit, per cujus occultos and
sinuosus luctus, ejulatus, and lamentabiles voces saepe audiebantur. Guliel.
Thyraus.
skill divine,
The rude Barbarians did inhabit there,
O cursed! were taught Jehovah for to fear:
Where when I came, I heard the Kernes make prayer
To me as unto Jupiter the Stayer,
My grand Vicegerent has his Nuncio there,
Who by his Rhetoric incites them on,
As when their fathers followed fierce Tyrone,
There is my Throne erected, and by them
My brows are circled with hells diadem:
In spacious hell there are but Furies three
But there in each man's breast three thousand be.
O my dear sonns ye imitate me right,
And as my nature is, you do delight:
Because Gods servants shall not howl in hell,
For to torment them, while on earth they dwell,
So that the sword so many lives nere gained,
When as those Brethren, death and Scilla reigned:
The seven persecutions never wrought
More mischief to Gods Saints then you have brought.
The powers of hell are all at once engaged
To aid the Irish, they by them enraged,
Perform my wish so well, that all my mind
Performed by those my Agents now I find.
Proceed in Ills O ye incarnate Devils,
And fill you up your cup brim full of evils;
Exceed in fury till ye come to dwell
And suffer with me in the lowest hell.
Nor need your Nigromancers use their charms,
I Am prompt and ready to bring on all harms
On those that do adore The true God.
almighty Jove,
And him to serve as he ordaines approve.
O my dear sons! you still maintain the story,
You will not want S. Patricks Purgatory;
You have again erected that same grot,
Which of late Years did Cloghers Bishop blot,
Which Florentianus Bishop of that See
Divulged to his fond Posterity,
Who did believe S. Patrick made relation
Of that same Cell, by divine inspiration;
And by my sly deceit, I did persuade them,
He there on earth a Purgatory made them.
Which easily upon their fancy wrought,
When Virgils It was demolished by decree from Rome, Anno 1497. and of late
years wholly taken away by Henry Jones Bishop of Clogher An. 1632. but since
this Rebellion is again re-edified and augmented by the Rebels: into this
place does Stephanus Forcatulus make Arthur King of the Britains to enter,
where he says: Specum longo recessu opacum Rex invisere, non est gravatus, and
relicto spiritu libero in illum se demittere, in quem nullum discrimen diei and
noctis perveniret, relicto in tergo luce, descensu aspero, declivi itinere, and
tenebris assiduis, diffuso natura prorsus and fabula, memorando ferebatur enim
ad manes pervius, specus vel certe ad locum, in quo animae eorum qui dum
viverent, sesevitiis and labe aliqua eluibili iuquinaverunt: recocti, forte
Patricus, inter inanes and efferatos populos lepido commento usus fuerat, quo
magis eos a peccatis deterreret, and ultricem adesse pene domi ostenderet,
imbutus numisse Merlinus specum Patricii. Ulysses forsooth was driven on the
Irish coast when he wandered by sea; and Homers fabulous relation taken for a
true story, he intending only an Allegory: Vlyssi in decantatiae illis
erroribus in Hybernia acto adscripserit, effossum quidem primum, Ulyssis ense
ad cubtti mensuram, deinde circulum altissime impressum successu temporis
increvisse, quod dicit Odiss. 11. and Steph. Forcatulus de Gal. Imper. and
Phil. lib. 7. page 1007.
Verses to their mind I brought;
Who fancieth a place beneath the ground,
Where purging Torments for men's souls were found.
"Where worn with anguish, there the soul does smart,
"And for its crimes, when living, has desert:
"Some are hanged in the air, in water some
"Are washed, or purged in fire, and have their doom.
"Each man, as was his fault, etc.
Go forward still: (but ah) I greatly dread,
The State of England will your race impede;
And force, perforce, Gods worship you among,
Which (to my joy unspeakable) you long
Have wanted, and in spite of Hell I fear,
Both Rome, and I in vain have toiled here.
But in the mean time I adjure you all,
Like a disease that^s epidemicall,
Orer-un Hibernia, and ere your fate
Constrain you stoop, sell your selves at dear rate:
The Fiends of Hell on my part shall not fail,
Conglomerating, with you, to assail
My Enemies, and yours; let this you cheer
That I to your assistance will appear,
And if Jehovah crush me not, will I
A means to gain your glorious victory.
His Arrival in Scotland.
From this same Ireland is said to have no snake, toad, or any other venomous
creature in it.
venom-wanting Kingdom, I
Came into Scotland where the mountains high
Do kiss the clouds, and valleys are as low,
Where trees are wanting, only shrubs do grow;
Where nature scants her bounty, nor does deigne
Sometime to yield the husbandman his pain:
Here (o my soul) my looked for hopes were crossed,
The French Agent.
Montrevill, and my self our hopes have lost:
I hoped once for to have kindled War
'Twixt them and England, and dispatched l Aecto.
her
That moved fierce Turnus, though unto his bane,
With Venus Aeneas.
son fierce Wars for to darraine.
But he whose power ding'd me down to Hell,
With my confederates that durst rebel,
And sent the Spirit, that in gleames of fire,
Shaped like tongues, did once the twelve inspire,
Who soon made void the hags infernal skill,
And held them steadfast; howl ye Furies, fill
All Hell with clamor; quickly was I gone
From those great Enemies unto my throne,
His Observations in Wales.
And into Wales I came, where those do live
That from the Trojan Brute their race derive,
Who are a people of themselves, whose tongue
Differs from all on earth, who once were strong,
And did to follow banefull Mars delight,
And sometime ward on England, and whose might
Was far renowned when Prince Lewline reigned;
But now such Power I over them have gained,
They Are grown effeminate, corruptly live,
And do more heed to Merlins sayings give,
Then to the Scriptures, that so much I hate,
I also by my agents instigate
Them so to wrath, that in their fury they
Care not their Fathers with the sword to slay:
And do so still, let naught your ire deter,
Imitate me, always a murderer.
And may you still in blood, and death delight,
Carve up the bodies whom you owe least spite:
And when to hell you shall be tumbled down,
I Will give to each of you a flameing crown.
I never had mirth in all my progress, till
In a thatcht cottage stood beside a hill,
I heard a Shepherd courting of his less
It was so pretty, I Will not let it pass.
A Dialogue between Diggon and Madge.
Madge my dear and bonny Frillock,
Sit we down beside this hillock,
All my Cuds, my best Belwether
Who does lure my flock together,
I would all bestow on thee,
So thou would but smirke on me;
Thy lowering scowling makes me dumpish,
For to see my Love so frumpish.

Madge. Diggon thou talk like a Lorrell,
Showing that thy wit is borrell,
There is Claius that can talk
Like a man made out of chalk,
And singing Ditties joy my soul,
As when I hear my Fathers Owl,
Who in an earthen cage does sing
Sweetly when the trees do spring,
He upon his horn can play,
While I talk a Roundelay,
And in Rimes a full yard long,
He can make a merry song:
But thou in these things art a A Fool
Fon,
Nor can I smirk on thee Diggon.

Diggon. (Out alas) my dearest honey,
I cannot but love, thou art so bonny:
Thy snarly hair, thy cheeks as red,
As paint that they on signs do spread:
High colored, as the new burnt brick,
Thy slender waste just two yards thick:
Thy knotty fingers, large sized hand,
Thy dried thighs, the which do stand
Asunder, like two blasted Oaks,
Or like to near adjoining Rocks;
With thy splay-foot and horned toes,
Do fire my heart, when as thou goes
Tripping through the dirt and mire.

Madge. To hear my beauties praise does tire:
My tender hearts now I Will be gone,
Yonder stands a tree Diggon.

Diggon. A penny rope anon I Will buy,
And hang my self before I die.
And yet you further joy to me procure,
In that you care not for good literature,
But are a people rude; and void of that
Which your renowned Bardus pointed at,
Without the knowledge of Jehovahs Word,
How many thousands does your Land afford,
All which does show you faithful servants be,
And even while on earth, converse with me.

The Authors Conclusion.
Thus wrote the Prince of darkness: yet I see,
As it has often happened unto me,
He lost his labor, and did never bear
His scroll to hell, for to peruse it there,
But left it on the earth; perhaps some hand
From heaven snatched it by divine command:
Allotting me the same abroad to show,
As I have sent it (Readers) to your view.
To the common Readers.
For you, you may your minds evacuate,
And talk your fills, I not regard your prate.
To the knowing Readers, or the Muses darlings.
For you, if you for mercy find no room,
I pray that mildly you will pronounce my doom.
FINIS.

