A More full Relation of the manner and circumstances of His Majesty's
departure from Hampton Court. Written By Colonel WHALEY, At the Demand of the
SPEAKER of the House of COMMONS, To whom it was lately sent, for the better
satisfaction of the PARLIAMENT and KINGDOM.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the black spread-Eagle, near the West End
of Paul's. 1647.

Mr. Speaker,
WHat I spoke in the House (according to your command) I present you in
writing, as follows, to my best remembrance.

Mr Speaker,
IT is not (I suppose) unknown to you, that I have faithfully, and through Gods
mercy successefully served the Parliament from my first undertakings, which
was, from your first engagement. You have been pleased so much to honor me,
as to let me share in your favor; and I desire to let you know, that I highly
esteem it, and shall endeavor further to deserve it. I shall therefore
(according to your command) deal clearly and heartily in giving you (as in the
presence of God) a true Relation of my service, and the Kings going a way.

The place, the guards, and commands that lay upon me considered, makes it no
wonder the King should be gone. The King was never declared to me to be a
Prisoner. I was not to restrain him from his liberty of walking, so that he
might have gone whither he had pleased; neither was I to hinder him from his
privacy in his Chamber, or any other part of the House; which gave him an
absolute freedom to go away at pleasure. The House is vast, has 1500 rooms, as
I am informed, in it, and would require a Troop of Horse upon perpetual Duty
to guardall the Outgoings. So that all that could be expected from me, was to
be as vigilant over the King as I could in the day time; and when after Supper
he was retired into his Bedchamber, to set Sentinels about him, which I
constantly performed, as is well known to the Commissioners and others. But for
some fifteen weeks I had M. Ashburnham's engagement for the King's safe abiding
with me: and truly I must do him so much right as to declare, that he dealt
honestly, and like a Gentleman with me: For about three weeks ago he came to
me, and minded me of his Engagement, which was to continue no longer then he
gave me warning: He told me he now did, and would stand engaged no longer. I
demanded of him the reason. He replied, The Court was so much Scottified, that
he feared there would be workings to get the King away. Whereupon I presently
sent away a dispatch to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, acquainting him,
with it; no long after went my self to the Head-quarter at Putney, at what time
his Excellency and the Officers sat in Council. I there again, before the
whole Council, acquainted his Excellency with M. Ashburnhams disengaging
himself, and withal, both my self and friends earnestly solicited for a
dismission from that great charge, that had been long imposed upon me; which
was not the first time that openly I had desired it: I gave diverse reasons for
it; One was, that I had been two or three and twenty weeks upon that careful
and hazardous duty, and I thought it was but reasonable now to have some
relaxation, and that some others should be put upon it. Another, That if they
did look upon the Kings safe abiding with us as a concernment to the good of
the Kingdom, it was impossible for me, the King having that liberty, and such
Bedchamber men about him (as were) so keep him. One of them was Colonel Leg,
once Governor of Oxford under the King: the other, though they were Gentlemen
of honor and quality, put in by the Parliament; yet they were his ancient
servants; and though perhaps they would not put him upon any design of going
away; yet probably would not cross him, nor disclose any. Therefore I
conceive, if the Parliament did expect the General should safeguard his
Majesty's Person, that the General should desire leave of the Parliament to
put such Bedchamber men about the King as the himself would be responsible
for, and might confide in. And indeed, I did there declare, I was very jealous
of M. Mawle. The third reason that I gave to be discharged was this; Should the
King go away (for I cannot term it an escape, because he never was in custody
as a prisoner) I should not only run the hazard of losing some reputation my
self, but diverse of my near related friends eminent Officers in the Army, would
have jealousy cast upon them, being by some already suspected upon less
grounds then that would be. But say what I could, or my friends for me I must
not go off. It was long debated, and by all concluded, that I could no more
keep the King, if he had a mind to go, then a bird in a Pound: yet I must
continue my charge. But truly, I conceive both the General, Officers, and I am
sure my self did much rely upon his Majesty's Engagement. His Majesty was
pleased freely to promise me when I waited upon him at Newmarket, That he would
not go from me, till he first gave me warning When he came to Wooburn,
observing my guards, he told me, Colonel Whaley, your guards are strong: but do
you think you could keep me if I had a mind to go away? I answered, with these
commands I had I could not: No, says the King, though you had five times as
many more, or to that purpose. I replied, Your Majesty's engagement was a
greater force upon you, then all the guards I could put, or to the same
purpose. His Majesty answered, his engagement was in case he might go to one
of his own Houses: But however, I do now freely and absolutely engage my self
to you, That I will not stir from you till I give you warning: and if I do, I
will give you leave to say I am an infamous fellow.

And whereas (Mr. Speaker) you do demand of me, to know whether the King did
take himself off from his engagement, I can tell you no otherwise then thus:
About a fortnight ago the Kings Children came to him, staid with him three or
four days. The Princess Elizabeth was lodged in a chamber opening to the long
Gallery, in which two Sentinels stood for the safeguard of the King: the
Princess complained to his Majesty that the soldiers disquieted her: The King
spoke to me that it might be remedied. I told the King, if the soldiers made
any noise, it was contrary to my desire and commands; I should double my
commands upon them, and give them as strict a Charge as I could, not to
disquiet her Highness: which I did: Notwithstanding a second complaint was
made: I told his Majesty, stricter commands I could not give; and the
Soldiers ensured me, they came so easily through the gallery, and made so
little noise, That they conceived it was impossible for the Princess to hear
them. However, I told his Majesty, if he would be pleased to renew his
Engagements, I should place the sentinels at a more remote distance. The King
answered, To renew his Engagements, was a point of Honor; you had my
Engagement; I will not renew it, keep your guards.

And as for the manner (Mr. Speaker) of the Kings going away, it was thus.
Mondayes and Thurdayes were the Kings set days for his writing Letters to be
sent into Foreign Parts: his usual time of coming out of his Bedchamber on
those days, was betwixt five and six of the Clock: presently after he went to
prayers, and about half an hour after that, to supper; at which times I set
gards about his Bedchamber, because he made no long stay after supper before
he treired himself thither: About five of the clock I came into the room next
his Bedchamber, where I found the Commissioners, and Bed chamber men: I asked
them for the King: They told me he was writing letters in his Bedchamber. I
waited there without mistrust till six of the clock, I then began to doubt, and
told the Bed chambermen, Mr. Mawle, and Mr. Murry, I wondered the King was so
long a writing: They told me, he had (they thought) some extraordinary
occasion. Within half an hour after I went into the next Room to Mr. Oudart,
told him I marvelled the King was so long a writing: he answered, he wondered
too, but withal said, the King told him, he was to writ letters both to the
Queen, and Princess of Orange; which gave me some satisfaction for the
present. But my fears with the time increased: so that when it was seven of
the clock, I again told Mr. Mawle, I exceedingly wondered the King was so long
before he came out. He told me he was writing: I replied, posibly be might be
ill: therefore I thought he should do well to see, and to satisfy both my
self and the House, that were in fear of him. He replied, the King had given
him strict commands, not to molest him, therefore durst, not: besides he had
bolted the door to him. I was then extreme restless in my thoughts, looked
often in at the keyhole to see whither I could perceive his Majesty, but could
not: Pressed Mr. Mawle to knock, very often: that I might know whether his Maj^stie
were there or not; But all to no purpose: he still plainly told me, he durst
not disobey his Maj^sties commands. When it drew toward 8 of the clock; I went
to Mr. Smithsby keeper of the privy lodgings, desiring him to go along with me
the back way through the garden, where I had sentinels, and we went up the
stairs, and from chamber to chamber till we came to the next chamber to his
Majesty's Bedchamber, where we saw his Majesty's cloak lying on the midst of
the floor, which much amazed me: I went presently back to the Commissioners
and Bed-chambermen, acquainting them with it, and therefore desired Mr. Mawle
again, to see whether his Majesty was in his Bedchamber or not, he again told
me, he durst not. I replied, that I would then command him and that in the name
of the Parliament, and therefore desired him to go along with me. He desired I
would speak to the Commissioiners to go along with us: I did, we all went. When
we came into the room next the Kings Bedchamber; I moved Mr. Mawle to go in:
he said he would not, except I would stand at the door: I promised I would, and
did. Mr. Mawle immediately came out, and said, the King was gone. We all then
went in, and one of the Commissioners said, It may be the King is in his
Closet: Mr. Mawle presently replied, and said he was gone. I then being in a
passion, told Mr. Mawle, I thought he was accessory to his going: For that
afternoon he was come from London; it being a rare thing for him to be from
Court: I know not that he has been two nights away since I came to wait upon
His Majesty.

I presently sent out parties of Horse and Foot to search the Lodge in the
Park, I sent dispatches immediately away to the General, and
Lieutenant General, who sent me Orders presently to send out parties of Horse
every way both from my guard and Regiment: but I had done it before. I sent to
search M. Ashburnhams house at Ditton (a mile from Hampton) but my soldiers,
when they came thither found the house empty. Mr. Ashburnham was gone three or
four days before, his household goods two days, and four horses the night
before. I set guards round the house, and searched that, which was as much as I
could do.

And whereas (Mr. Speaker) you demand of me, what that Letter was that I showed
the King the day he went away. The Letter I shall show you; but with your
leave, I shall first acquaint you with the Author, and the ground of my
showing it to the King. The Author is Lieutenant General Cromwell: the ground
of my showing it was this; The Letter intimates some murderous design, or at
least some fear of it, against his Majesty. When I read the Letter I was much
astonished, abhorring that such a thing should be done, or so much as thought by
any that bear the name of Christians. When I had shown the Letter to his
Majesty, I told him I was sent to safeguard, and not to murder him: I wished
him to be confident, no such thing should be done, I would first die at his
foot in his defense: And I therefore showed it him, that he might be assured,
though menacing speeches came frequently to his ear, our general Officers
abhorred so bloody and villainous a fact. Another reason was, That I might get a
nearer admittance to his Majesty, that so I might the better secure him.

And last of all, (Mr. Speaker) whereas you desire to know who were with the
King two or three days before his going: I know very few, but them that were
appointed to wait no him. The Lord Lanerick was with him on Monday morning, but
stayed not: On Tueday all the Scots Commissioners, who went away likewise that
night. On Wednesday night the Earl of Southampton, and the Earl of Chichester:
On Thursday morning Colonel Leg went away.

Mr. Speaker, I have delivered to you a true Narrative of what you desired, and
I hope satisfactory; In testimony whereof I have subscribed my name.

Edw. Whaley.

FINIS.

