Westminster College: OR, Englands Complaint against those that sit in the
Chamber called Jerusalem, alias, HENRY the Seventh Chapel: Being a Discourse in
Meeter, in behalf of Saint Peter, concerning the Power of the KEYS.
Avaunt, prodigious Mountebanks, a set
Whose very Names confound the Alphabet;
A Catalogue, to call but as ye sit,
Will torture Adoniram to a sweat;
And starts this Problem, whether that ye came
So late from Babell or from Amsterdam.
An Hippo-Centaure Linsey-wolsey pack,
Scarce fit enough, for Bookers Almanac:
Amongst whom the most completed, were he shown
In his accoutrements, (without a Gown;)
With Reverend Harry breeches, which between
The loins are strengthened with a list of green,
And those precisely tied above the joint,
As daily neighbors to the Cod-piece point,
With Rocket over all; 'twill hoy'st the rate
And put the King of Swedland out of date.
An overcast of Nature, that may fright
My Muse, and turn her stomach while I write,
But yet have at ye, Sophisters, for I
Have a preparative of Loyalty;
And spite of all your vizard faces dare,
Pronounce (though it is no matter) what ye are.
And first, since now a Lustrum is complete,
Since ye encroached upon Peter's seat;
Since it is apparent ye discarded him
As disaffected to your stratagem;
His supplication now is, you may please
Once to restore his Office and his Keys;
For now ye have unlock't the mysteries,
Of all those hidden and obscure decrees.
As in your League and Covenant ye prosesse,
(That new found Path to worldly happiness,)
Swallow that Pill ('it is gilded) and your eyes
Shall be enlightened as in Paradise:
You may too sleep upon it, it is your hap
Now that your wealth shall rain into your lap.
Alas Philosophers, your Stone grows old,
It Is naught, but Covenant virtue works on gold;
Then kiss we all our hands and make a leg,
To th'Hen that laid us such a golden egg:
And not like him (for that is the way to loose,)
That (as the story tells us) killed his Goose;
Yet is it not addle all this time? I doubt
The smell and color bid us look into 't;
Now mercy on us! Chickins one may see
In The shell contesting for the victory.
(They look like Presbyterians that intend,
To break with violence on the Bishops land,)
But let that pass; I Will one word to my friend,
Hand over head's foul play, and there is an end.
Proceed we then, next trophy of their Glory,
Is that grand Masterpiece, the Directory;
That piece which had the Primitive Christians seen
They had not yet believed it could have been;
That tells the Common Prayer Book is too blame,
And adds new suffering to the Martyrs flame:
(Thrice happy Martyrs! that so long are dead
And live not now to die unburied;
As now it is thought expedient, but are got
Up with Elias in his Chariot.)
Tell us, ye Nest of Juglers, can there be
To true Devotion such Antipathy?
Produce the Alcaron, I Will be a Jew,
Rather then keep this worship coined by you;
That Phylactery for a Pagans wrist,
Convei'd unto us in a Scottish Mist:
That trim and neat device of the newest fashion,
That so much picked* the pocket of this Nation,
For which their wages was in shillings more
Each day, then they had seen of pence before.
Of these S. Peter seems to give a hint, Pet. Epist. 2. Chapter p. 2. verse. 1, 2, 3.

And put their Character in sacred Print.
But (make us thankful) this distorted Calfe,
Came to perfection in a year and half:
And like an Oracle (though maym'd and blind,)
Took heart to grass and blated out his mind:
Yet look a little first, and see it prance,
About to th tune of the blew Ordinance,
which makes's believe, that they shall loose a lim
At least, that go about to muzzle him:
And their estates be turn^d into a bilk,
That bar the foolish creature of his milk.
Peace! hear him speak a little (I protest
The very-very language of the Beast!)
But we must bear with that, it cannot chew,
In time it will learn the languages anew:
Yet see! it stands for liberty, and cries
Ye must be covered friends, in any wise.
As i there were a difference in it at all,
Betwixt your glittring Temple and my Stall.
The head is most of worth (though Moses loose
With terror at his first approach his shoes:)
No Ceremonies therefore, fie upon it,
No not so much as at the Sacrament.
But cleanliness and decency befit,
The Saints, O let us not abolish it.
If former acts offend, it is their intent
To make amends in the other Sacrament:
Bring here the Basin, is the Babe defild,
Good Parson play the Barber with the Child;
Place him in public view, in sight of all
But spare your Crosses and your washing ball:
And (that the Goldsmith may be quite undone,)
The Father and the Godfathers are one.
This Babe of grace shall be of more account,
Then all those Antichristians of the font.
More freedom for the faithful yet, if any
Shall enter in the bonds of Matrimony,
The Egyptian yoke is broken, and we dare
Marry sans license or the Jeweller;
Our words are valid, and the Righteous may,
Take pledge before hand against another day.
Your Feast and Ribban is of Popish rite,
Goose giblets and Sack-posset, so good night.
All this the City plot with zealous force,
As new Religion for a second course.
That buy a mock-baptizing trick so dear,
Their children hardly be their own I fear:
That dam the Ring, and Book, and poor Amen,
That so the match may be dissolved again.
And for our Holy Days they were bur vain,
A counter-plot against the Godlies gain.
If so, it is worth a stipend by the week,
For the Contrivers of so queint a trick.
Yet notwithstanding this, we still desire
Our Pater Noster, and our Creed entire:
Although I heard one lately take his oath,
They were providing fastian for them both;
And thus alleged, it needs must want repair,
That lasted ever since the Apostles were:
But for the former reason there is none,
Unless they fear the Kingdom come too soon.
If these be thus reformed, what intents
A change in all the Ten Commandments:
It Is to be doubted they will put excise
On all, but that which cries down Images;
And yet it is strange there is none in all that den,
But more resemble Images then men.
As first, the thing whose head's in such a plight,
It wants a cuffe of the ear to set it right:
Another like a Crab-fish, you would say,
His back was stuff't up with etc.
A third, so squeamish stomack't, so uncooth,
He Is led away with any by the tooth:
One more, that has good lungs, but's discontent.
He cannot thumb the Pulpit as he meant,
With ears (God bless!) so gifted, that do thrive
So well you will think that Midas is alive.
These or the like (if any be so wise
To preach before to get a Benefice:)
He may be sure to see or speak with them,
At their old quarters called Jerusalem.
FINIS.
Printed in the Year 1647.


