MANKIND'S JUBILEE: OR, Good Tidings of great Joy for all people, plainly
discovered by Scripture Texts.

And the Angel said unto them, Fear not: For behold, I bring you good Tidings
of great joy, which shall be to all People, For unto you is borne this day in
the City of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke 2.10, 11. And this
famous general proclamation of Grace for all People, was also then published by
a multitude of the Heavenly Host. ver. 13.

Thus Christ was from Heaven declared to be the Savior of all Men, or all
People, agreeable to 1 Timothy 4.10. (who accordingly) has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, by his being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. By his tasting
death for every man, Heb. 2.9. whereby he became the propitiation for the sins
of the whole world, 1 John 2.2.

Showing, That there is a Common Salvation of all Men, from the Eternity of the
Curse of the Law, and first death, and that in that salvation, such real
Ability is communicated through our Savior Christ his performances to all men,
as that no one man has done, does, or shall eternally perish, by any
obstructions which came over all men, by Adams Fall, but only by his own
actual and wilful persisting in the abuse of the Ability by grace in Christ
conferred unto him.

Written by Christopher Wade, An. Dom. 1658.

LONDON. Printed for the use and benefit of Thomas Gibbs, Gent. 1658.

The INTRODVCTION.
FOrasmuch as it is evident, that some men, even Christian men, yea even some
godly learned men, by casting in their own scholasticall glosses, upon many
excellent plain Texts of Scripture, have as much as in them lies, buried the
comfortable use of the firm foundation, on which faith and repentance, ought in
Gods ordinary way primarily to be builded, even the common salvation mentioned
Jude 3. which the Scripture, if it be permitted to speak for it self, in its
own litterall language, with the assistance of the spirit thereon attending,
being submitted unto, will of its self evidently set forth to public view.

From the vanity of which practice, men are necessitated, being thereby cast
into confused conceptions and conclusions arising from various humane
expositions, to propound these and such like questions, how it can be rightly
affirmed, that Christ is the Savior of all men? according to 1 Timothy 4.10
except all men be eternally saved? or by whose means it comes to pass, that
although Christ tasted death for every man, according to Heb. 2.9. and dyed for
(no fewer than) all, 2 Cor. 5.15. that yet some men do suffer in an eternal
death? How that although our Savior Christ, be by his death the propitiation
for (no fewer sins than) the sins of the whole world, according to 1 John
2.2. that yet some men do perish eternally, in, and by their sins? How
Christ can be truly said to be (not only tidings, but) good tidings (not only
of joy, but also) of great joy (not only to some, but also) to all people,
according to Luke 2.10, 11. when as notwithstanding some people do perish in
eternal sorrow?

These men thereby, though it may be unawares, do intimately charge God to
reserve dubious meant all reservations in himself.

In answer whereto, that I may procure aright understanding, separate from
these, and such like fancied doubts, let it not be tedious I entreat you, to
take notice, that in Rev. 2.11. and 20.6. and 21.8. being compared with Rev.
20.10, 15. and Mat. 25.41, 46. there is an express discovery of an eternal
second death, into which men may fall; which second death, does unavoidably
intimate, the extinguishing of a preceding first death, into which all men
without Christ considered, should have fallen into, as is further proved in
this tract; which first death and second death being considered of together,
do fairly present to our apprehension, a first life, which was once incident
to men, and relatively foregoing a first death, and also a second life procured
by Christ's performances only, which extinguisheth the first death, and is also
relatively foregoing the second death before mentioned; for without a foregoing
first life, there can be no first death, nor without a foregoing second life,
there can be no second death.

But for aready discovery herein, the Apostle Jude infers, that the first l
fe and first death, and the second life and the second death, either has,
does, or may prove incident to some one and the same man; the first life by
Creation, and the restored second l fe by Christ being considered of; for he
affirms, that some persons by their turning the grace of God into
wantonness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4.
(that deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1.) from the eternal danger of
the first death, as is proved he has done for all men, in my 5 Distinction.
These men says Jude, are twice dead, and then also plucked up by the roots, to
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Note this, not only once
dead, but twice dead, and then also plucked up by the roots: that is to say,
First, once alive by grace of Creation: then Secondly, dead by Adams fall:
Thirdly, alive again by Christ's reconciliation made: and Fourthly, dead again
the second time, by their wilful personal persisting in the abuse of grace,
after their inlightenment; and then, and not while then, plucked up by the
roots.

Now beloved by my showing that by the first Adams offense, the first life by
Creation was lost for all men, and that death, even the first death thereby
pissed upon all men; and by my proving that our Savior Christ, the restoring
second Adam, Acts 3.21. does estate by his performances, all men, by a real
common salvation, into are stored second life, which does extinguish the
aforesaid first death for all men, and that therein, and thereby, Christ does
confer such effectual light, freedom, and ability in due season upon all men
in their inward man, mind and will, so that in their well usage thereof they
might escape the second death also, and by my having proved what the second
death is, and the cause why it is executed upon any man. I shall thereby make
it appear clearly, in full answer to the former queries, and such like, that it
is not from God, but by some men's wilful personal defaults brought about,
that some men do perish by their own personal acting and persisting after
inlightenment, in disobedience against the second Covenant, which is of grace,
by their resisting the gracious dictates of the Holy Ghost.

To the READER.
Three directions according to three several conditions of men.
FIrst, to all such men, who though being by our Savior Christ in due season,
enabled to know the truth, and confide in Gods goodness only, and faithfully to
endeavor to walk answerably, as is proved that al men are in my 6 and 7
Distinct. yet do profanely if not blasphemously, not only slight Gods grace
but also in effect do charge God with disabling them by a decreed preterition,
delusively affirming, that thereby they cannot repent, and that they cannot
believe. These men I do exhort to consider, that no rational man, except he be
justly given up of God to a reprobate mind dare affirm, but that God has, at
several times, strived with his conscience, to convince him of his evil
requital of his gracious favors. Neither dare they say, that God has not
also all along in their own experience, afforded them not only means, but also
much more ability to be humbly obedient to the faith, then they ever did, or
were willing to act in accordingly.

These men, as I do hereby persuade them to take notice of the large extention
of freedom and ability, which God by grace communicates to every man, as is
declared in my 6 and 7 Distinctions, hereafter following, to take away that
conceit of their fallacious sheltring cannots, and to cause them to confess to
the glory of God, and their own shame that the fault is in themselves that will
not repent, that will not believe, that will not be obedient. So also I do
persuade those men, if they come to be resolvedly willing to become obedient
to Gods convincement, then to take heed of building their faith, upon the
fading sands of their legal reformations.

For first, the Scripture sets forth all men, being considered of as merely
natural, to be Atheists, the wisdom of this world, is foolishness with God,
1 Cor. 3.19. From hence it is said, the fool has said in his heart, there is
no Gods, Psalm. 14.1. that being all men's prime condition after the fall. And
from thence it is affirmed, that he that will come to God, must believe that
God is, H b. 11.6. with these men, whilst they so continue they are without
God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm. 10.4.
which is a terrible fearful condition.

And Secondly, when men are convinced by Gods spirit of their trnasgressions,
then thereby their atheism vanishes away, and then they do most ordinarily
earnestly press into Popery, to please God, whom they have so offended by
making him a men's in their future conversation by their doing and walking in
any sort of superstition practiced in the world, rather than by faith to depend
upon Gods grace and goodness only purchased by Christ, which always procures
thankful obedient walking; and though some men are without their own desire or
seeking, nay it may be contrary to their desire, by a national Law, set free
from the outward fantastical trash of Popish Discipline, and out ward doctrine
of their supposed meritorious observations, and are thereby constrained to be
Protestants in conceit, yet they do retain inwardly though secretly, the
papisticall, heretical opinion of merit, or justification by works, or at best
by faith and works mixed in the very fundamental. And although some others by
the means aforesaid, called Protestants, verbally confess, that they ought
not, nor cannot conclude their being personally justified before God by their
works, yet also they will affirm as some of them have done, that by their works
of signs or supposed reformations they may fundamentally know and conclude that
they shall be justified by Christ, their faith in God, being by this fancied
tenent, more strong or more weak, according as their supposed reformations, are
more lively or dead, in their actual performances: and although good actions
are chearsully to be continued in; yet to have faith strong or weak in the fund
amentall, according to their variation is a more secret deceit of Popery and
therefore more dangerous to be convinced of. Those seeming Protestants though
they be transformed from the first condition of Atheists, into the estate of
Papists either in external profession, or internal confidence, are still void
of the fundamental, to confide only in Gods mere mercy, grace and goodness
purchased by Christ, and upon that fundamental ground to walk humbly,
obediently and thankfully before God.

The second direction is to such men, as have so far yielded to convincement,
that in their obedience to the faith, they have forsaken all legal
confidences, as fundamental (and are become earnest seekers to find out the
good old way, to find rest to their souls) that they do not provoke God by
their immoderate distrustful importunacy, by their not being in the first
place, contented to be of those, who not only by faith, but also by patience
thereto annexed, do attain to inherit the promises, according to that
exhortation, Heb. 6.12. but will at all adventures, rashly post over the
expressions of the common salvation, and Gods gracious general promises,
declared therefrom in his written word to sinners and to the ungodly, if
turning to his grace, not excepting one man: Which written word the Apostle
affirms plainly, is the sure word of peophecie, unto which men ought
waitingly to take heed, until the day dawn (and Christ the bright morning
star, Rev. 22.16.) or the day star arise in their hearts, as is fully proved 2
Pet. 1.19, 20. but will by that their distrusting rashness, aspiringly desire,
that the day star should arise in their hearts first, even before they have
patiently walked to, and before God in honoring him, by consenting to, and
making use of his abundant mercy and goodness, declared by him in general
expressions for all men in his written word, which inordinate distrustful
have, is reproved of God, Psalm. 27.14. Isa. 30.18. he that believes, shall not
make have, Isa. 26.18. and so much the rather I do advise those so convinced
ones, though not to abate their importunacy, yet to mix confiding, waiting; and
depending patience therewith. Because experience has often presented to our
view, that diverspersons, by their exercising such distrustful rash
importunacy, and yet failing of their end by them so sought for; that is, by an
immediate revelation, to ascertaine them of their eternal life, which being
not then granted, they have cast themselves headlong into a desperate
dangerous, and untimely death.

The third exhortation, I humbly present to all such persons who have
confidingly, and persistingly abided by faith, in the comfortable use of Gods
general gracious promises, so far in all difficulties and temptations; that
God having srownd, these abiding believers persistingly submitted in humble
obedience to the faith, and in faithful endeavors in their thankful walking
has established them in the benefits of the special salvation, sealing them
after they believed, with his holy spirit of promise, according to Ephesians. 1.13.
These blessed people I do humbly entreat, that now having their first nurse in
the faith, the common salvation more clearly unmasked unto them in this tract;
from whose breasts though they now slight her, yet in the infancy of their
faith, they first sucked the streams of eternal life, that now they will be
pleased to own their first nurse whilst they were in the cradle concerning
faith, for the comfortable building and nursing up of Gods Church now coming
in, or hereafter to come in, that by the discovery of the large extent of his
love to, and care over all men, he may come to be more and more admired in his
saints, desiring those blessed people, no longer to endeavor to deprive the
world, of the most sure most ready and most comfortable foundation of faith and
patience, and repentance, presented frequently in Gods written word in general
promises, on his part intended for the benefit of all men. And that those
Saints of God will be pleased (what ever other ignorant people do) no longer
with dubious interpretations to discourage, but with Scriptures plain and full
sayings, to direct infants in the faith; first, to feed upon that general
milk of the word, and not to forsake their importunacy, to ask, and seek, and
knock, but yet with patience, to wait upon the lively use of Gods general
promises, until the day star do arise in those tender waiting hearts, as
formerly it did in their own, when they resolvedly with patience, waited for
establishment. Thus entreating thee to take notice, that I do not by this
ensuing tract maintain, that any one man has free will, as he is descended
from fallen Adam, to incline to, or to think, much less to act any thing
acceptable to God, in point of eternal salvation, but that hereby I do by
Scripture prove the contrary.

Secondly, that I do not herein maintain, that all men are eternally saved, but
that some men after their inlightenment, and infranchisement in the common
salvation in due season, will wilfully refuse their own mercies, choose their
own destruction, and will draw back even to eternal perdition.

Thirdly, that I do not in this ensuing tract maintain, that any one man,
though found beleevingly well acting in the ability by grace given unto him in
the common salvation, can in the least measure, merit or deserve reward of due
debt from God, otherwise them God is pleased by the mercy of his own second
Covenant, to impute righteousness unto him, as is largely proved in my 14
Distinction. Thus also desiring thee to read and conclude without partiality, I
rest thine in the Lord Jesus.

Christopher Wade.

The Heads of my 24 Distinctions ensuing, to set forth the extent of the common
salvation, with the necessity and benefit thereof, concerning all men, and in
what page to find them.
THE first Distinction, which shows, that as all men lost their blessed first
life of Creation by Adams fall, and thereby fell all of them into the first
death, that there is a common salvation wrought by Christ, warranted by
Scripture, which does relieve all men from the eternal danger of the first
death, and from that impossibility to be eternally saved, which came in by
Adams fall; showing also the difference betwixt the old man and the new man,
and the rational man. page 1 The second Distinction declares what the common
salvation is, and the extent thereof for the benefit of all men, whereby is set
forth in good part, the excellency of the restored second life of mankind,
graciously intended on Gods part by Christ, to preserve all men from the
eternal second death. p. 7 The third Distinction shows, that our Savior
Jesus Christ, by a salvation first wrought by, and in himself alone without
men, laid the soundation of the common sulvation, by his descension from
Heaven, and personal performances upon the Earth. p. 16 The fourth Distinction
proves, that one means to establish the common salvation purchased by
himself, is this; that Christ by his performances, has abolished the eternal
condemning power of the Moral Law yet showing the necessary use thereof. p. 17
The fifth Distinction proves also, that to perfect the foundation of the
common salvation, Christ by his death, has abolished the first death for all
men. p. 22 The sixth Distinction shows accordingly, that at Christ has by
the said salvation first wrought in himself, laid the foundation of the common
salvation of all men, by his personell performances upon the earth, without
men. So herein is declared how he fin sheth the same by his spirit in all men,
by is resurrection and ascension into Heaven, and his there being. p. 24 The
seventh distinction sets forth, that our Savior Jesus Christ perfects the
common salvation, even to all the Heathens also, where neither written Law nor
Gospel is vouchsafed unto them, otherwise then the effects thereof are written
in their hearts. p. 49 The eighth Distinct on, which shows the mistakes of
some en, concerning diverse considerable expressions of Scripture, which has
bred, and does nurse up many vain contentions, even amongst the Christians,
about the extent of the common salvation. p. 52 The ninth Distinction does
discover what those sins were, which are accounted in Scripture, to have been
the sins against the Father, and that those sins also, were the same sins,
which in Scripture are called the sins of the whole world, and that they are
all forgiven in and by Christ. p. 56 The tenth Distinction, wherein is set
forth, what those sins are, which in Scripture, are accounted to be the sins
against the Son, or Son of man, and that they also, as in reference to eternal
punishment shall beverily forgiven unto the Sons of men. p. 57 The eleventh
distinction shows, what those sins are, which in Scripture are accounted to
be the sins against the Holy Ghost, and that they shall never be forgiven,
neither in this world, nor in the world to come, and the cause why, whereby the
second death is discovered also. p. 60 The twelfth Distinction, wherein the
wrong application, of the simile of the Potter and his Clay is discovered. p.
62 The thirteenth Distinction, wherein the mistakes of some men, concerning
Gods dealing with Jacob and Esau, is laid open. p. 67 The fourteenth
Distinction, wherein some men's misconstructions are discovered, concerning that
Text, where it is said, so then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but in God that shows mercy. p. 70 The fifteenth Distinction,
wherein the mistake is discovered, which some men have fastined on that Text,
where it is said, therefore has he mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he
hardneth; also shows that there is but one will in God. p. 72 The sixteenth
Distinction, shows the unwarranted dealing of some men, with Gods
prerogative, by a wrested application of Gods hardening Pharaohs heart. p. 75
The seventeenth Distinction is, to rectify some men's mistakes of that Text,
where it is said, for whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, Romans
8.29. and of that Text where it is said, elect according to the fore knowledge
of God, 1 Pet. 1.2. p.77 The eighteenth Distinction, is a short application of
those last six Distinctions, for further clearing the cause of election and
reprobation. p. 81 The nineteenth Distinction, is briefly to show what the
special salvation is, mentioned 1 Timothy 4.10. as distinct from the common
salvation which is in that Text, there with coupled. p. 85 The twentieth
Distinction shows, that as all men lost their peace with God by Adams fall,
which all Adams posterity had by propriety in him, whilst he stood; so all men
are virtually in Christ by Christ, reconciled to God again by restoration,
though some men after their inlightenment, do abuse that grace of their
reconciliation in him, and do thereby lose the benefit thereof. p. 86 The one
and twentieth Distinction proves, that whereas all men were involved under the
curse of the Law, by the destructive first Adams fall, so all men are again
blessed virtually in Christ, the restoring second Adam, though some men will
after inlightenment, voluntarily lose the eternal benefit of that
blessendesse. p. 89 The two and twentieth Distinction shows, that all men are
by restoration, sanctified in Christ vertually, though some men do abuse the
same, and so wilfully lose the benefit of that sanctification. p. 91 The three
and twentieth Distinction declares, that all men by restoration, are justified
in Christ vertually from the curse of the Law and first death, though no man is
by imputation, personally justified, until he be a confiding believer. p. 94
The twenty fourth Distinction, wherein is proved by plain Texts of Scripture,
that as all men by Adams fall were blotted out of Gods book of life, that came
in with the Creation, so all men are in and by Christ and his performances
only, again written in the book of life, that came into the world by Christ's
restoration; and that no one man has been, is, or shall be blotted out
thereof, but by his own personal default, showing also herein, the
fundamental cause of the heretical error of the Papists doctrine, hinting
herein also what the Lambs book of life is. p. 101
MANKINDS JVBILEE.
The first DISTINCTION.
The first Distinction which shows (that as all men lost their blessed first
Life of Creation by the Fall, and thereby fell all of them into the first
death) that there is a common salvation wrought by Christ, warranted by
Scripture, which does relieve all men from the eternal danger of the first
death, and from that impassibility to be ternally saved, which came in by Adams
Fall, showing also the difference be wixt the Old man, and New man, and
Rational man.
NOw herein I do humbly beseech you, that you will not undervalue, extenuate,
nor deface the fullness of the litteral sense, expressed in diverse places of
Scripture by the Holy Ghost, in its speaking of Christ's performances on his
part intended, for the eternal salvation of all men, as these following and
the like.

That as God is not willing that any should perish, but that (no fewer than
all) should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. That even so accordingly, because
all men are cast into unability to know the truth (by the fall) therefore God
will have all men saved, and come unto the the knowledge of the truth. Note
that it is not here said, that God desires it only, or would have it so, or
that he will have but some men saved; but absolutely God will have (no fewer
than) all men saved and come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. And
again it is said of Christ, who gave himself a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy
2.6. Herein Christ's obedience to perform that express will of his Father,
appears to be by Ransom, a Savior for no fewer than all men. Also it is
said that by the Grace of God he should taste death for every man, Heb. 2.9.
Here is the fundamental means of effecting that absolute gracious will of God
set forth to be for no less number than all men. Also a believer has
testified unto believers in the word, saying, And he is the propitiation for
our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world, 1
John 2.2. By this the extent of Christ's being a propitiation by his tasting
death for every man, is discovered to take full effect with God for the sins
that were against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20. for no fewer than
the sins of the whole world (or every man) Also it is said, that God had
purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of the fullness of time, to
gather together in one (not only all men, but) all things in Christ, whether
they be things in Heaven, or things on Earth, even in him, Ephesians. 1.10. And to
show that this was a reconciled gathering together of all men in Christ, it is
said, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing
their trespasses to them, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20, but he laid upon him the
iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. And yet further, plainly to show that this
reconcilsiation was not made only for the world of the elect, as some have
vainly fained. It is further affirmed, that it pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell, and having made peace by the blood of his Cross, by
him to reconcile (not only all men, they being his choice earthly thing by
Creation, but also) by him to reconcile all things to himself: By him I say,
whether they be things in Heaven, or things on earth, Col. 1.19, 20. Thus you
see God in the attribute of his Justice and Truth, reconciled to all men in
Christ by free mercy; and from this general mercy of God in Christ toward all
men in a common salvation, that famous discovery of the Angel, was publicly
proclaimed, and unanimously consirmed by a multitude of the Heavenly Host,
saying, with a remarkable ecce, Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy,
which shall be to all people, that this day is born unto you in the City of
David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord, on earth peace, good will toward
men, Luke 2.10, 11. herein not excepting any one man. Thus is Christ proclaimed
to be a Savior for no fewer than all people or all men.

And the Apostle Jude in his diligent course to maintain that salvation, which
he expressly calls the common salvation, exhorts that we should earnestly
contend for the faith that was once given to the Saints, which appears to be
given to those Saints, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which was by promise often
repeated to them, that in their seed should (no fewer then) all the Nations and
Families of the Earth be blessed, as in Genesis 18.18. and 26.4. and 28.14.
without excepting any one man; and accordingly Paul did so highly esteem of I
it us in this respect, that he called him his own son after the common
faith, Tit. 1.4. And accordingly further teached him, that the grace of God
that brings salvation unto all men has appeared, Tit. 2.11. And all this
general mercy extended as in Romans 5. by the free gifts coming upon (no
fewer than) all men unto Justification of Life; or as I find it in a reformed
Bible, in the same Chapter, thus, that as by the sin of one, condemnation
came on all men; even so by the justifying of one, comes the righteousness
that brings life upon all men: by which means as is inferred in the same
Chapter, as sin abounded by the Law, (there) grace did much more abound, ver.
20. and the reason thereof, is there given to be this; that as sin had reigned
unto death (even over all men, as appears, ver. 12.) by the Law, ver. 20. even
so (largely) might Grace reign through righteousness by Jesus Christ our Lord
ver. 21. by his costly establishing the Gospel, intended on Gods part for the
benefit of all men.

And to say as the truth is, the Apostles very frequently in their Epistles,
do lay down in plain words, these and such like general grounds of a common
salvation, wherefrom they do very often frame their following discourses;
though indeed this their general ground-plot, though being declared by them
the Apostles, agreeable to the Prophets, and also our Savior Christ's own plain
words, has been by many Godly and Learned men, overlooked; which oversight
has not only as it were buried the most ready, the most sure, and most
comfortable foundation of faith and repentance which is, that Christ dyed for
all, and has thereby saved them, from the curse of the Law, and first death,
bringing all men to the knowledge of truth, inabling all men; so that in their
good use thereof, they might also of ape the danger of the second death, all
which is herein proved, but also it has bred and nursed up, and does nourish
many variable noisome contentions, even in the Christian world by men; blasting
as much as in them lies, those plain words, that Christ is the Savior of all
men, 1 Timothy 4.10. that he dyed for all 2. Cor. 5.15. that he is the
propitiation for the sins of (no fewer than) the sins of the whole world, 1
John 2.2.

But hereto I do entreat you to take notice, that whereas in Scripture is
mention made of the Oldman, Romans 6.6. Ephesians. 4.22. Col. 3.9. and of the New man,
Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10. that the common salvation is in no for hespefull either
to the Old or New man, nor indeed can be, for the Old man is the body of sin,
Romans 6.6. the old man is corrupt through deceiveable lusts, Ephesians. 4.22. This
corrupt qualification in man is devilish, and from the Devil issues naturaily
into all men by Adams fall, and is nourished by Satan's continual operations,
thereto annexed, and cannot, nor is, in any mannar capable to receive any
benefit, or be any ways bettered by the common salvation.

And on the other de, the New man is renewed in knowledge, after the Image of
him that Created him, Col. 3.10. and after God is crected in righteousness and
true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. And by its thus proceeding from God, who is perfect
perfection, it no way needs, neither can it any ways be helped mended, or
made better by the common salvation, or any other means. Therefore we are to
know that the common salvation is by grace in Christ established, and by him
perfected for all men, whether any man do believe it or not; that by the help
of the holy and good spiritual New man the Rational man consisting (by virtue
of the Creation) of the substances of soul and body, might be assisted on Gods
part, against the continual evil attempts and suggestions of the Sathanically
deluding Old man; for both the New man and the Old man, do strive against each
other in the person of the Rational mean to obtain his consent; either to
good by the New man's solicitation, or to evil by the Old man's instigation.
From whence the Apostle exhorts, not the spiritual new man that needs no
exhortation to good, nor the diabolical Old man, that cannot possibly act any
otherwise but to do evil; but he persuades the Rational man (in whose person
they both do strive to get the supremacy in his acceptance and affection) to
put off the Old man which is corrupt, and to put on the New man, which is after
God created in righteousness, Ephesians. 4.22, 24. And from hence also the Apostle
accounts our yielding up our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable
unto God, our reasonable or rational service, Romans 12.1. Which Rational man,
or substances of body and soul being considered of (without the sin by
themselves contracted to and in them) are in themselves good for sin does not
null those created substances, which were by Creation good, but does pollute
them.

And not only the good substances of men, as in reference to the Creation, but
of the Devils also are not offensive, being considered of apart from the sin
thereto by themselves contracted. And further to confirm this necessary point.
Note what Paul said, But I see another law in my members, rebelling against the
law of my mind, Romans 7.22. Herein the Apostle Paul shows distinctly, that the
Rational man is the spectator, and is the place or person in whom that combat
is fought, for in effect he says I see Note that I the Rational man do see
the contest betwixt the flesh and the spirit, or the Old man and the New man
making war one against the other in me, one of them in my mind the other in my
members. Again he says, the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
against the flesh, so that ye cannot do that ye would, Gal. 5.17. Herein also
the word (ye) cannot do the things that (ye) would because of the strong
contest of the Old man against the New man or the flesh against the spirit
maintained in their persons, sets sorth the Rational man distinct from the Old
and New man, which rationality, has reference to Romans 12.1. before cited.

And although this combat of the flesh and the spirit or the Old man and New
man, be very often in the conscience of every man that has attained to years
of understanding and judgment; yet this distinction is either not known, or
but little discerned by any until he become a confiding believer, neither do
any yield to the new man's part, but such; yet I believe that no man being
capable of understanding will deny, but that he has often felt such conflicts
in his conscience, and in his judgment, although he has persisted in
resisting the good motions of the holy spirit, and has not followed, much
less accepted of that Gospell-light; and so in time it may be his conscience
is grown seared, and then given up of God; spiritually insensible of all
accusations or good instructions of the spirit or New man dictated in his
conscience; therefore we are to understand, that by the rational man, is meant
every man, or the substances of every man's soul and body, and their faculties:
And that every man thus considered, is totally by nature corrupt by Adams fall
originally, and so is Sathanically deluded and captived, in darkness and
rebellious dispositions, Psalm. 14.2, 3. Romans 3.10, 18. So that before any one
of mankind can attain to be able to know or choose light or life, upon
necessity he the rational man must be enabled and set free by grace in the
inward man, their hearts, eyes, and ears must be opened, Acts 16.14. Job
36.11. Psalm. 146.8. For which end God graciously has perfected in and by our
Savior Christ's performances only a common salvation, whereby the naturally
enchanted and deluded judgments of all men occasioned by Adams fall, are set
so free in the inward man in due season, as that they may thereby if they make
good use thereof, choose light and life, as is proved in my 6 and 7
Distinctions.

And if any man do imagine, that the salvation of all men, this cause of great
joy for all people, the blessings appropriated by and in him, Abraham's feed, to
all Nations, and all the Families of the Earth are intended to be of God, but
as temporal blessings to some part of men to be injoied by them in this life
only; then see the misery that inevitably falls to those men thereby; for the
Apostle says, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, then we are (not
only of some men, but) of all men (not only miserable, but) most miserable, 1
Cor. 15.19. So that in that sense, those temporal blessings intended to some
part of men, are extended forth only to aggravate their eternal woe and
misery, which once the Scripture cries down, and affirms that God is good
(not only to some, but) to all, and that (not only his mercies, but) his tender
mercies are over (not only some, but) over all his works. Thus far that there
is a common salvation perfected by and in Christ intended on Gods part to
procure the eternal salvation of all men, if they persist not in resisting the
operations of the Holy Ghost, graciously tendered therein to every man.

The second Distinction declares what the common salvation is, and the extent
thereof for the benefit of all men, whereby is set forth in good part, the
excellency of the restored second life of mankind, graciously intended by
Christ on Gods part, to preserve all men from the eternal second death.
WE are to effect this discovery, feriously to treasure up in our memories,
what in Scripture is fet forth to be a general loss or common inbondagement
that befell all men, by the destructive Adams fall, and we shall find that one
extraordinary great and common loss which befell all men thereby, was such,
that as considered in its own nature, it did utterly deprive all mankind for
ever, of that estate of possibility to be eternally saved, which Adam had given
unto him by grace of Creation in himself, or in his own power as the public
trust for all his posterity, and though by no constraint of God, as is cleared,
Eccle. 7.29. yet by his own perverse behavior against his faithful Creator,
under his gracious hand working, by his finding fault with his good condition
then given him, he in effect rebelliously faying, Why have thou made me thus,
that I must depend on thee, and not subsist upon, or by mine own inventious.
So marring himself under his gracious Creatours hands, as is instanced, Romans
9.20. Thus by his forsaking of Godsirst, he himself wilfully lost the freedom
of will possibility and ability in himself, to continue in his enjoyment of
the blessed use, of which he was possessed by Creation, by which one loss was
then lost all the unexpressible blessings thereto belonging: And also he then
and thereby lost the real possibility, which all his posterity had by
propriety in him whilst he stood to enjoy all those blessings. Yet
notwithstanding, I beseeth you further to note, that he lost thereby no more
for himself and his posterity, in reference to the point in hand, but only a
possibility to be eternally saved; for more than a possibility to be eternally
saved, he could not lose, neither for himself, nor any one of his posterity;
for he himself though being the great and public pattern for mankind, in
whom God did set forth the extent of his gracious intentions to all men, as
concerning the Creations yet even he was thereby possessed of no more, nor of any
firmer established Condition in himself, than a possibility only, that he
might be eternally saved; for in reference to this cause, by the utmost extent
of his estate which was given him by Creation; as you know it was possible that
by his well acting in that freedom of his will, he might have been eternally
saved: So also you know on the contrary part, that he by his evil acting in
that his freedom of his will, he might lose that his blessed estate for ever,
which he has done, and by his fall did unavoidably overwhelme all mankind in
an utter impossibility as of themselves to be eternally saved.

Note therefore that Christ the restoring Second Adam, by virtue of a salvation
first wrought by his Death, Resurrection and Ascension in himself, for all men
to make way for his gracious operating by his spirit in all men, as is proved
he does, in may 6 and 7 Distinctions, by that means helping all mankind out of
that impossibility as of themselves to be eternally saved, so as that all
mankind shall in due season, enjoy by free grace in their own particular
personal possessions, a restored ability, where by in their well using of that
ability to them by the spirit communicated, by believing they might obtain
eternal life, and all the unutterable privileges, mercy and blessings thereto
belonging. This is the common salvation of all men, and is an effectual
salvation of all men from their imposibility, in which they were all involved
by Adams fall.

Although men may, and some men do, by their wilful abuse of that their
restored freedom and ability by grace given them, of themselves Adam-like,
forsake their own mercies, Jonah 2.8. of themselves choose their own
destructions, Hos. 13.9. of themselves draw back to perdition, Heb. 10.39. and
so of themselves by their own particular personal choice, refuse, and so for
ever lose eternal life.

Now to make it appear visibly by Holy writ, that our Savior Christ his
restoration of free do me and ability to all men in a common salvation (where
by they might or may in their well usage thereof, attain to the enjoyment of
eternal life, and all the blessed privileges thereto belonging) is for all
men an effectual salvation, or ransomed condition, although some men through
their own wilful defaults, by abusing that freedom, are not eternally saved.
I pray you let us consider what extent in this point the Scripture allows to
Christ's offices as Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. or Ransomer of all, 1 Timothy
2.6.

For which end, observe that Jude in his extraordinary diligence, clearly to
discover the common salvation, expressly called so by him, in ver. 3. used the
ancient types for exemplary proofs, according to the frequent example of our
Savior Jesus Christ and his Apostles, as appears in Luke 7.29. John 3.14. John
6.48. Gal. 4.22, 26.1 Cor. 10.1, 12. and many other places. So Jude to express
his meaning concerning the common salvation, by him so called in ver. 3. brings
in the Typical ancient condition of the Jews; and to prevent all men's
rejecting the effectual benefit of the common salvation of all men, he says,
I will therefore put you in remembrance, though you once knew this, how the
Lord having saved the people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed
them that believed not, ver. 5. Herein I believe that no man can deny, but that
Jude, to open what he meant by the common salvation by him before so called,
does by comparing all the Jews in the Type, to all men or all mankind thereby
typified, brings into our view no less number than all Israel (none excepted)
really saved out of their Egyptian bondage; and yet for our instruction in this
very point, he shows there with, that notwithstanding that effectual
salvation of them all, out of that impossibility to save themselves which they
were all then in; yet after that, God destroyed those of them that confided not
in Gods power, goodness, and protection only, who had himself so mightily
saved them.

Who sees not, that Jude herein apparently declares, that all men are
effectually saved in a common salvation by him mentioned, out of the
impossibility and bondage, which by a spiritual Egyptian darkness, contracted
by Adams fall under the captivity of Satan than, Typified by cruel
tyrannical Pharaoh, and yet shows therewith that God has done, does, and
will destroy all such men, that though being so effectually enabled to believe
and be saved, as is proved, that all men are, in my 6 and 7 Distinction, and
yet will not abidingly believe and confide in his grace and goodness only.

And who sees not, that by his rendering their example, that although they were
all so effectually saved out of Egypt, yet that there was a possibility
remaining in their own power, that they might through their own defaults, lose
the enjoyment of the fertile earthly land of Canaan, that he does thereby
plainly infer that though all men are indeed, so really as before saved in a
common salvation, from the impossibility to be eternally saved before mentioned.

Yet as there was left in the fallen Angels, and in Adam by Creation, and in
the Jews after that their effectual salvation out of Egypt, a possibility in
their wills, whereby they might through their own wilful default come to
destruction, that so also notwithstanding the said common salvation of all men,
men may utterly deprive themselves of the benefit of the special salvation to
be enjoyed in the heavenly Canaan.

And this need not seem strange, for the Scripture frequently discovers
diverse salvations to be effectual salvations, although they prove not
eternal; as amongst other places, so where it is said, That for the
unthankfulness and rebellion of the Jews our Types Nehemiah 9.26. though God
therefore delivered them into the hands of their enemies; yet when they cried
unto him, he gave them Saviors, who delivered them out of the hands of their
enemies, ver. 27. Note here that God honored those men with the high Title of
real Saviors, though they procured unto those so really saved people, but a
possibility only that they might keep that their so restored freedom; for
those very same people though being so really saved, did after that wilfully
lose their so restored freedom again, which is plain that these people did,
for the Text says, but after they had rest, they did evil again before thee,
therefore thou left'st them in the hands of their enemies.

And will not even they that do deny the common salvation wrought by Christ,
freely confess that such a man's life was effectually saved from drowning at
such a time, by another man's assistance, although the same man so really saved,
do after that through his own default or negligence, fall into the water
again, and is thereby drowned.

Are we forced to confess these salvations to be effectually performed
instrumentally by Creatures, yea sometimes by mean Creatures, as salves,
medicines, and potions in temporal deliverances? and will we not own the truth
of the common salvation performed by Christ the Creator, to be effectual in
recovering all men from the impossibility to be eternally saved that came in by
Adams fall, unless he do then eternally save them? does not the Apostle Paul
tell us according as Jude has done, that although all Israel our Types, were
saved out of Egypt, yet with many of them God was not well pleased, for they
were overthrown in the wilderness? 1 Cor. 10.5. and that he strengthens this
my Argument, saying, all these things happened to them for examples or types, as
the margent has it, and they were written for our admonition, ver. 11.
undeniably intimating and persuading, that though all mankind be by Christ
saved in a common salvation as all the Jews were, that all men would be very
careful of abusing their of freedom therein communicated to them, showing
that many of them by their so doing, were destroyed of Serpents.

But now beloved be pleased to take notice, though some men, yea godly learned
men have overlooked it, which is this; That absolutely our Savior Christ's
offices of Ransomer or Redeemer by a price, which you know are in effect both
one office, will neither of them both, nor both of them considered of together,
admit of any larger salvations, redemptions nor deliverances (as to those
offices in any manner appertaining) but only by Ransom or Redemption by a
price, to help the inbondaged to their freedom lost, and so leaves such men
so ransomed in a possibility, that afterward those same men may wilfully lose
that their restored freedom again.

For these sayings, Ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 7.23. and redeemed with
(the price of) the precious blood of Christ, are still but a ransom by a price
paid. Now though all men be ransomed, 1 Timothy 2.6. even for ever by that price
paid, from the curse of the Law; as is largely proved in my 4 Distinction, and
from the first death, as is fully declared in my 5 Distinction, and are all by
that ransom or price paid, freed from the impossibility (that came in by Adams
fall) to be eternally saved as is fully proved that all men are, in my 6 and 7
Dictinctions; yet there be some men that will count the blood of the Covenant
(which is the price paid) by which they are in Christ sanctified) an unholy
thing, and will offer despite to the spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29. There be some
that will deny the Lord that bought them, (by that ransom or price paid) and
bring upon themselves swift destruction, 1 Pet. 2.1. So that we may easily
discern, that some men though they be, by that price paid, bought to Christ,
and are, by that price paid, for ever ransomed from the curse of the Law, and
first death, and the impossibility to be eternally saved, which unavoidably
came over all men by Adams fall, and also though they be sanctified as before,
yet that some men will voluntarily and wilfully destroy themselves, by casting
themselves desperately in the eternal terrible second death; and from hence
appears clearly, that some men that are really ransomed, as is before said, yet
are not eternally saved.

Yet though our Savior Christ's offices, of Ransomer or Redeemer by a price
paid, do but deliver all men from the impossibility to be eternally saved,
which came over all men by Adams fall, yet the Scripture further affirms,
that to those men, that by and in that freedom and ability procured by that
ransom or price paid, that do turn them at his reproof, he will (then
abundantly) pour out his spirit unto them, and make known his words unto them,
Prove. 1.23. yet those and such additionall high favors, are not part of the
barely Ransomed Condition, (though that made way for it) but is only Gods
performing of the grace freely given by a promise to such, by virtue of the
second Covenant, even to all such men as do walk before him thankfully and
obediently, by the ability by grace given them in their ransomed Condition or
their Redemption (by a price paid) from the first Covenant or Moral Law, God
having had experience of their believing in the freedom by the ransom
procured. And now beloved, because this cause is very weighty, be pleased with
patience to take yet further notice, how graciously God does discover to us the
extent of the common salvation, and of the strength of ransom and redemption
by a price paid, by his coupling the offices of Christ as Savior of all men,
or ransom of all, in one Text together, where it is said, I exhort therefore,
that first of all prayers, and intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for
all men. (note this for all men) For this is good and acceptable in the sight
of God our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth. For there is but one Mediator between God and man, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be a testimony (or)
to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2.1, 3, 4 5, 6. Thus you see that God in
express positive words, will have (no fewer than) all men saved, he will have
it so. But here the question may be, how far will God have no fewer than all
men to be saved.

This question is answered by God himself in that very Text; first, that as
all men are utterly disabled by Adams fall to know the truth; so God absolutely
will (by Christ the Ransomer) have all men saved and come unto the knowledge of
the truth, which is to know God, for God is truth, Tit. 1.2. And no man can be
brought to the knowledge of the truth, but he must also be enabled to believe
that the truth presented to him is the truth; Thus removing the impossibility
that came in by Adams fall.

Secondly, the common salvation of all men without accepting any one man,
mentioned in 1. Tim. 2.4. is so far there limited in its kind, that it shall
be of no larger extent for the benefit of all men in general, then Christ's
office of a Ransomer will afford or maintain. Thus we find here, that all men
in the generality, are only so far really saved in the common salvation,
according to the 4 verse, as his office of a Ransomer by a price paid, will
extend according to verse 6. that is, by his own performances, to recover to
all men the knowledge of the truth, as is manifest by comparing verse 4 and
verse 6 together, which ability to know God, and the truth of Gods grace and
goodness, all men lost by Adams fall, which without Christ's assistance, would
have procured the eternal destruction of all: Which truth so to all men made
known, being by any man thankfully and obediently accepted, and faithfully and
abidingly confided in, will give those men possession of entrance into eternal
life, here in this life, and in the life to come fullness of enjoyment thereof,
with all the blessed eternal privileges and blessings thereto belonging,
which were all lost for all men by Adams fall.

Thus by these Texts compated, Christ is declared to be for all men a saving
Ransomer, or a ransoming Savior by a price paid, to take away the
impossibility, and to bring all men to the knowledge of the truth, which is the
utmost which those texts maintain, to belong to a Ransomer by a price paid.

But beloved, take notice that I do not insist herein upon any other
redemptions which God exercises by a strong hand, without a consideration
given, or price paid, for so he brought forth or redeemed Israel out of Egypt
with a strong hand, and so he establishes confiding believers, out of the
common salvation, wherein men may make shipwreck of faith and a good co
science, 1 Timothy 1. 19. into the special salvation, keeping them by his power,
that they shall never perish, 1 Pet. 1.5. So he may be said to redeem any man
without any price paid, from manifold dangers: these redemptions or ransomings
which God does without giving or receiving a consideration or price paid, are
innumerable, and though the price of of the precious blood of Christ, has
first made way for all these, that they may be in due season afforded to men,
yet are they not in their single branches acted by God, according to men's
necessities by a price paid; the refore I pray you to observe, that I herein
do insist only upon the extent of deliverance of all mankind, for whom Christ's
precious bloodshed, was made the consideration laid down in full pay in hand,
to take away the impossibility to be eternally saved, which unavoidably came
over all Adams posterity by his fall, that so all men might be made capable
subjects to receive at Gods gracious hand, all other redemptions, ransomings,
or deliverances, without any price paid, as God in his heavenly wisdom will
communicate.

Thus beloved we find, that although the common salvation perfected by Christ
alone for all men, barely considered in it self, does but remove the
impossibility which came upon all men by Adams fall, to be eternally saved, and
does but estate all men at one time or other in due season, in a real
possibility or restored ability, in themselves in the inward man to obtain
eternal life, yet that it is a real salvation of it self, intended on Gods
part therein and thereby to enable all men so, as in their well usage of that
ability, they might attain to enjoy eternal salvation, and all the eternal
blessed privileges thereto belonging; which ability conferred on all men in
the common salvation, being by any man believed, and cheerfully and obediently
made use of it, it does not only open the door into, but also puts such
believing men into the special salvation, wherein in due season, in their
patient and faithful striving endeavors to keep close in their dependence in
God alone, they come to be established, rooted, and built up in him, Romans 1.11.
Col. 2.7. with such enlarged knowledge and experience of God and his goodness,
as is expressed in Ephesians. 1.17, 21. such confiding believers, and obedient
walkers in faithful endeavors, shall never fall, 2 Pet. 1.10. See briefly
what the special salvation is, distinct from the common salvation, in my 19
Distinction, and you shall find that the common salvation by its making the way
smooth, by discovering the foundation of faith and repentance, and so for the
entrance into the special salvation, is a blessed salvation, in excellency
far surmounting all temporal blessings in the world, intended of God for
men's temporal blessings only.

So that those men's opinions, that do maintain, that Christ does not
effectually save all men, except he do eternally save all men, is found
fallacious.

As for the possibility, or restored ability conferred on all men in due season
to know the truth, 1 Timothy 2.6. I conceive that the expression (in due season)
in that text used, is communicated in such a seasonable time for every man's
benefit, as God knows to be fittest, God cordially intending on his part, to
prevent men's future progress in the sins of unbelief, but however it must
be communicated in this present life time and not when men are dead, for there
is no hope, therefore whilst men are yet joined to the living, it is said, a
living dog is better than a dead lion, Eccl. 9.4. As the tree falls, there
shall it be, Eccl. 11.3.

The third Distinction shows, that our Savior Jesus Christ by a salvation
first wrought by and in himself alone, without men, laid the foundation of the
common salvation of all men, by his descension from Heaven, and personal
performances upon the earth.
HErein we are to note, that the effects of Christ's performances and sufferings
upon the earth, is in Scripture called a reconciliation by his death, Romans
5.10. and what he does for men by his spirit, by his living again resurrection
and ascension into Heaven, is distinctly called a much more being saved by his
life in the same verse.

To perform the first of these, he came down from Heaven to the earth; to
perform the second, he ascended up from the earth into heaven: The first he
effected by the effusion of his precious blood upon earth for all men: The
second he operateth by the infusion of his spirit into all men; by the the
first in the common salvation he performed his fathers will, who will have (no
fewer) than all men saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. By the second he finisheth the common
salvation in bringing all men to the knowledge of the truth according to Gods
will also, as appears in the same verse.

And to the end he might be made capable to suffer death, or taste death for
every man, according to Heb. 2.9. he became flesh, John 1 14. And although he
being in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet
he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant,
Phil. 2.6, 7. Thus when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son
made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. and so he became the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5.
made under the Law (or same obligation which all men were under) to redeem them
that were under the Law, Gal. 4.4, 5. Note, that it is not said that he
redeemed the elect or believers, or some part of men only, but to redeem them
that were under the Law, in which condition by the fall, all men were, Romans
3.19. and 5.18, 19, 20. And as without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb.
9.22. So by the determination of God, Acts 4.28. and grace of God, he tasted
death for every man, Heb. 2.9. whereby his most precious blood was shed, 1 Pet.
1.19. Which blood of his in respect of his personal union, as composed of the
Divine and Humane nature, is called Gods blood, Acts 20.28. the shedding of
which is more precious, and pacifically efficacious with God, than if all the
men in the whole world had suffered.

And therefore by this means he became the valuable propitiation for the the
sins (of no less than) the whole world, 1 John 2.2. for God the Father finding
him to have become voluntarily for man's sake under the Law, and same
obligation, into the which all men were by the fall inthralled. God the Father
attached him, and laid upon him the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. and that by
those words (the iniquity of us all) is meant of all mankind; see my 20
distinction. Now the effects produced by his suffering upon the earth, are
principally two.

The first is his abolishing thereby, the eternal curse of the Moral Law or
first Testament, for every man.

And secondly, that by his death he also swalloweth up the first death in
victory for all men: And first, to prove the first of these, I proceed as
follows.

The fourth Distinction proves, that one means to establish the common
salvation purchased by himself, is this: This Christ by his death, abolished
the eternal condemning power of the Moral Law for all men, yet briefly
showing the necessary use thereof.
HErein we are first to observe, that there is a Law abolished by him; sor it
is said of Christ, he having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the Law of
Commandments contained in Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. And herewith we are to know,
that the strength of the word abolished, is a disanulling, a destroying, a
putting out of memory. Note also another full expression, in this very cause
speaking of Christ's not slightly crossing that general accusing bill, leaving
it still condemnably legible, but of his blotting out the handwriting of
Ordinances that was against us, and was contrary to us; and not only so
neither, but for our further security he took it out of the way, nailing it to
his Cross, Col. 2.14. Now I beseech you consider, what more plain or strong
expressions, can be used in this cause; yet further to prove, that hereby is
meant the abolishing of the Moral Law, observe that as it is herein affirmed,
that it is an handwriting of Ordinances, that is blotted out.

That God never wrote any other handwriting of Ordinances but the Moral Law
only, Exodus 31.18. for he added no more, Deuteronomy 5.22. Neither did Moses write any
Ordinances, but such as were either totally Moral Law, or mixed with Moral
Law-Ordinances, as is manifest in his written books; for as God did first
verbally declare the Moral Law at length before he wrote it, Exodus 20. Deuteronomy.
5.22. so Moses wrote not some of those words only, but he wrote all the words
of the Lord, Exodus 24.4. in one book or (handwriting of Ordinances) until
they all were finished, Deuteronomy. 31.24. Thus in Scripture (all those now counted
five books of Moses, are accounted but one book, or handwriting of Ordinances,
and being so composed in one, Moses commanded the Levites to put (not those
books in the plural number, but) that (one) book of his handwriting, into the
side of the Ark of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 31.26. Therefore if the handwriting of
Ordinances, that as beforesaid is blotted out, be referred to Gods
handwriting, then the Moral Law is abolished and blotted out, for God wrote
that with his own finger, Deuteronomy. 31. 18. but he added no other, nor no more,
Deuteronomy. 5.22. And if the handwriting of Ordinances which is blotted out, Col.
2.14. be referred to Moses handwriting, then also the Moral Law is blotted
out; for as God spoke all the words of the Law, so you see proved, that Moses
wrote all the words of the Lord, even until all were finished, Deuteronomy. 31.24.
And he wrote no book of Ordinances, but such as had and has Moral
Law-Ordinances frequently included in it, his books now counted five books,
being then but one book or handwriting of Ordinances, Deuteronomy. 31.26. Thus far
we have observed, that the Moral Law is abolished and blotted out, as it is
called the Law of Commandments, or one handwriting of Ordinances.

But now I pray you let us consider of the Moral Law, as it is called the
first Covenant, Heb. 9.7. or first Testament, ver. 15. which was written and
engraven in stones, 2 Cor. 3.7. God having given no other Law engraven or
written in stones, but the Moral Law only, unto which Moral Law, the
Ceremonial Law was appointed to be pacifically subservient, Heb. 9.1, 6. Also
it is said, that that Law also was but imposed upon the Jews, but until the
time of reformation, Heb. 9.10. And as for the Moral Law it self, which was
written and engraven in stones, 2 Cor. 3.7. called there the ministration of
death, that it was to be done away, see ver. 7. And further in express words
it is done away, ver. 11. and is abolished, ver. 13. and with the downfall
thereof, the very Ceremonial Law and Priesthood to that Law belonging, is
abolished utterly, and the Priesthood it self to that Law belonging, at the
coming in of the reformation, so limited as is said in Heb. 9.10. is fully
changed from the Tribe of Levi, to the Tribe of Judah, for our Lord sprang out
of Judah, Heb. 7.14. and therefrom the Apostle affirms, that thereby is made
upon necessity a change of the Law, ver. 12. Observe, upon necessity the Law
must be changed by that change of the Priesthood; and for our further
satisfaction in this point the Apostle says, that there is verily a
disanulling of the Commandment going before, ver. 18. What can the Scripture
say more. And beloved I think you will not deny but it had been very frivolous
for the Apostle to tell the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.15. that the Ceremonial Law was
abolished; and to tell the Colossians, Col. 2.14. hat the Ceremonial Law was
blotted out for them, and as much vanity it had been for him to tell the
Galathians, Gal. 3.13. that Christ had redeemed them from the curse of the
Ceremonial Law, for the Ceremonial Law was never at enmity with those
Nations, nor against or contrary to them; for the Ceremonial Law was never in
any measure imposed upon any of those people to observe (except some few
Proselytes.

Therefore as is before proved, the Moral Law is abolished and blotted out,
for it was but added until the seed came, Gal. 3.19. Again, if the Moral Law
be not so fully abolished and blotted out for all men, but that it remains in
such force still, that some men do eternally perish under the curse or
sentence of that Law, and if any one man be lest out of the protection of the
second Covenant, to perish by the first Death eternally for the breach of that
first Covenant, or first Testament; then the Moral Law is not abolished nor
blotted out; which to affirm, is not only a flat audacious contradiction
against Gods manifest words beforesaid, and is not only contrary to Romans 5.20,
21. and Heb. 9.15. where it is affirmed that Christ's death was for the
Redemption of the transgressions against that first Testament without any
limitation; but considering that the transgressions against that first
Testament or Moral Law, never were, are, or ever can be the unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost, as is by Scripture proved, in my 9, 10, and 11
Distinctions.

That affirmation to say that some men do perish eternally by the Moral Law,
proves also no less than a flat affronting opposition, against our Savior
Christ's own words, who affirms punctually, that all manner of sins and
blasphemies shall be forgiven unto the sons of men (with this one only
distinct reserve) that he that blasphemeth the Holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, as appears,
Matthew 12.31, 32. and in Mark 3.28. And I hope you will not tax our Savior
with indiscretion for so saying.

Yet notwithstanding, though the curse, or eternal condemning power or
sentence of the Moral Law, is abolished and blotted out, as is proved herein,
and also in my 20 Distinction. Yet the holy righteous requirings of Love both
to God and men contained in the Law, is required by the Gospel, for it says,
Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. Thus though the Gospel
destroys the eternal curse of the Law, yet by its so amiably sympathizing
with the holy requirings of the Law, by a justiciall salutation of them both in
Christ, and his propitiatory performances, MERCY and TRUTH are met together,
Righteousness and PEACE have kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10. Thus is the
righteousness of the Law (evangelically) fulfilled in them that walk not after
the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8.4. in the first fruits of the spirit,
ver. 23. and will be perfectly fulfilled in them at their resurrection and
adoption, or redemption of their bodies, which believers wait for. Romans 8.23.
Therefore we are not to reject or cast off the holy instructions, which are
rendered in the holiness, goodness, and justness of the Law, Romans 7.12.
for our Savior says, he came to fulfill the Law, Matthew 5.17. And from this
amiable conjunction of the Gospel, with the holy requirings of the Law, the
Apostle says do we make void the Law through faith? yea we establish the Law,
Romans 3.31. Therefore the Prophet speaking of seeking to, and trusting in God,
says concerning the Law Gospelized or testimony of Jesus to the Law and to the
testimony, if they speak not according to this word it is because there is no
light in them, Isa. 8.20. And the Apostle speaking of the Saints overcomming of
Satan, says, and they overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and the words of the
testimony, Rev. 12.11. Also according to the proportion of ability allotted to
us here in this life, we may therein see, the excellent perfect perfection,
holiness and justness, that is in our good God, and in that pure glass, we
may behold our own pollutions and deformities; and though however slighted by
some men, yet it remains to public view, as a famous ancient precious
monument, whereby we may behold the dangerous rock, upon which without Christ's
assistance, we all mankind had eternally suffered shipwreck, Romans 3.19. and
5.12, 19, 20. And many more excellent discoveries and righteous exhortations
may be by us viewed and collected, from and in that transparent Crystal
glass of the equity of the Law, which for brevity sake I do omit to rehearse,
but still desiring you to take notice, that notwithstanding the abolishing the
eternal curse of the Law, whereby men's accusing first husband is dead.

Yet in erroneous consciences that will not know, that that their first husband
is departed this world, Romans 7.13. and do not by Gospel faith, dye to the Law
by the body of Christ, that they should be married to another, even to him that
is raised from the dead, ver. 4.

In such erroneous persons by their thoughts and consciences, excusing or
accusing one another by the effects of the Law written in their hearts, they
will wilfully judge themselves according to the Law of works, and from thence
are said to be judged by the Law, Romans 2.11, 16. Yet it is not God that by that
Law judges them, but it is their so judging themselves erroneously thereby,
for it being indeed their erroneously chosen judge, it will appear in their
consciences, as an exact witness against them in a Gospell-way, restifying
their unthankful walking toward God, in his tenders of the grace of the
second Covenant by the Holy Ghost. But when God judges the secrets of men's
thoughts and consciences, then he judges not by the Law, but by the Gospel,
as is annexed thereto in that Chapter, ver. 16. So not those words spoken and
written by God in Mount Sinai being the Law, but the words which Christ spoke
in the Gospel, that shall judge men at the Last day, John 12.48. And for
further proof, that the curse of the Law is abolished and blotted out for all
men, peruse my 20 Distinction.

Only to conclude, hereto note, that as Moses was not to lead the children of
Israel out of the wilderness into the earthly Canaan no he must dye, and be
buried in obscurity, Deuteronomy. 34.5, 6, before that was done, and Joshua in the
type, which is by interpretation Jesus, Heb. 4.8. was appointed to bring all
those Jews, which had not themselves rebelliously destroyed their intended
interest in that earthly Canaan: Even so in this very cause (though then but
typified) Moses Law or the first husband, Romans 7.1, 4. must dye or be abolished
by establishing such a Gospell-way, so that Moses Law must not, but
Jepell-Covenant of grace by himself purchased with his own precious
bloodshed, to bring all those men into the heavenly Canaan, which have not
themselves destroyed their of God intended interest in that blessed inheritance
in the spiritual Canaan, in their walking through the wilderness of this
terrestrial world.

The fifth Distinction proves also, that to perfect the foundation of the
common salvation, Christ by his death has abolished the first death for all
men.
IN which discovery we are to take notice, that there is a second death
mentioned in Rev. 2.11. and 20.6. and 21.8. which undeniably proves, that
there was a first death from which by Christ's performances all men have
escaped, not meddling here with the temporal death of men's bodies, which by
reason of the resurrection thereof, is hardly allowed the name of death, but is
frequently in Scripture accounted to be a sleep, 1 Cor. 15.20. Deuteronomy. 31.16. as
in the 1 Kin. 1.21. or but a change of the body, Job 14.14. 1 Cor. 15.52. But
of the other two deaths that is the first death, which without Christ's
assistance, would have been by the fall eternal over all men, and the second
death which does remain eternal, to all such men as wilfully and persisting
refuse their own mercies, tendered to them by the Holy Ghost by the Gospel:
Of these two deaths we are to note, that one of them is abolished, 2 Timothy 1.10.
and that Christ by his death, swalloweth up one of these deaths in victory, 1
Cor. 15.34. Hosea 13.14.

But it may be that some men will make a question, which of these two deaths is
by Christ's death abolished.

In answer whereof, considering that Christ dyed for all, 2 Cor. 5.15. and that
he tasted death for (no fewer than) all men or every man, Heb. 2.9. from hence
is proved, that it is that death which is abolished, which by one man's sin
entered into the world, and so death passed upon all men, Romans 5.12, 17. This in
Scripture is the first death; for all men or every man do not perish by the
second death, there be some men that have part in the first resurrection, over
whom the second death has no power, Rev. 19.6. but this death, which is in 2 Timothy 1.10 mentioned to be abolished, came in over all men, in and with the
first entrance of sin into the world. This sin in respect it issued
originally by one man's offense, is called in the singular number the sin of
the world, which the Lamb of God takes away, John 1.29. And in respect of the
overspreading leprosy thereof, throughout mankind in their individuals; it is
in Scripture in the plural number, called the sins of the whole world, for all
which Christ has also made a pacificall propitiation, 1 John 2.2. These were
sins naturally against the Moral Law of works, for they came in originally by
Adams rebelliously acting against the Law, of do and live. Now our Savior
having by his tasting death of every man, satisfied justice for no fewer sins,
than the sins of the whole world, in reference to the first Testament, Heb.
9.15. Romans 5.20, 21. for which the first death came upon all men, it
unavoidably follows, that all those sins being so by his death destroyed,
which sins were the sting of (that first) death, 1 Cor. 15.54. and the Moral
Law or first Testament being abolished and blotted out, which was the strength
of that sin, ver. 56. as is proved the Law is in my last Distinction, from
hence all those the worlds sins are not imputed to the world, 2 Cor. 5.19. but
our iniquities against the first Testament, Heb 9.15. Romans 5.20. were laid upon
Christ, Isa. 53.6. And Christ by his incomparable victorious conquest, finished
by his resurrection and ascension, from under the charge of those the worlds
sins, and from under the power of the curse of the Law, and power of the first
death thereto due, he swalloweth up (not the second death) but the first death
in victory, according to 1 Cor. 15.54. Hos. 13.14.

And hereto it is very remarkable, there is no first death named in Scripture
by which any one man has done, does or shall eternally perish, for that is
prevented by our Savior Christ's performances; but when the death is named or
distinguished, by which any man does perish eternally, it is distinctly and
plainly called the second death, as appears plainly, in Rev. 2.11, 20. and
6.14. and 21.8. for the second death is the relative eternal punishment, for
the transgressions against the second Covenant, which is of grace, if by men
gressions against the second Covenant, which is of grace, if by men persisted
in, against the dictates of the Holy Ghost, which second death is also the
reserve for punishment at the last judgment day, in relation to men's souls
and bodies, united by the resurrection to preserve from which, Christ's death
has no relation to diminish, much less abolish as is fully proved in my 11
Distinction. Thus far to prove, that it is the first death, which together with
the first Testament is abolished.

This recovery of all men from the eternal curse of the law and first death,
is a salvation purchased by Christ himself alone without men, for all men
whether any man does believe that Gospell-tidings or not, and no man enjoys
the comfortable use thereof, personally in his conscience but believers only.

The sixth Distinction shows, that as Christ has by the said salvation first
wrought in himself, laid the foundation of the common salvation of all men, by
his personal performances upon the earth without men; so herein is declared
how he finisheth the same by his spirit in all men, by his resurrection and
ascension into Heaven, and by his their being.
IN which point we are to observe, that our Savior Christ having out of his
love to mankind, by that costly price paying of his precious blood shed,
purchased and obtained of the Father, the dominion and Lordship over all men,
both the living and the dead, for which very end, expressly Christ dyed, rose
and revived, Romans 14.9. So to make it appear to all men (notwithstanding the
hard conceit which some men (against Scripture will harbor against him) that
he is no hard Master in his dominion, nor intends no destructive ends therein
to any one man, by reaping where he sows not, and gathering where he stroweth
not, which he rejects, Mat. 25.24. He will make it appear to public view,
that he will charitably be to all men, as the tender hearted dresser of the
Vineyard, who would not have the barren tree cut down, although it had been a
long time barren, before he have dug about it, and dunged it, and also
waited upon it a convenient time to make trial what good effects would proceed
therefrom by the sufficient means which he lovingly and diligently had
therewith used, according to Luke 13.7, 8, 9. He will have the world see, that
he will not put impossibilities upon men to be performed by them, by putting
yokes upon their necks, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear, as
some tyrannically did upon the Disciples, Acts 15.10. No, no, my beloved, there
is no such matter to be found in him, we have experience of his faithful and
tender dealing with all men in our Types, the Jews, for God required no
oblation; of beasts or other Creatures, to be by them rendered to him, until he
first enabled them to perform those his Commandments, by giving them those
Creatures so required by him. Also God commanded them not to go forth in
warfare against their enemies, but as he gave them and assisted them with
sufficient means, that they might thereby become victorious. God expected not
that the fallen Angels should keep their first created blessed estate, until
he had first enabled them to keep that their first habitation.

But more especially we are to keep in memory, Gods just and gracious dealing
with our grand parent Adam, who was the public general pattern of Gods
intention, in this point to all mankind, for we shall assuredly find, that
though God did not in the counsel of his own immense widome, establish him by
Creation so as he could not fall, yet we find that God graciously did not
require his obedience to perform the keeping of those first precepts he gave
him to observe, until he had first given him ability in himself, whereby he
might have been exactly obedient thereto. Now considering this grace granted to
and in our exemplary parent, shall we once perfidiously question or suppose,
that God (who commands (no fewer than) al men (not only in some particular
places but) every where to repent?) Acts 17.30. does require of any one of
mankind, their obedience, of faith and repentance, to be performed by them
according to the second Covenant which is of grace, as to be eternally punished
for their di obedience thereto, before he has (notwithstanding their by the
fall natural unabilities) enabled them in the inward man, mind, and will to
perform the same.

If any man be still possessed with such false surmises of God, then for
satisfaction let us read, and seriously consider of our Savior Christ's
Commission

Concerning the large extent of Gods love in Christ, not only to some men but
to all mankind. Did Moses, though but the servant, to whom Christ in conduct,
and other respects was to be like him? Deuteronomy. 18.18. Did he in the Type by his
Commission conduct and instruct, and bring no fewer than all the Children of
Israel out of the prison house of the Egyptian bondage, from under the
tyrannical hand of cruel Pharaoh, the Type of the Devil, his captiving all
men at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. whilst they do remain in that natural
darkness, that came over all men by Adams fall? Then observe what Christ the
obedient Son does by the strength of his Commission for all men being all by
nature imprisoned Captives, spiritually captived under Satan's tyranny.

Wherein first note, that as all men in their natural estate, are so
imprisoned and captivated by the Devils works originally, that for this purpose
the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil,
1 John 3.8. And accordingly God says concerning Christ, I will give thee for a
light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the
earth, Isa. 49.6. This in reference to the common salvation is without
limitation; and that this salvation is for the benefit of all men, or all
mankind, observe what God further says, my righteousness shall be for ever,
and my salvation from generation to generation, Isa. 51.8. Thus is the promise
performed, that was diverse times promised to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that in
their seed, should no fewer than all the Nations and all the Families of the
earth be blessed. Note that these expressions of salvation and blessedness are
not limited either in respect of time, place or person. Again, I will give thee
for a Covenant of the people (the Jews) and for a light of the Gentiles, to
open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners out of prison, and them that
sit in darkness, out of the prison house, Isa. 42.7. This is more than the
opening of the prison doors of Satan's spiritual inthralment, that all
imprisoned mankind may go out; for by this his mission, he is to bring out the
captives out of that captivity and darkness. This grace is unlimited, yet this
does not prove, but that some men may wilfully and voluntarily after their
inlightenments, return to that captivity again.

And our Savior faith, I am the light of the world, John 8.12. And lest we
should mistake what is here meant by the word (world) as many men have
ignorantly done by applying the word (world) in this and diverse other places,
to be meant of the elect and believers only; therefore to prevent that
absurdity,

John Baptist steppeth forth, and punctually affirms, that Christ is not only
the light of the world, but also that he is the true light, that inlightneth
(not some men only, but) every man that comes into the world, John 1.9. And
to prevent that any man should affirm this general light, to be only a
temporary light to some men. God no ways intending that thereby those men
should believe as is required in the Gospel;

Behold that John Baptist presses still more forward; and tells us thereto
plainly, that that light by Christ communicated unto every man (not one man
excepted) is of such efficacy, that (no fewer than) all men through him might
believe; compare John 1.7. with the 9 ver. And this he does for all men,
without price or reward by them paid, by virtue of his atonement, Isa. 45.13.
As in the Type no less number than all the Jews were set free by the
atonement made in their year of Jubilee, without money and without price, Lev.
25.9. Thus according to Gods absolute express will, 1 Timothy 2.4. Christ does in
due season (by his inlightning every man that comes into the world) bring all
men out of their natural darkness unto the knowledge of the truth.

Now you know that no man can be brought to the knowledge of the truth, but
first that man's judgment must upon necessity be convinced so far, as that he
does believe that the truth, so by Christ tendered, is the truth, for no man
knows, nor can know that to be truth, which he first in his judgment
believes not to be truth; so that Christ by his bringing all men to know the
truth (of God in his goodness and mercy) does thereby also enable all men to
believe the truth to betruth, in which believing they might abide, which is
full to John 1.7, 9. and 1 Timothy 2.4. though some men will not retain that
their believed knowledge of God. Romans 1.21. and 28. and will when they are
enabled to know and also believe (which cannot be separated) that the light is
light, distinct from darkness, yet will love or choose darkness, which our
Savior says, is the condemnation. John 3.19. Thus we find, that as God is not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, that so
he does not only as in the Type lay meat before them, by presenting Gods
gracious goodness to them, for them to confide in only, but he also takes the
spirituallyoke from off the jaws of all men, that they may feed on the reality
of that his goodness, by faith confiding in the same only, which simile is
teachingly presented to us in Hos. 11.4.

Now herein we have a fit opportunity to take notice of the manifest dangerous
errors, that some men have fallen into, by overlooking of this imprisonment of
all men's spirits under Satan by the fall, and Christ by his spirit
inlighteningly preaching to all men's spirits so imprisoned in this life time
upon the earth, according to Luke 4.18. where our Savior says, the spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the
poor, he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to
the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and to set at liberty them
that are bruised. Now as all men are by nature blind and captives; so this
preaching of his by his spirit to the blind and the captives, is unlimited, for
by the mistake of some men, in that Christ by his spirit preaches to all men's
spirits so imprisoned in this life time upon the earth,

The Papists to maintain their painted purgatory, have fained, that Christ went
down into hell in the days of Noah, to preach to the spirits there in prison,
grossly abusing 1 Pet. 3.19, 20. For Peter did not say that Christ by his spirit
preached to the spirits that were in prison in hell, no such matter, for he
says, that Christ by his spirit preached to the spirits in prison, which were
disobedient, when once the long suffering of God waited in the days of Noah,
while the Arc was preparing (as you know upon the earth) never in the Texts
mentioning the spirits in hell, but at that time by his spirit preaching then
upon the earth to those rebellious spirits that were upon the earth while the
Arc was preparing. And to say as the truth is, some godly Protestants by their
overlooking the said imprisonment naturally of all men's spirits upon the earth,
under Satan's captivity by the fall, and Christ by his spirit preaching, not
only in the days of Noah, as the Text says he once did, but that also by his
in ightning of every man that comes into the world, he preaches to all men's
spirits, all men being by nature imprisoned in the darkness of that spiritual
prison house) their judgments also have been dazzled with this Text, although
it be said of Christ, concerning even rebellious spirits (which all men are by
nature) thou have ascended on high, thou host led captivity captive, Satan and
all his power in captiving al men's spirits in darkness, is by Christ's
performances and power, led into captivity under Christ's inlightenment of every
man; Thou have received gifts for men, or in the man, yea for the rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell amongst them, Psalm. 69.18. Observe the
generality of this free donation; and though some rebellious spirits will not,
yet all men might accept of this freedom, for Christ the just has suffered
for the unjust, not that he does infallibly over-powre all men so, when he has
brought them to the knowledge of the truth, which is God, for God is truth,
that they never can depart from him, but Christ the just has suffered for the
unjust, not excepting any one man, all men being unjust, to open a passage with
God the Father, that he might bring all men to God, which is the lively
coherence of 1 Pet. 2.18. though some men will rebelliously depart from the
living God, though so brought to him, and so draw back even to perdition, Heb.
10.38, 39.

But now beloved we are seriously to observe, that every man must upon
necessity be compelled or over-powred, to receive the possession in him elfe of
his inlightenment and ability by grace, given unto him in the common salvation,
for our Savior Christ has a harder task to accomplish the restoration of all
men to the knowledge of the truth, then was in the Creation to make man, for
Adam, who was first formed of the earth, made no resistance to his Creation;
but by restoration after the fall, Christ has to deal with a world of men,
who are all by the fall naturalized in rebellious resistance against Christ his
well forming hand upon his potters wheel of restoration; and for to effect the
Creation, there needed none to suffer; but our Savior Christ, to effect the
restoration of all men, for the pacifying of the Fathers justice, was
necessitated to suffer even death it self in a most terrible manner for
rebellious mankind, who will not be so much compliable to his gracious working
and good intention toward them, as patients passively to submit and yield
themselves unto the dispose of the Physician: but he has to deal with a world
of men, that as they are all by nature born spiritually blind, so they are all
very well pleased with that their blindness, all of them being by natural
descent from polluted Adam, so far inchanred by Satan, that they do count it
injurious to be brought out of the darkness of that spiritual imprisonment,
so that our Savior Christ, in obedience to perform his Fathers will, who is
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2
Pet. 3.9. and to help all men that they may repent, he absolutely will have all
men saved, and (brought or) to come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy
2.4, 6. And also Christ to testify his own love in performing that his Fathers
will for all men, is necessitated, how cross soever, or how rebelliously
soever all men wilfully act against that his gracious work, yet to compel all
men to come to the knowledge of the truth, according to his Fathers will, as is
before he will have it so, there is no remedy by men's hanging back in this
cause, it must be so, for our good God will not, nor indeed cannot be so
unjust, as to take advantage against any one of Adams posterity, by their being
unavoidably fallen into darkness by another man's actual transgression; when
another has feld the tree down, it is not suitable to his glorious greatness
and goodness, to hack off the boughs: Nay further, he will extend his mercy in
Christ also, even to Adam himself also in his darkness, who was the personal
occasion of the fall of all, for Christ inlightneth every man, all men are to
come unto the knowledge of the truth, for his Father by free grate sent him,
not only to open the blind eyes, and to open the spiritual prison doors, but
also to bring out the prisoners from the prison house.

Christ is not only to inlighten them that sit in darkness, but he is
necessitated in his obedience to his Fathers will, whether men be willing or
not willing to part with their natural darkness, to bring those that sit in
darkness, out of the darkness of the prison house, Isa. 42.7. these being by
nature all men's conditions.

Thus you see how our good and merciful God, will not have that saying used,
that the fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge, Ezekiel 18.2, 3, 4.

This spiritual preaching of the Gospel by Christ's word, or believing
servants or creatures, to all men, is called the Kingdom of Heaven which is
within you, Luke 17.21. which appears by comparing mat. 3.2. with Mark 1.15.

And from such expressions, by likening diverse things to the Kingdom of
Heaven, our Savior uttered many parables, as is instanced by the parable of
the sower and his seed, and of the drag-net, and of the leaven, and of the
Feast.

Wherein note, that to declare the compulsion of all men, internally to receive
the infranchisement aforesaid in the common salvation, Christ sets forth the
same seeds-man sowing of the same seed, even the word of the Kingdom upon
four sorts of ground, representing thereby all the sorts of ground, or of men,
which were compelled all alike to receive the sowing or falling of the seed
upon them; for the simile holds not, nor maintains not, that any of those sorts
of ground, no not the best sort of ground, used any means, or desired that the
seed should be cast upon them, yet it is said (in effect) that all those
grounds were (by the act of sowing the seed upon them) made to hear the word,
and also some of the bad grounds did receive it with joy, Mat 13.19, 23. and
also some of the bad grounds sprang up, Luke 8.6. which shows that there is an
ability given by the seed sowing even on the bad grounds, for they had no such
ability of their own, but they by one means or other in that ability suffered
one interruption or other to fasten upon them, so that only that ground called
the good ground, did bring forth good fruit thereby.

But still note here with, that the goodness thereof is not attributed to a
surmounting Almighty power of God, extended to that ground over and above, or
more than the other grounds, but it is attributed, as in the simile, in effect
to the due obedience of the ground, or of men being found well acting in the
ability by grace restored to all men, by Christ the seeds-man, by sowing the
same seed upon it, which seed he also sows on all persisting disobedient men;
for if the goodness thereof were not attributed to its own well acting in
ability of will by grace so restored, but to a surmounting Almighty power of
God, unresistibly overpowring it, more then was granted to the other grounds,
then it were gross absurdity with men, much more for us to conceive of our
impartial good God, who is no respecter of persons, Acts 10.34. Deuteronomy. 10.17.
Romans 2.11. That he should esteem of that ground, and that he should so
partially and highly prefer that ground as being good, rather than the other
grounds, considering, that if those bad grounds had been so over-powred, they
could not have avoided it, but they must perforce have brought forth as good
fruit, as that ground accounted good ground did. But

These grounds to say, as the truth is, do represent the rational man,
consisting of body and soul in all men, which rational man is set forth
distinct from the Old and New man in the latter part of my 1 Distinction, the
rational man being in all men, inthralled in an utter unability (in respect of
Saving Acts) by Adams fall, yet are all in due season. Thus by this general
seeds-man (that as you see pro ed sowes his seed, or the word of the Kingdom
on all grounds, or all men, so that) so that all were infranchised in their
natural dease condition, so as to hear the word (with the ears of internal
minds as Mat. 13.19, 23. plainly declares, that all the sorts of ground did.
And herein is represented some rational men so enlightened by the title of the
good ground, as found well acting or fruitfully by faithful endeavors acting
in the use of that their infranchisment when the other grounds also so enabled
by the same seeds-man and seed, yet are found rebelliously acting, and for
secondary carnal ends, casting often the benefits by that grace given unto them,
and therefore are called bad grounds.

And yet observe, that though one ground is imputatively by grace commended to
be good ground, yet know, that no man though being found well acting by faith
and obedience in his infran hisement represented by the seed sown on all, when
as some other men being so enabled also, are found rejecting those works of
grace, or seed sown on them also; yet as the Angels that never fell, nor Adam,
if he had remained in his created innocence, could not have merited reward as
due debt from the Creators hand, otherwise than he is pleased to maintain his
second Covenant by his free grace given; so much less does this ground, or
those men here called or accounted, or imputed good, merit any reward at Gods
hand, but as God is pleased by grace according to his second Covenant, to
account and to impute them to be good that believe in him that justifyeth the
ungodly, Romans 4.5. by Christ.

Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is compared to a net cast into the sea, which
gathers together every kind, which when it was full, they drew to shore, and
sat down and gather d the good into vessels, and cost the bad away, Mat.
13.47, 48. Note herein, that all men (represented by the fishes) good and bad,
are enforced to receive the word of the Kingdom in this sense, here by the
simile of the drag-net called the Kingdom of Heaven, for all both good and
bad, will they, nill they, were compelled to partake of the same condition in
the net; though some was found in that drag-net compared to the Kingdom of
Heaven, that in their continued badnesse were cast away. Note that no man is or
was created bad, but as he makes himself bad, as is often proved in this tract.

And now consider how lively both these parables represent the common
salvation, where our Savior says, and I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men
unto me, John 12.32. He will not only by his spirit invite all men to come unto
him, but he will draw as in the drag-net, not only some men, but all men unto
him not in the least measure on his part for destructive ends to any one of all
men so drawn to him, but for saving ends on his part for every man, for his
Father sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved, John 3.17. Which yet appears more clearly
where it is said, that God does reconciledly gather together in one to
himself, not only all men, but all things by the blood of his Cross, in him,
even in him, as Col. 1.20. and Ephesians. 1.10. being compared together, do plainly
render. Thus this reconciled gathering or drawing together of all men in
Chri8st, even in him, includes all men good and bad, reconciledly gathered to
God in him, though some men being so graciously gathered together in him in the
common salvation, will notwithstanding by their wilful persisting in the abuse
of the benefit thereof, be cast out or cast a way. But how comes it to pass,
that no fewer than all men good and bad, are in that sense drawn to, or are
made partakers of the word of the Kingdom, or Kingdom of Heaven, or the
knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. In answer to this, the means how, is showed
by our Saviors comparing the large and secret working of the spirit to Leaven,
our Savior saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is like leaven, which a woman took
and hid in three measures of meal, until (no less than) all was leavened.
Note that until no less than all was leavened.

Herein is the Kingdom of Heaven, or the word of the Kingdom, as it is called
in the same Chapter, Mat. 13.19. comparatively set forth to be as Leaven,
infusing it self effectually, not only into some part, but into all parts of
the meal, similizing thereby, that light, and therewith ability to know the
truth and choose it, is effectually by a secret, yet powerful operation of the
spirit infused into all men, as in John 1.7, 9. and 1 Timothy 2.4. is proved.

Again, our Savior says, the Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King
which made a marriage for his son, Mat. 22.2. Unto which Feast, the first
that were compelled, or made to know thereof by invitation, having refused, he
commanded to gather together bad and good, and the wedding was (thereby)
furnished with guests, ver. 10. Note that this gathering together of all by
command, is rendered to be no less than a compelling of them all, good and
bad, to come into (in the aforesaid sense) into a terrestrial Kingdom of
Heaven, or thereto likened, compel them to come in, Luke 14.23. or gather
together good and bad and bring them in; no man can conceive that all good and
bad were to be brought together into one local place, or into Gods celestial
Kingdom, but into one condition of ability, to see and to know of the truth
and reality of Gods goodness and mercy extended by the slaying of Christ the
unspotted Lamb that by faith they might feed thereon, for none of them were
further compelled to feed thereon, as by the words of the Text is cleared, and
the first refusers were so far compelled by invitation. But beloved, this
compelling or bringing in of all men, good and bad, to come into the
terrestrial Kingdom of Heaven (so called or likened to, in this Scripture
sense) or to receive the word of the Kingdom, so called, Mat. 13.19. does no
way countenance that opinion which some men have vainly hatched from those
words, affirming that there is no man saved eternally, but only such men as are
compelled by an Almighty power of God, more than some other men are; not only
to know the truth, as is proved that all men are, according to 1 Timothy 2.4. But
also that those men are compelled to abide in the truth by believing, so that
infallibly whether they will or no, they shall not fail, nor be able to resist
against their eternal salvation in Gods Celestial Kingdom, whereas in truth,
there is no such matter maintained in Scripture, for herein by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, we find the clean contrary, that is; that in a common
salvation, all men good and bad, are compelled in, and gathered in to receive
the word of the Kingdom, or the knowledge of the Feast of Gods goodness (not
only intended, but also prepared for them) by the self same men's, as the
forcibly enclosing and drawing of all, good and bad, in the parable of the
drag-net does discover. And thereby some gathered together, and by command,
compelled in, were found there, not having on a wedding garment, therefore cast
out, as those that followed Christ for the loaves sake, John 6.2. whereas no
bad or unclean person, no tpurifyed by faith, can be compelled in neither can
possibly enter into Gods celestial eternal blessed habitation represented,
Rev. 1.8, 27. nor any being once there, can be cast out; and though some men
for an evading shift, have reply thereto, saying that it was but one person
that was found there compelled in, who had not on a wedding garment, and
therefore little notice can be taken of that man, being but one, I answer
thereto; that that one being there so found compelled in, is sufficient to
confute that their fancyed imagination. But behold, that our Savior makes a
far larger application thereof; for as there was some bad found, compelled in
to this condition, called or counted like the Kingdom of Heaven, whereas no
bad person can be compelled in, nor enter into Gods heavenly habitation. And
our Savior affirms upon that very example of the casting out of that one
man, though there be but one mentioned, that as he had said before, that all
were gathered or compelled together, both good and bad, so accordingly even
from that one his being cast out, he concludes, that though many are called
(yet) but few are chosen, in the very next ver. 14. Now taking but a few out of
the many called, this sets forth a greater number of men, who though called in
to receive the word of the Kingdom, and know the truth and reality of Gods
goodness prepared for them by the Feast, yet by their wanting their wedding
garments there, of thankful, loving, obedient acceptance, and faithful
endeavors to walk humbly therein, they are all of them cast out, and few are
chosen.

Hereto if you will be pleased to own it, that no fewer than all, is very
often in the Scripture, comprehended in the word (many) as is fully proved in
my 8 Distinction; and that all men are called by Christ's inlightning (no fewer)
than every man that comes into the world; so that (no fewer than) all men
through him might believe, as in John 1.7, 9. and that by him all are so far
called, that they are all in due season, made to come unto the knowledge of the
truth, according to the 1 Timothy 2.4. by Gods own showing it even to the
Heathens also, Romans 1.19. and 2.14, 15. From hence, and many such like Texts,
we may warrantably conclude, that all men are by the spirit invited or called,
and enabled, though none be chosen, but such men only, as do make good use of
their infranchisement and inlightenment, and by their ability received in the
call, do themselves abide in believing, and so are not only called or compelled
in, as all men are, but are accounted to be faithful, and are chosen, Rev.
17.14.

And the sense of the Greek word, Biazetai, used Luke 16.16. as the Learned
say, is to be read; the Kingdom of God is preached, and every man is pressed
into it, which can be but by infranchisement to receive the word of the
Kingdom, for no man is further so compelled, than as Adam was to be enabled by
grace in himself to obtain eternal life, though some men so enabled by their
persisting in, and abiding in obedient believing, after some trial of their
faith, are by Grace established in the privileges of the special salvation,
as is elsewhere said, and is proved in Ephesians. 1.12, 13. 1 Timothy 4.10.

And considering that all men are utterly disabled by Adams fall, and so by
nature cannot be obedient to the faith; then if all men be not enabled by
Christ's spirit, to become obedient to the faith, and abide therein, but as they
are compelled by a surther Almighty power of God, then that tenent being
maintained, does cast a gross soil in the face of our just dealing impartial
faithful Creator, and all his serious exhortations, dehortations, reproves,
promises, threatenings, rewards and punishments, which is recorded in the holy
Scripture to be proceeded in, for or against men, according to all men's own
actual and personal obedience, or disobedience to the faith; for by that
tenent, obedience is required of some men, and promises and threatenings are
declared to be dispensed to them, according to their personal obedience, or
disobedience, whereas they are utterly disabled by Adams fall, and by Gods
withholding means of inabling them, from them, it proves totally impossible for
them to perform the least part of the obedience required, and if that tenent
were true, then also obedience to the faith is required of some men, and
promises and threatenings declared to them, also to be dispensed according as
they personally do prove obedient or disobedient to the faith; whereas those
men by a surmounting power of God, granted more to them, than to the other men
shall not, nor cannot possibly be able to do or act otherwise, than to be
savingly obedient to the faith, neither can they be able to resist against
their eternal salvation. But to rip open the bowels of this fallacy, we see it
is here proved by Scripture, that all men are in due season so enabled by
Christ by a common salvation, savingly to believe and repent, and thereby those
strained extremes are vanished, and that thereby the perfect holiness of all
the attributes of God, is unitedly cleared, whereby also no less than all
occasion, for any one mere man to boast before God, is totally destroyed, and
that no man is in the least measure wrorged, although God does not only require
but also command no fewer than all men in all places to repent, as he does in
Acts 17.30. and to recover themselves, 2 Timothy 2.26. and to give an account of
himself to God, Romans 14.12. and to be obedient to his reproof, Prove. 1.23.
and to humble themselves, Mat. 23.12. 1 Pet. 5.6. purge themselves, as in 2.
Tim. 2.21. and to turn themselves, Nehe. 19. and that hereby it does plainly
appear (that considering all men's inablement by Christ) not any one man is in
the least measure injured, although God does actually proceed in judgment with
every particular man according to that which he himself has actually and
personally done in his body, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. for God
does not judge every man, nor any man, according to works enforced to be done
in his body, by the corruption that unavoidably came over him by Adams fall,
nor according to unbeleeving works, which any man is necessitated to do by a
decreed reprobation or preterition of God, by his withholding means of inabling
from them, as some men grossly imagine, neither does he judge any man, according
as he is enforced to act beleevingly whether he will or not, by an overruling
Almighty power of God, by God wrought in his body, but being enabled of God by
Christ, he judges every man, according to the things he (himself) has done
in his body, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. as has been touched, or
according to works (not enforced by God or Adams fall) but according to their
works, Rev. 20.13. being as is said, first enabled by God to be obedient, then
God proceeds strictly without partiality, or any respect of persons, 1 Pet.
1.17. Acts 10.34. all which particulars are proved, and is one maine drift of
this whole tract.

And further, to prove that God does not by a surmounting Almighty power,
compel any man after that he is enabled to believe; so that then unalterably
he shall abide in believing, except it be in the case of his establishing of
persistingly abiding humbled believers, after some trial of their faith into
the privileges of the special salvation, which especial salvation, is set
forth in my nineteenth Distinction.

For we have many examples therein, that God does not so overpower enabled
ones, before he has had some trial of their faithful constancy to keep the
faith, which they are by grace enabled to do, Ephesians. 1.12, 13. for observe,
though it may be said that he compelled the refusing guests, to know of the
reality of the Feast, and his good will therein intended to them by his
inviting of them, which reality they questioned, not much less denied for they
in effect confessed that, by their desiring to be excused for their not coming
to it; yet you see that God did not by an almighty power, further compel those
knowing, though refusing guests to come to the feast, much less to seed
thereon; reither did he compel that party, not having a wedding garment, to
abide at the Feast, although he had by command, compelled him to come into it.

Neither do we read that he compelled any other of the guests to feed on the
Feast, though he had compelledly brought them in to it, and enabled them to
feed thereon.

Neither in our Types the Jews, after he had given beasts and other creatures
to offer, whereby they were by him made able to offer up to him in Sacrifices,
such of them, as he to that end required of them, yet did he not then compel
them by an Almighty power, to offer up those beasts to him, whether they would
or not.

Neither, though God had used such compulsion by the fire, as raised the scum
in the seething pot, so as men might themselves have taken it off, which
represents his dealing with all men, yet you see he did not use a further
Almighty power to take it off himself, nor to enforce them so to do.

Neither when he had given the children of Israel weapons, and ability to enter
into the terrestrial land of Canaan, then compel them by an almighty power,
to beat out their enemies in Moses time.

Neither though God made the fallen Angels to receive the possession of their
blessed first estate, and made them to receive ability in themselves, to keep
that their first habitation, yet you see God did not further than compel those
Angels to keep that their estate or first habitation.

And although it may be in some sort said, that he compelled Adam; First, to
enjoy a living being; Secondly, to receive the actual possession of his
blessed estate, prepared for him by the grace of Creation; And Thirdly, made
him to receive an ability in himself, to have kept that his blessed glorious
estate, yet you see God did not by a further Almighty power, compel him whether
he would then or not, to keep and continue in in obedience, and to keep that
his blessed estate, although herein in this point he was the great and leading
pattern of Gods intention concerning all mankind to the whole succeeding
world, and al we his posterity by his example are not to expect at gods hands
(though he does by Christ enable all men evangelically to keep the second
Covenant, which is of grace, as he did enable Adam, perfectly to keep the first
Covenant of works by doing) that he will furnish his posterity with a more
established condition, than he did him, our grand parent, and exemplary
pattern.

And so far he does enable all men, that they all may or might be obedient;
for as has been said, and indeed cannot too often be said, that our blessed
Savior Christ, by a salvation first purchased at a dear rate by himself
alone, by his sufferings and performances upon the earth for all men, with out
men; and then by his resurrection and ascension into Heaven, or by his being in
Heaven, from thence by his spirit operating in all men, and thereby inabling
all men in the inward man in due season, so effectually, as that thereby, they
all by believing might obtain eternal life; yet as has been said and proved,
no man is compelled by a further Almighty power, to abide inbeleeving, or
obedience to the faith, whether they then, when being so enabled, will or not,
neither so overpowered, that they shall not be able to close their internal
eyes again, lest so remaining seeing, they should be healed, as we see those
did, Mat. 13.15.

Yet God never fails in due season, when he sees fit, to establish
persisting, abiding, humbled believers (who are found to have some good
progress in the faith, by their well using that ability by grace given them)
these he establishes in the privileges of the special salvation, wherein he
seals them after they believed, with the holy spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1.13.
and therein affords them many gracious spiritual visits, as to eat of the
hidden Manna, and also gives them a white stone with a new name written in it,
which no man knows but he that receives it, Rev. 2.17. And observe that by this
real ability aforesaid, by Christ communicated unto all men, from thence he
says, without me you can do nothing, John 15.5. therewith also exhorting men
to abide in that ability by believing, John 15.4, 6. and there also shows the
danger of those men that will not abide; also from that ability received,
believing people do triumphantly say, Not of our selves, but by thee only will
we make mention of thy name, Isa. 26.13. and in consideration that some people
do willingly and cheerfully act in that by grace restored ability, given to all
men to know the truth, which God foreknowing, they by him are called Gods
people or elect, according to his foreknowledge, agreeable to the proofs cite
in my 17 Distinction; and from hence it is said, thy people shall come
willingly in the day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3.

Thus herewith keeping in our memories, though God in compassion says, what
could I have done more to my vineyard, that I have not done? Isa. 5.4. Which
vineyard as in the Type, represents all the men of the world, as appears, 1
Cor. 6.11. yet you see he did not by an almighty power force them to bring
forth good fruit, but he proceeded only by taking away the obstructions that
hindered them so to do, that they might by the benefit of that good means used
with them, bring forth good fruit, and then expected good fruit from them or
their own performances, in their good use of that means he had graciously used
with them, as fully appears in Isa. 5. And whereas God said, what could I have
done more for my vineyard, you know that God could if he had so pleased, by his
Almighty power, have so established them, as that they no ways could have
brought forth bad fruit; but he having in his transcendent wisdom, after the
counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. determined not to invest mankind in
genenerall, in any further ability in themselves, but only by taking away the
obstructions that came in by Adams fall, and therewith to enable all men so in
the inward man, as that thereby they all might in their usage of that ability,
prove obedient to the faith, as appears in our grand pattern Adam, that God did
but enable him to be obedient, from this determinate council of his own will,
and glorious wisdom, he in that text says, what could I have done more, etc.

But for the further clearing of what has been said, let us observe that never
since Adams fall, God has not, nor does not entrust any one mere man with an
ability in himself, thereby to be transferred to any other person, as it might
have been transferred from Adam by generation to his posterity if he had stood.
No beloved, God never since the fall, does trust any man with any such ability
in himself, but our Savior Christ only, who as the public man or second
Adam, is entrusted with all the power and ability which is to be be transferred
to any man, that power is invested in him only, Mat. 28.18. whereby because no
one man should suffer loss in that point, by the first Adams fall, he
graciously communicates by his spirit to every man, and does entrust every man
with an ability, whereby he in the good use thereof, might be eternally saved,
so far as concerns his own personal injoiment for himself alone, excepting
only what good another man may receive from him by his good example and
instructions and prayers. But perhaps some man will say, in respect of what
has been by me formerly declared, how can it appear that our Savior Christ
has redeemed all men from the curse of the Law and first death, according to
your 4 and 5 Distinctions, when as it is evident, that some remaining effects
of the curse of the Law, and also of the first death, are as yet unremoved from
off the earth, and other creatures.

To which I answer, that the general curse mentioned in Genesis 3.17. Cursed is
the ground for thy sake, considering that that is but a temporal curse and
affliction; this curse is not of the nature of that which the curse of the Law
would have effected, for without the Covenant of grace applied, as it is
promised to the woman, ver. 15. (in the same Chapter) the curse of the Law
would have been eternal.

So that this aforesaid curse of the ground, which does remain but temporally,
cannot be said to be the curse of the Law.

But God having had experience of Adams wilful rebellion and disobedience
against him, by his being so diabolically puffed up in pride, with his
excellent estate of Creation, and his glorious enjoyment of the perfection of
the Creatures, as created for him, God not for destructive, but gracious ends
for all men, only blasts the gloriousness of the Creatures, as Created,
saying, cursed is the ground for thy sake, as if said, because thou have
(though enabled by me to do the contrary) so wilfully and rebelliously betrayed
the trust which I reposed in thee, for thy self and thy posterity, by thy
being entrusted with so blessed and glorious estate (for thy sake) I will never
again trust thee nor thy stained posterity, with the use of the glorious
Creatures in that beauty and excellency, in which they were created by me, but
having had experience of thy unfaithfulness and rebellion in the use of them
(for thy sake) I will never again hazard the eternal favor I intend for thee
and thine, in such an alluring estate, whereby the hearts and affections of
thee and thine, may probably hereafter come to be alienated again from me and
my grace, protection and goodness; but I will in my tender mercy by grace
extended by the Gospel or second Covenant, by a curse out of my mercy,
temporally blast those rare created beauties and excellencies of the Creatures,
provided for thee and thine; and this on Gods part intended to hide pride from
mankind in general, as we frequently find that he does, not by destructive,
but gracious intentions, afflict particular men in diverse manners, to hide
pride from particular persons, as appears in Job 23.17, 19. and very many
other places, which shows, that as God to that gracious end, afflicts the
whole world of mankind in general, by the effects of that merciful curse, by
him settled, concerning the ground or whole earth; so God afflicts particular
men out of his mercy, to the end, intended on his part, that men should turn
in to him, his grace and protection only, for in those afflictions, though they
seem burdensome to flesh and blood, yet therein and thereby he waits to be,
or that he may be gracious, as in Isa. 30.18.

And how can we harbor in our breasts, such hard conceits of our faithful
Creator, and good and impartial God, as to account those his merciful curses
or afflictions, to be of the nature, which was in the eternal curse of the
Law, which without Christ's assistance, would have been everlasting upon all
men, especially considering that our gracious God has declared to us, which he
expects we should take thankful notice of, which is, that on his part, all
his intentions are (not only good, but) good to all (and that not only his
mercies, but also) his tender mercies are over (not only some, but over) all
his works? Psalm. 145.9.

So that that curse, affliction or afflictions, proceeds from the grace of the
second Covenant, intended on Gods part, for merciful ends to all men, though
some men, after their infranchisement and inlightenment, do wilfully persist
in abusing that grace, and so as perversely by their own voluntary choice, do
lose the eternal benefit, intended on Gods part for them thereby.

And as for the small or weak remaining power of the first death, which the
aforesaid query so much scruples at, considering that by Christ's death, that
death has no more power left it, but temporally to bring all men's bodies to
the grave or earth, from which it was taken, and to hold them there, until the
general resurrection mentioned in Rev. 20.12, 15. We may not be much troubled
to find out that that is an exceeding blessing also, as it is intended of God
on his part for all men, being folded up in a merciful, gentle curse, by that
death or sleep, to make way, or open the passage for the immortality of all
men's bodies to be brought in by Christ's performances.

For by those words, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread,
till thou return unto the ground, for out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou
art, and unto dust shall thou return. This saying, however it appears to
humane wisdom, yet it does but testify Gods love to all men, in that by his
grace in Christ, he has provided a way, that whereas death, even the eternal
first death, would unresistibly have seized on all men, to procure their
everlasting separation from God and his blessed presence; yet that now, even
from the acceptance of Christ's blood, as if it had been actually shed at Adams
fall, Rev. 13.8, 1 Pet. 1.19. No man shall be, nor can be otherwise but
temporally mortal, and that also concerning their bodies only; for as Christ
by his death has brought in life from that first death, which came over all
men by sins entrance, Romans 5. and also therewith, immortality of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. Even so by Gods gracious Ordinance, It is appointed for (all) men
once to dye, Heb. 9.27. that temporary death of the body, and God by that death
or sleep, or change of the body, does graciously strip all mankind of that
cursed immortality, into which all men fell by sins entering into the world, so
that although all men's bodies from that ground, are sown mortal bodies, 1
Cor. 15.53. Gods intention being to make that kind of death, or rather sleep, a
means by Christ, that all men might be rased up at the general resurrection,
not only immortal, but also in his prime intention on his part, that they
should all of them be eternally blessed, in that their immortality, which the
mortal death of the bodies of all men by Gods wisdom and mercy made way for;
so that the temporal death of the body, whereby by grace they are stripped of
mortallity, it being the door of entrance into immortality, is an unspeakable
mercy, intended of God for all, and proves effectually so to believers: and
though some men after their inlightenment, do persist in perverse wilful
unbeleefe, yet even they also shall for ever remain immortal at the
resurrection of the body, though by their own choice, they for ever lose the
blessedness that of God was intended they should have enjoyed for ever, in that
their immortality, they themselves turning the blessedness thereof, into an
immortal cursed living being, yet is the temporal death as God intended by
grace in Christ, to make use of it for all men, so far from a curse in its own
Nature, that it is an exceeding great blessing also.

And now craving your patience a little further, concerning the inabling and
inlightning of all men, we may note, that in the case of little children,
whilst they remain in their weakness and imbecility of their understanding,
and also all Idiots and Fools that were so born, and do so continue, as they
never had ability afforded them, to deny the Doctrine of the Gospel, nor
actually and personally to resist the spirits teaching, nor do wittingly
forsake God, who infallibly does never forsake any one person, until that man
or person, forsakes him first, as is fully proved in my 16 and 17
Distinctions; and as little children, and also such Idiots and Fools are not
capable of understanding to be against Christ and the Gospel, of such our
Savior affirms, that he that is not against us, is on our part, Mark 9.40.
And as they are not capable to refuse light, and choose darkness, which is the
condemnation, John 3.19. So there is no condemnation to them by the Gospel,
and as for the Law, they are also free from that charge of sin; for Christ
has redeemed, not only them, but also all men from the curse of the Law and
first death, as is largely proved in my 4 and 5 Distinctions. And our Savior
also affirms of little children, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat.
19.14. Mar. 10.14. and says, that they believe in him, Mark 9.43. And our
Savior affirms, not only of little children, but of men also, saying, except
ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 14.3. Mark 10.15. and Luke 18.17. And of those men
that humble themselves as a little child, our Savior says, the same is the
greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.4.

And beloved, God has not left us without examples of this truth; for
notwithstanding that it is said, that all the Congregation of the Jews, bed
stone Joshua and Caleb (the faithful spies) with stones, Number. 14.10. In which
act, no doubt can be made, but that all those of 17, 18, 19, 20 years of age,
had a hand, yet Gods mercy is held forth to them, and he charge none of them
with that rebellious sin of unbeleefe, that were under the age of 21 years,
for all of them that were under that age, he accounted them their little ones,
Number. 14.31. their children, ver. 33. and does pass by all their offenses,
being under that age of 21 years, as not knowing betwixt good and evil, as
clearly appears by comparing Number. 4.29. with Deur. 1.39. Now considering,
that all such dealings of our gracious God with them, were written for our
admonition and example, as appears they were, in 1 Cor. 6.11. though I know
not whether we may thereby conclude, that God always grants an uncapability
to be in man, and that God does not take notice of any man's unbeleefe, and
unthankfulness, as to be eternally punishable, until he be above 20 years of
age, yet we may conclude, that he does not exclude or shut out any man from his
grace of the second Covenant, be he young or old, that as yet are not by him
made capable to accept of grace, nor shuts out any such persons, as neither
do, nor can wittingly resist the tenders thereof.

The seventh Distinction sets forth, that our Savior Jesus Christ perfects
the common salvation even to all the Heathens also, where neither written Law
nor Gospel is vouchsafed unto them, otherwise then the effects thereof are
written in their hearts.
TO set forth which, observe, that although it be said, that there is no other
name given under heaven, whereby men must be saved according to Acts 4.12. yet
that does not prove, that the want of the knowledge of that very name to any
people, does put them into a condition of eternal condemnation; but on the
contrary does implicitly confirm, that as Christ is the Savior of no fewer
than all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. so God does by him communicate an inabling common
salvation to all men, as in my last Distinction, and also an eternal salvation
to all believers or confiders in his goodness, only by a virtue derived from
that name only, and his performances for all men, even for such men as was
never made acquainted with Christ's very name, nor the particulars of his
performances. Herein we are to take notice, that there is a considing and
believing in him, or in God that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, that
is imputed for righteousness, as Abraham's says was imputed unto him for
righteousness, by believing that God notwithstanding the deadness of his
body, and of Sarahs womb, by so quickening the dead, would multiply his seed,
Romans 4.17, 18, 19. And the Apostle says, that this imputation of
Righteousness unto him, was not written for his sake alone, that it was
imputed unto him, but for us also to whom it shall be impured, if we believe on
him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, Romans 4.24. Thus the very
Heathens that have not the written Law or Gospel, otherwise than the effects
thereof are written in their hearts, even they by their believing and confiding
in the goodness of him only, or of God only, that railed up Jesus our Lord
from the dead, is warrantably, according to the scope of that Text, accounted
to them for righteousness, which they may do by their ability received in
themselves by Christ in the common salvation, by their being all of them
brought to the knowledge of the truth of Gods grace and goodness, as is proved
in my last Distinction, although the very name of Jesus, and particulars of his
performances, which procures that goodness for them, be not discovered unto
them; and this is made apparent for the unthankfulness of the very Heathens,
as is proved, where it is said, despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long suffering, not knowing (or remembering, as in some
translations) that the goodness of God leads thee to repentance, Romans 2.4.
As if said, do thou behave thy self so unthankfully to God, not knowing of
his goodness, will thy conscience say that thou art not acquainted with his
goodness; no, no, that is not the cause, it is the hardness and impenitencie
of thy heart, that treasurest up unto thy self wrath, ver. 5. And that this is
spoken of those people, that have not so much as the Law written vouchsafed
them, otherwise than the effects thereof written in their hearts. See the 14
and 15 verses following.

And this need not seem strange to any man: For behold beloved, that even
Christ's chosen Apostles and Disciples, were ignorant of his sufferings, death,
and resurrection, even after they had remained with him a considerable time, as
appears in Mat. 16.21. By his there instructing them, that he must suffer,
and be killed, and be raised again the third day; and so also in Mark 8.31.
and herewith is very much to be observed, that in the very time of that their
great ignorance, Christ does affirm directly, that they were blessed, as in
Mat. 13.16. as also he affirms that Peter was blessed, even before Peter knew
of Christ's sufferings, death and resurrection, as in Mat. 16.17. And more than
this, for Peter, James and John were ignorant what the rising from the dead
should mean, Mark 9.10. And to prove that they were all by Christ affirmed to
be then blessed, even in the time of that their ignorance, or before they knew
of his sufferings, death, and resurrection, compare Mat. 13 16. and 16.17.
foregoing, wherein they are affirmed to be blessed, even in the time of that
their ignorance, with Mat. 16.20, 21, 22, 23. following, wherein is made
apparent, that Christ at that time before, when he affirmed them to be blessed,
had not then acquainted them with his sufferings, death, and resurrection; and
also that then they were utterly ignorant of those particulars, therefore it is
no strange thing to believe, that the Heathens may (by the effectual inabling
means used with them by the spirit, in the visible book of the Creatures)
believe and confide in Gods goodness, who raised up Jesus our Lord from the
dead, which faith, by virtue of that name, is imputed for righteousness, as is
before said, although they never heard of the name of Jesus, nor are made
acquainted with the particulars of his sufferings, death, and resurrection, for
most of the ancient Saints before Christ's Incarnation, had either none or very
little knowledge of Christ's name, and particulars of his sufferings, death, and
resurrection, the knowledge of which particulars, now since Christ's
Incarnation, death and resurrection, is required where the Gospel comes, as
main Articles of our Christian Faith.

And observe herewith yet further, that as it said, the manifestat on of the
spirit is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7. that though some
men apply this Text to believers only, because there spoken to believers, yet
to testify to the world, that the very heathens though not instructed in
Christian principles, have effectual manifestations used with them, it is said
that that which may be known of God, is manifest in them (and the reason is
therewith given) for God has showed it unto them, Romans 1.19. Which
manifestation of the spirit to the Heathen, makes the very letter of 1 Cor.
12.7. to appear in full for every man, and also amiably agrees with that Text,
where it is said, that Christ inlightneth (no fewer than) every man that
comes into the world, so that (no less number than) all men through him
might believe, John 1.7, 9. Now you know that every man and all men, must needs
include all the Heathen men; and the books wherewith God by his spirit does
teach those Heathens, are also made known to us in the word, saying, For the
invisible things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by
the Creation of the world, so that they are without excuse, Romans 1.20. That
whereas all men are brought to the knowledge of the truth of Gods goodness, as
has been largely proved, whereby those persons of those Heathens, that having
the truth, do hold the truth in unrighteousness, ver. 18. and having the truth,
do change the truth into a lie, ver. 25. such of those Heathens, though so
having the knowledge of God, who is truth, Isa. 65.16. communicated to them,
yet do not glorify God as God, Romans 1.21. and having the knowledge of God, do
not like to retain that knowledge, ver. 28. such are without excuse, as verse
20. because God has showed these unto them, as before, by the manifestation of
the spirit in the Creature-booke; wherein note, that if the means were not an
effectual discovery, then in equity they were excusable. So also the testimony
of the Prophet David, concerning this very point, where he also sets forth
to view, by what books God by his spirit does declare himself and his
goodness, even to those very Heathens, saying, the Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the firmament shows his handy work, day unto day utters
speech, night unto night shows knowledge; there is no speech nor language,
where their voice is not heard, their line is gone through all the earth, and
their words unto the end of the world, Psalm. 19.1, 2, 3. which sort of
Preaching, though Christ's name, nor the particulars of his sufferings, death
and resurrection, be not discovered to them thereby, yet the Apostle Paul, from
hence does affirm it to be a Gospel preaching to all, Romans 10.18. saying,
have they not heard? yes verily, their sound went into all the earth, and their
words unto the end of the world, alluding here to the same words used in Psalm
19. before recited; and the persisting in the abuse of this knowledge of God,
causes a delivering up to a reprobate mind, Romans 1.28.

Now beloved, considering that all the Heathens are so effectually enabled
spiritually, to hear, see, and understand, and confide in Gods goodness, as
it is proved that all men are, in my Last Distinction, take notice hereby, what
pregnant speaking voices, and preaching manifestations, as the Text says,
fitted for all languages, are communicated by Gods spirit by the Creatures, to
every one of them, Heathens, and all the world, to make manifest the goodness
of God, to them and all other men, and in their conscience, to cause them to
confide therein, if they resist not; also it is said, he that believes in him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans 4.5.
Now you know it is God that justifies, Romans 8.33. though Christ be the only
means of justification propitiatory; here also you see, that faith in God
justifies by Christ, although Christ by name in his performances, be not
discovered. Again, all Kings of the earth, and all people, are called upon to
praise his name, Psalm. 148.11. Then certainly, although many Kings and people
have not Christ crucified or them, revealed to them, yet there is a true real
cause (besides acfcountable temporal mercies) whereby they are all obliged to
praise his name, and ability given them, whereby they may so do, else that
command were injurious, and fallacious, which is the highest degree of
blasphemy, to affirm those to be in God.

But if we will be ruled by the Apostle, he tells us, that there is no
difference between the Jew and the Greek, for the same Lord over all, is rich
unto all that call upon him, Rom 10.12. though Christ's name be not discovered
to some men, and though in outward Ordinances they differ, and this he
affirms in a leading way, to discover the general Creature, teaching in the
18 verse of the same Chapter, and as fully, Acts 10.34, 35. Also our Savior
commends and incourageth men, in that sort of believing in God, where the
knowledge of himself is not obtained, saying for their encouragement, that so
confide in God,

Let not your hearts be troubled, ye believe in God, believe also in me, John
13.1. Thus though confirming their faith which they were in, yet thereby gently
instructing them to believe in him also, where he is made known.

Thus the grace of God brings salvation unto (no fewer than) all men, Tit.
2.11. and by this means aforesaid, we find how that the Gospel was, and is
preached to every Creature that is under Heaven, according to Col. 1.23. And
why should the Christians stumble at this truth? shall their eye be evil,
because God is good? Mat. 2.15. or why should any Christian offer to part those
whom God has joined together, in the great and good Gospell-tidings? Luke
2.10. and in the general blessing in Christ, promised often to Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, that in their seed, should no fewer than all the Nations of the
earth, and all the families of the earth be blessed.

But what now beloved has God lest us without evident examples of this his
gracious dealing, even with the heathens also, to confirm this Scripture
Doctrine? Has he not for our further confirmation therein, set forth Lydia,
who is honored with respect, to to be one that worshipped God, even before
she closed in with the religious principles, either of the Jews or
Christians, Acts 16.14. Also Rahab the Harlot, a Gentile, is ranked amongst
those worthies, Heb. 11. her faith being only a confiding in the God of Isreal's
power and goodness, Joshua 2.9, 10. there being no mention of her faith in
Christ, for she was then no proselyted Jew, much less a Christian. We have
also the example of Job, and his godly friends, which were neither Jews nor
Christians. Also the Centurion, the Roman Officer, who though he was no Jew,
nor then joined to the Christians, yet our Savior exceedingly commends his
faith, Mat. 8.10. Also we have for example a woman of Canaan, having also no
knowledge of Christ as a Savior, by his sufferings, death and resurrection,
and yet our Savior did not only approve of her faith, but rather admires at
it, saying, O woman great is thy faith, Mat. 15.23.28.

Also we have for example, Cornelius, whose prayers and alms same as for a
memorial, before God, Acts to 4. he being then no proselyted Jew, and before he
was by Peter made acquainted with the virtue of Christ's sufferings, death and
resurrection: Whereupon Peter, after he was instructed by an efficacious
vision, that he should not call any man (note) that he should not call any man
common or unclean, Acts 10.28. then by way of admiration, he opened his mouth,
and said, of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons, but in
every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him; hereby including any person in any Nation whatsoever, whether they be
Christians or not, that fear God and work righteousness, as Cornelius was
found to do, before he was instructed in Christianity. And further to clear
Gods impartiality, amongst very many other places, peruse Deuteronomy. 10.17. Romans
2.11. 1 Peter 1, 17.

And considering that Paul was instructed of God, not to call any man common or
unclean, I hope it will be a sufficient caveat for all Christians, to be wary
of slighting or undervaluing of such multitudes of Heathens, which have been,
and are, or probably may hereafter be in the world.

As if God has not, nor does not afford them effectual means, whereby in
their good use thereof, they might be eternally saved because he does not
afford them the outward privileges of Christianity, for from this number of
godly Heathens by Scripture nominated, we cannot but in all probability
conclude, that there has been, is, and will be great multitudes of such godly
Heathen Saints, from the beginning of the world, to the end thereof.

Thus, as before, I gave you a hint what Christ did by his personal
performances upon the earth, by his descension from Heaven, by that salvation
wrought in himself for all men to plant the foundation of the common salvation
of all men.

So now herein, I have presented to you, a taste of what our Savior Christ
has done, and does in men, by his being ascended, and sitting at his Fathers
right hand, from thence by his spirit, finishing the common salvation of all
men, whereby also considering, that all men are therein enabled with a
possibility or ability in themselves, whereby in their well usage thereof, they
may obtain eternal life.

A great part of the excellency of the restored second life of all mankind, by
Christ procured, by his swallowing up mankinds first death, in victory, which
came over all men, Romans 5.12, by Adams fall, is laid open to public view.

and without this ability of grace on all men, even on them that do choose
darkness rather than light; those refusers could neither know saving truth
from falfhood, nor light from darkness, nor could not depart from the faith, 1 Timothy 4.1. they never had, neither could any man make ship wrack of faith and a
good conscience, as some did, 1 Timothy 1.19. and so their refuall of grace, would
be in the balance of justice and equity, excusable,

Especially considering, that all Adams posterity, is unavoidably involved in
an utter unability by another man's offense, even by Adams fall, unto which act
they never gave any actual or personal consent, much less did ever act in
it, for they were all unborn. See what is said of Jacob and Esau, considered of
as unborn, Romans 9. which is, that then they had done neither good nor evil.

But hereby we find from these aforesaid apparent over-powring manifestations
by Christ strongly, though graciously acted, to discover God and his goodness
to all men, by bringing all men to the knowledge of the truth, proceeds that
saying directed to men, to persuade them to lay hold on that strength, saying,
Let him observe, let him take hold of my strength, that he make peace with me,
and he shall make peace with me, Isa. 27.5. Note that the man must lay hold;
and from the same ground it is said, that those that forget God, shall be
turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17. Job 8.13. not said those that never knew God, but
those that after knowing, forget God, but that even the Gentiles also may know
God in his grace, mercy and goodness, Christ is appointed to be a light unto
(even unto those) the Gentiles, that he should be for salvation (note this that
he should be for salvation, not only for Christians, but also) unto the ends of
the earth, Isa. 49.6. This Christ does by his spirit, by inlightning not only
the heathens, but also every man, or all men, so that not only the Gentiles or
Heathens, but also all men might believe, as appears, in John 1.7.9. And for
this end, Paul was sent unto the very Gentiles also to open their eyes, though
not powerfully to turn them; but as in most translations, that they might, or
may thereby turn them from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. by the
means aforesaid; faith is afforded, not only to the heathens, but also to all
men, Acts 17.31. though some men make ship wrack of it, 1 Timothy 1.19. this
grace brings salvation to (no fewer than) all men, Tit. 2.11. though some men
refuse it, Thus is the Gospel preached to every Creature, which is under
Heaven, Col. 1.23. though some men reject that preaching.

The eighth Distinction, which shows the mistakes of some men, concerning
diverse very considerable expressions of Scripture, which has bred, and does
nurse up many vain contentions, even amongst Christians, about the gracious
extent of the common salvation.
THE expressions of Scripture, which are very often by some men misapplyed, are
these (us, we our, ye) and such like; and also the word (many) is much
wrested; for where it is said, Christ or the Son of Man, came to give his
life a ransom for many, Mar. 10.45. This Text from the word many, is by some
men applied, as if Christ gave his life a ransom for the elect only, and so
consequently but for some part of men: But what says the Scripture: many of
them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life,
and some to shame and perpetual contempt, Dan. 12.2. Herein it cannot be
denied, but that the word many does include all that sleep in the dust, for the
grave delivers up all that are in it to judgment, Rev. 20.13. Note here that
all sleep in the dust, one way or other, except in the case of Enoch and Eliah.
Again, many are called, but few are chosen. These word; are spoken
comparatively of all men, who are all in due season called or sent to the
work, 1 Timothy 2.6. by the knowledge of the truth received; only those are not
chosen, that then murmr at Gods gracious dispensations, Mat. 20.1, 15. And
also those words are spoken again by Christ, of those invited to the Feast,
Mat. 22.9, 10. where the charge given unto the fetchers in, was to bring in (no
fewer than as many as they could find, and accordingly they were gathered
together) all as many as they found, good and bad.

This is a simile of Gods dealing with mankind, and you know that God can
find out all men, to call them to the Gospell-Feast, therefore considering,
that according to the Parable, he calls as many as he can find, consequently
by inlightenment, he calls no fewer than all men, as is proved, 1 Timothy 2.4,
6. John 1.7, 9. Also by Christ's accordingly, not only inlightning, but also
inabling all men, or every man to know the truth of Gods goodness, and embrace
it, and confide in it, as is proved in my two last Distinctions, it does
evidently appear, that by many are called, is included that all men art called.

Though through some men's own wilful defaults, when being called, and all
drawn to Christ, John 12.32. by their drawing back, few are chosen, all the
rest being of that number, that draw back to perdition, Heb. 10, 39.

So also it is said, for as by one man's offense many were made sinners, Romans
5.19. and as agaire it is said, if through the offense of one, many be dead,
ver. 15. so in full satisfaction what the number is, which is here meant by the
word many, it is said in ver. 12. in the same Chapter, as by one man, sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed over all men.
Here you see plainly, that in the word many, all men are included; for the Text
says, that all men were made sinners by one man's offense, Romans 3.19. and that
thereby death passed over no fewer than all men. Romans 5.12.

Also as our Savior Christ is said to give his life a ransom for many, Mat.
20.28. and Mark 10.45. So to set forth fully, what the number is there meant
by the word many, it is also written, that he gave himself or his life, a
ransom for (no less number) than all, 1 Timothy 2.6.

And considering the expression (us) where it is said, unto us a child is born,
unto us a son is given, Isa. 9.6. These words are applied by some men, as if
appertaining to the elect or believers only, which is contrary to the
Scripture, for the good tidings of great Joy, which is appropriated to that
holy child Jesus being born and given, is proclaimed by the Angels, to be good
tidings of great joy for (no fewer persons than) all people, Luke 2.10. And
further concerning that his Son given; it is affirmed, that God out of his love
to the world, gave his Son, and sent his Son, not to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved, John 3.16, 17. And whereas some
have rendered the word (world) to mean only the world of the elect or
believers; the Evangelist St John does utterly deny that limitation, saying of
Christ, and he is the propitiation for our our sins, and not for ours (as
believers) only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Hereby that word
only, as applied to believers only, is utterly by strength of Scripture, cast
out as fallaciously abusive.

And also if Gods giving his Son to the world, as in John 3.16. be applied to
elect or believer, only, then the sense of that Text, cannot be read any
otherwise, than thus: That God so loved the world of the elect, or believers
only, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever of the world of the
elect or believers, do believe in him, shall not perish. But considering that
the Scripture no where says, the world of elect, nor the world of believers; I
leave the gross absurdity that is in that sense, unto any rational man's
censure; hereby also appears evidently, the wrong that some men have done to
that Text, where it is said, that Christ dyed for our sins, according to the
Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.3. by their applying that expression (our sins) as if
meant of the sins of believers only, notwithstanding that the Scripture
further says, that Christ tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. and that
Christ dyed for no fewer than all, 2 Cor. 5.15.

And that thereby he is the propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1
John. 2.2. Also observe, that this expression, ye are bought with a price, 1
Cor. 6.20. and the 7.13. is by some men applied to the elect or believers only,
when as in truth, those words do appertain to all men, for the price paid was
for redemption or ransom, and the price to effect both of them, was paid down
in full by Christ's death, 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 Cor. 15.3. and therewith by his
precious blood shed, 1 Pet. 1.19. Now beloved, as the price paid has reference
to his death for redemption, there it is said, he tasted death for every man,
Heb 2.9. and as the price paid has reference to his bloodshed, you know, that
without shedding of blood there is no remission, Heb. 9.22. And accordingly the
atonement or propitiation was with our Types the Jews made, by the shedding of
the blood of beasts, the benefit of those extended, though to all, as in their
Jubilee, yet but to all the Jews and proselytes only. But herein we may behold
the excellency of the price paid by Christ's precious bloodshed, transcendently
surmounting; for by that propitiation made, or price paid for atonement; Christ
is affirmed to be the pacifying propitiation, for (no fewer than) the sins of
the whole world, as has been in other causes said, that is for the
transgressions against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20. which were
the sins accounted against the Father, as in my next Distinction.

And again, as the price paid has reference to Christ, as a ransomer, who
always pays the full value appointed for the ransomed, or in bondaged, then
behold it is said, he gave himself a ransom (not for elect, or believers, or
Christians only, but) for all. 1 Timothy 2.6. Besides all this, because no man
should doubt to maintain this large extent of the price paid, the Scripture
steps forth and tells us, that there are some men though bought by Christ, that
do deny the Lord that bought them, with that price paid, and (not God, but)
themselves, do thereby bring upon themselves swift destruction, 1 Pet. 2.1.
Again, observe, that whereas it is said, that if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, Romans 5.10. that this
reconciliation is applied by some men, as appertaining to believers only,
whereas on the contrary, the Scripture gives us to wit; that God was in Christ,
reconciling (not elect, or believers, or Christians only, but) the world unto
himself, not imputing their (the worlds) trespasses unto them, 2 Cor. 5.19. in
relation to the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20, 21. And to confirm it,
that the benefit of his reconciliation is to be applied to all men, the Apostle
as a leading ground of that same speech, affirms in the 15 verse, immediately
going before, in the same Chapter, 2 Cor. 5. that Christ dyed for all, besides
all this, the reconciliation being made by his death, and precious bloodshed,
is none other by a price paid, than an atonement or propitiation, the benefit
whereof, as before is proved, is in the Scriptures own words, appropriated to
all men, or every man, and for the sins of the whole world, as against the
first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20, 21.

And beloved, if you please, you may see this unlimited sense, in this very
cause fully proved, also in Col. 1.20. being compared with Ephesians. 1.10. wherein
is plainly showed, that not only all men, who are Gods most excellent earthly
Creatures, but also that all things, both in Heaven and in earth, are by the
blood of his cross, reconciled to God himself, by and in him, and that all
men are not only gathered together, but are also reconciledly gathered together
in Christ to God, even in him, as in those Texts being compared is manifest.

Thus for instance, I have given you a little notice, how that the application
of these and such like words and expressions of Scripture, has been, and are
by scholasticall glosses, too often drawn away from the true meaning of the
Holy Ghost, in holy writ, which abuse has very much dazzled the judgments of
the Christian world.

The ninth Distinction does d scover what those sins were, which are accounted
in Scripture, to have been the sins against the Father, and that those sins
also, were the same sins, which in Scripture are called the sins of the whole
world, and that they are all forgiven in and by Christ.
THey were those sins that were transgressions against the first Testament, for
the release of which, to all men, Christ suffered death, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20.
These sins by Adams fall, would have brought in an eternal separation of all
men, from Gods blessed presence, and from their offspring proceeding from one
man, they are called the sin of the world, which sin, the Lamb of God takes
away, John 1.29. and by their original over-spreading leprosy, into all
mankindes natures, they are called the sins of the whole world; for which sins
also, Christ is the propitiation, John 1.29. These sins were against God the
Father, having no incarnation with mankinds humane nature; wherefore those sins
could not be forgiven, without that valuable satisfaction made by Christ,
therefore out of his love to mankind, God the Father was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing those the worlds sins unto them, but laid
upon him (his son) the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. This was represented unto
us, by the Scapegoat, on which, not only some, but all the sins of the
children of Israel were then put, and on him sent away with that goat, unto a
Land not inhabited, even into the Wilderness, Lev. 16.22. or Land of oblivion;
this significant type, being compared with the large efficacy of Christ the
Lamb, offered without blemish, Lev. 23.12. does signify to us, that the
Fathers justice was satisfied for those sins that were against him, at the time
of his accounting and accepting of the Lamb as if slain, and his precious
blood as if shed, which was by the Fathers foreknowledge of Adams fall, timely
foreordained and prepared to that very end, from or before the foundation of
the world, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. Rev. 13.8. Therefore considering that the first
Testament or Fathers Law, written in Tables of stone with his singer, on Mount
Sinai. Exodus 31.18. is blotted our for all men, and therewith the first death
abolished for the benefit of all mankind, as is proved they are in my 4 and 5
Distinctions. We are not to conceive, that there are many sins remaining in the
world, which are accounted sins against the Father, never since God then
virtually applied the Lambs blood, as a timely antidote to expel the poison of
those sins, even at Adams fall.

Though indeed if we look upon the union of the Godhead, the least sin is
offensive to all the Trinity as united, wherefore though all sins, except the
sin against the Holy Ghost, are ever since the fall, accounted to be directly
against him the Son of man, as distinct in the Trinity, all power being given
to him in heaven and in earth Mat. 28.18. so that the Father judges no man,
but has committed all judgment to the Son, John 5.22. yet in his respect to
honor the Father, he exhorts men to pray to the Father for forgiveness of
sins, that the Father may be glorified in the Son, John 14.13.

Thus we are taught by Scripture, that the sins against the Father, were those
sins which were against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20, 21. the
eternal punishment of which, is abolished for all men, even at the fall of
Adam, or at the very entrance of those sins, for if there had been the least
vacation, or intervallum, betwixt those sins then acted by Adam, and the
vertuall application of Christ the Lambs blood, then those sins against the
Father, by the equity of his Justice, being unsatisfied in that time of
vacation, would have justly dissolved the earth, and all the inhabitants
thereof; as appears by David's speech in the behalf of Christ, Psalm. 35.3.
and by Isaiah his affirmation of Christ, Isa. 49.8. and by his admiration at
that preservation, Isa. 26.18. see also Heb. 1.3. But those sins being all by
the Father remitted, as beforesad, they are said to be not sins that are, but
sins past, Romans 3.25. not sins in being, but old sins, 2 Pet. 1.9. and
transgressions not which are, but which were against the first Testament, Heb.
9.15.

The tenth Distinction, wherein is set forth, what those sins are, which in
Scripture are accounted to be the sins against the Son, or Son of man, and
that they also, as in reference to eternal punishment, shall verily be
forgiven to the sons of men.
OBserve herein, that there is but two deaths, either mentioned or intimated in
Scripture, not meddling here with the temporal death of the bodies of men,
which is the utmost out-going of the power of the first death, which temporal
death is hardly allowed in Scripture, the name of death, but is therein often
in respect of the resurrection from it, accounted but a sleep, or change of tho
body.

This considered we shall find, that though the Scripture does discover a
first death, due for the transgressions against the Father, he having no
Incarnation with mankindes humane nature; which first death would therefore
have held eternal condemning power over all men, if it had not been prevented
by Christ, as in my first Distinction; and also that though the Scripture, do
set forth a second death, in and by which, some men do perish eternally, by
their own wilful persisting in rebellion against the gracious dictates of the
Holy Ghost, being God also, having no incarnation with makind, humane nature:
Yet note seriously, that the Scripture does no where, neither mention nor
intimate, any third death appropriated to be the executioner for men's
transgressions against Christ the Son, or Son of man, having a fraternall
incarnation with mankinds humane nature, sin excepted.

From this palpable silence of the Scripture in this point, and its agreeing so
amiably with the Texts hereafter cited we may safely conclude that there is no
eternal death at all appropriated, for the transgressions against him the
Son of man.

And not only so, but as he has freed all men for ever, from the danger of the
eternal sting of the first death, due for the transgressions against the first
Testament, and so against the Father, as is before proved, in Distinction 5.
Even so he does out of his love to all men, his brethren in the flesh, so
strongly assist all mankind as is proved in my 4, 5, 6 and 7 Distinctions, that
thereby in their well usage of that means, they might escape the eternal danger
of the second death, which is inflicted for the sins against he Holy Ghost.
Nay his love rests not here neither, for although he does intentionally in
himself for good ends for men, correct them, afflict or chastise them, and
permit the temporal death to have dominion over them, which may be called
temporal punishments, also intended of Gods part for good ends, and uses for
men; yet he has promised concerning eternal punishment, that as there is no
death appropriated for the transgressions against him the Son of man, even so
accordingly he has affirmed, that verily all sins shall be forgiven unto the
sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme, or
whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him,
but whosoever speaks against, or blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, compare
Mat. 12.31, 32. with Mark 3.28. for as all power and proceeding in judgment is
given unto him, as is proved therein, and as he has bought al men of God by
the price of his precious blood paid, as is proved in my 8 Distinction, even
bought them that do deny him, the Lord that bought them, 1 Pet. 2.21. Yet by
the virtue of his power, purchased by God the Fathers so timely accepting of
his blood, as is shed at Adams fall, as before said, he has been, and is
invested with power, to forgive all the sins that have been acted by any man,
ever since the time of Adams fall, or shall be to the ends of the world, except
such of them as do by wilful persisting in unbeleefe, prove to become sins a
against the Holy Ghost.

And therefrom he does, as considering that men are ignorant of that his power,
use, means, to heal that their ignorance, that the world may know, that the
Son of man has power to for give sins upon earth, as in Mat. 9.6. Mark
2.10. Luke 5.24. And although indeed, the aforesaid sins against God the
Father, he having no incarnation with flesh and blood, could not be sorgiven
without satisfaction made to his justice, and although for the sins committed
against the Holy Ghost, being God also, having no incarnation with humane
nature, there is no ransom or propitiation provided, not can be, of, or by,
any man expected for pardon thereof because Christ dies no more, and death
has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. Yet our Savior Christ, though he be
God also, yet being therewith the Son of man by an Incarnation with humane
Nature, sin excepted,

He has power to forgive, and does forgive, as aforesaid, as the aforesaid
sins of all men, as against himself, without any oblation, sacrifice,
atonement or propitiation made, to him the Son of man, and from thence he
exhorts all men so largely, often, and freely, to forgive one another their
trespasses, as appears Mat. 8.21, 22. and in the prayer he taught his
Disciples, and in Luke 17.4. Thus we find, that all the sins that have been,
are, or are to be acted by any man, or all men, ever since God the Fathers
virtually applying at Adams fall, the effects of Christ's blood shed for all
men's sins:

And from that time unto the end of the world, sins against Christ only, and
his in lightning, in abling, preparative work, and that they are all as
concerning everlasting punishment, all forgiven to all the sons of men,
excepting only our Savior Christ's former own exception, concerning those of
them sins, which are by some men themselves, rebelliously transformed into
the sins against the Holy Ghost, by their persisting obstinately and wilfully
in unbeleese, against the holy spirits gracious teachings, which are always by
grace annexed in due season to our Saviors in lightning all men so
effectually, as is proved in my 6 and 7, Distinctions.

The eleventh Distinction shows what those sins are, which in Scripture are
accounted to be sins against the Holy Ghost, and that they shall never be
forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come, and the cause why,
whereby the second death is discovered also.
OBserve herein, considering that Christ does inlighten every man, that comes
into the world, so that (no fewer than) all men through him might believe, John
1.7, 9. And also that in obedience to his Fathers will, he does bring all men
unto the knowledge of the truth, accoding to 1 Timothy 2.4. as is largely proved
in my 6 and 7 Distinctions. And considering therewith, that the Apostle
absolutely affirms, that if we finne wilfully after we have received the
knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a
certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries, Heb. 10.26, 27 so that effect, Heb. 6.5, 6. From hence
we see proved, that those sins which are sins against the Holy Ghost, are
the sins which some men do commit against the holy Ghosts teachings, after
they are by Christ in due season enlightened, and after they are helped to the
knowledge of the truth, and whereas those sins are by Christ, said to be
unpardonable, as in Mat. 12.13. I find the cause to be, first, in respect that
they are sins against the second Covenant, being the Covenant of grace;
secondly, that they are sins persisted in, against the spirit of grace, Heb.
10.29. its dictates and teachings, who being so offended, being God having no
INcarnation with humanity. These transgressions against God the Holy Ghost, by
transgressing against the second Testament, in wilful persisting cannot be
forgiven without a valuable satisfaction made to satisfy justice with.

And thirdly, I find the irrecoverable cause to be, because there cannot be
any valuable satisfaction made, for men to satisfy justice for a deity
offended, who has no Incarnation with humane nature, but by one, who though
being God, and one in Union in the Trinity, is made capable to suffer death, by
taking upon him humane nature.

And fourthly, to conclude this cause, I find, that although Christ being so
made capable to suffer death, did dye to satisfy God the Fathers justice, for
the sins which as an unresistible violent inundation overwhelmed all Adams
posterity (though sinners in the seed) for sins by him acted, without the
personal consent, much less actual performance, of any one of them, so
preserving all men from the curse of the Law and first death, due for the
transgressions against that Law' as in my 4 and 5 Distinctions.

Yet concerning men's own actual and personal sins, in their individuals,
wilfully and persistingly acted against the Holy Ghost, and second Covenant,
after their inabsing and inlightenment, considering that there is none other of
the Trinity but Christ Jesus, capable to suffer death, nor any other to be
found any wise able to make satisfaction to that deity, the Holy Ghost so
oftended, having as God the Father, no incarnation with humane nature;

From hence proceeds the irrecoverable eternal fearful condition of such
Transgressors, openly discovered in these few words of Scripture, where it is
said, that without shedding of blood is no remission, Heb. 9.22. and by its
affirming withal, that Christ being raised from the dead dies no more (and
that) death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. From which cause, those
wilful persisting transgressors of the second Covenant, against God the Holy
Ghost, must in justice unavoidably perish in the eternal second death. Thus I
have briefly hinted what the sins against the Holy Ghost are, and what the
cause is, that they are unpardonable, as appears also, Rev. 10.14, 15, 21, 8.

Now beloved, if you please herewith to take farther notice of the
impossibility of their recovery, Mat. 12.31, 32. and Heb 6. and some
particulars of their eternal punishment discovered in Heb. 10.26, 27. 2 Pet.
21. Rev. 21.8. Jude 12. 2 Pet. 9.10. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. I shall not need to
make any further discovery, to show you what the second death is, which is to
be a much more sorer punishment then pertained to the breach of Moses Law, Heb.
1.29.

Only I do entreat you to take notice, that because our Savior Christ has
said that all sins and blasphemies shall be forgiven, unto the sons of men,
but only the sins or blasphemies against the Holy Ghost.

That some men have cavilled at this our Saviors affirmation, saying, then all
unbeleevers actual sins are remitted without any punishment, because in that
sense the unbeleevers do perish eternally, for their unbeleefe only.

They herein contrary to Scripture, separating the act of unbeleefe it self,
from the evil actions of men, or actual sins of men, wilfully persisted in,
after inlightenment, until those men prove to be of that sort of men, that are
called Goats, Mat. 25.32, 33. and of the serpentine seed, Genesis 15. their
actual sins being also thereby by them transformed into the same nature, by
their wilfully becoming the children of the Devil, John 8.44. From hence that
fearful affirmation arises, that some men are twice dead, that were not only
once dead, by that one man's offense, Romans 5.12. by the first death, but though
being fully set free by Christ, from the eternal danger of that first death,
and law of works, as in my 4 and 5 Distinctions, they do through their own
wilful defaults, fall into the danger of the eternal second death, for their
wilful actual and personal persisting abuse of grace, and so are twice dead;
and not only so, but plucked up by the roots also, to whom is reserved
blackness and darkness for ever, Jude 12, 13. This is the second death so
much mentioned in Scripture, Rev. 20.6, 14. and else where.

And now for the clearing the cause of Election and Reprobation, these six
objections next following, are distinctly answered.

The twelth Distinction, wherein the wrong application of the simile of the
Potter and his clay is discovered.
OBserve herein, that whereas it is said, has not the Potter power over the
Clay, of the same lump, to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor? Romans 9.21. Wherein the mistakes arise, because the same lump herein
mentioned, has by some men been understood, to be the whole Creature lump of
mankind, whereas in truth, God does not challenge any more or larger
prerogative to himself, in that aforesaid Text of Romans 9.21. than he does in
that ancient president of his, concerning the Potter and his Clay, plainly
recoded in Jer 18. From which ancient Scripture Grancouther, or lively
description, what is meant by the Potter and his Clay, that Text of Romans 9.21.
is punctually derived; which ancient exact platform, exemplarily does make
manifest unto any man in all the world, that desire to know the truth, that by
the Clay on the Potters wheel, is not meant the general Creature Lump of all
mankind, considered of as in one lump, out of which one lump, God takes some
men, and refuses others, by his will and power only, as some men have vainly
imagined, but that by the same lump, is meant as in Ier. 18. the house of
Israel, vorse 6. or the Lump of a nation-or a Kingdom, verse. 7. or the
several lumps of particular men's persons, in their individuals, verses 11, 12.
where is much to be observed, however some godly men have overlooked this true
sense, that though all men were made dishonorable vessels by Adams fall, yet
that God has by the Grace of restoration, made all men honorable vessels
virtually in Christ by Christ, as appears, that not only all men, but all
things are reconciled to God, gathered together in one in Christ, even in him,
as by Scripture is fully proved in my 20 Distinction, and has made all men,
all Nations, or all families of the earth blessed in him, as is proved in my 21
Distinction, and has sanctified all men in him, as is proved in my 22
Distinction, and has by reconciling the world unto himself in him, by
non-imputation of the worlds sins unto them, justified all men in him
vertually, from all their transgressions against the first Testament, as is by
Scripture proved; in my 22 Distinction.

And though all men by Adams fall, were blotted out of Gods book of life, which
came in with the Creation, yet he has by Christ, written all men in his book
of life again, which came in by Christ's restoration, as is by Scripture proved
in my 24 Distinction.

By this means, by him, making all men honorable vessels, vertually in him,
though no man be in himself, actually and personally reconciled or blessed, or
sanctified, or justified, or does unalterably remain written in Gods restored
book of life, until he be actually and personally thankfully contented with
Christ the Potter, his so well forming him upon his restoring Potters wheel,
and do patiently abide in thankful believing, and because all men are unable
to believe by nature, therefore he enableth all men to believe, as is proved in
my 6 Distinction, primarily intending to preserve all men, on his Potters
wheel of restoration, that they being so by grace enabled, might by their
compliance to his well-forming hand thereon, be so far honorable vessels, as
to be eternally saved, as is by holy writ fully proved, in my 6 and 7
Distinctions, which I do entreat you to peruse. Thus it evidently appears,
that God is so far from marring any people, Nation, Kingdom, or particular
person, before they persistingly do mar themselves, as that on his part, his
tender care is so great over every one of them, lest they should, contrary to
his gracious prime intention, mar themselves under his gracious hand, upon
his Potters wheel, and so by their rebellion, provoke him their gracious
intending and inabling Potter, justly to make of them the same particular lumps
or persons, dishonorable vessels; that to prevent their marring themselves, he
by his spirit graciously sends his Prophets, Apostles, and Word, and Ministers,
and glorious creatures throughout the world, Dinstinction 6 and 7, as he did
his servant Jeremy, not only to that Nation in general, but also to every one
of them to persuade every one of them to turn from their evil ways; but those
persons (the similized clay) said, we will walk after our evil devises, and we
will every one (note) every one do the imagination of his evil heart, as
those that refused to hearken, and did stop their ears at the gracious counsels
of God, and (not God by reprobation, but they themselves) do make their hearts
as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the Law, and the words which the
Lord of Hosts has sent in his spirit, Zech. 7.12. to those persisting
rebellious people. Thus finding fault with God, not for his making them
dishonorable vessels first, as some men have vainly imagined, but for finding
fault for themselves, with Gods care over them, and good means used with them;
as Adam did once for all men, by their, in effect, saying to him that so well
formed them, why have thou made me thus? yet no doubt God does for gracious
reproving ends, put men into many hard afflictions and conditions, which some
men by making a wrong use thereof, do rebelliously struggle against God, and
do wrongfully charge him to have made them dishonorable vessels, even in the
time of his merciful chastisements, to purge and refine them. Such men the
Apostle does advise to take heed as Jeremy had done, for example to the Jews,
for fear, that though God has made them honorable vessels, vertually in his
Son, as in my 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 Distinctions: Yet for their resisting or
finding fault with the well-forming hand of their Maker, as Adam did; he does
then, and not till then, justly make of those lumps of particular men's persons,
dishonorable vessels.

Which truth is fully and particularly maintained in this sense, in that
ancient pattern of the Potter and his Clay, in Jer. 18. And herein I do
entreat you to note that if the same lump herein mentioned, be taken for the
whole lump of Mankind, then behold how injurious that sense is, both to God
and man; for from thence they say (though I pass by men's grossest application)
that God foreseeing all men, or that whole lump to be polluted with sin by
Adams fall, that God by his prerogative royal power, and absolute will only,
did then by preterition, pass by or did decree, to leave some men without any
hope of effectual means, whereby they might recover themselves out of the
snare of the Devil, to which they are exhorted, 2 Timothy 2.26. or effectual
means intended on Gods part, whereby they in their well usage thereof, might
attain unto eternal salvation.

Whereto considering, that God so leaving off some men, must needs be at that
very time, when the other part of men were by him chosen, into his eternal
favor, which time is said in Scripture to be before the foundation of the
world, Ephesians. 1.4. Note at that time those men then supposed to be reprobated,
were then as holy as those that were chosen. Therefore it is said, they were
predestined, ver. 5. and his predestination is according as he does foreknow
that his, by him enabled Creatures, will be believers, as in Distinction 17.
Thus you will find that preterition, to be no other than a disguised decreed
reprobation, of some part of Adams posterity; for foreseen sins of theirs,
which they in their future generations, shall be unavoidably enforced to commit
originally by another man's default: whereas God does with indignation, utterly
disclaim and reprove that abusive taxation, and also renounceth the taking of
any such unjust advantage against his poor creatures: and though throughout his
word he affirms, that he actually forsakes no man first, as is fully proved
in my 16 Distinction; Yet say they, that this decree passed on them, even
before those his poor creatures had obtained a personal being, for they were
all then unborne; and therefore then could not so much as give actual consent
to, much less personally act any ways in Adams transgression, which was the
original inlet of sin; but what noisome soil this unshapen tenent, does cast
upon the perfect perfection of our just God, faithful Creator, and all his
holy attributes? for a determination therein, I do cheerfully appeal to Gods
own sentence, therein given for vindication of his unspotted impartiality,
proclaimed in Ezekiel. 18.1, 2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. 2 Chronicles 24.20.
Acts 10.34. Psalm. 145.9. Man's sinning in the seed in Adam, is not counted to be
actual or personal sin, see this proved, Romans 9.11.

But now beloved, if we on the contrary part agreeable with Jer. 18.19. From
whence Romans 9.21. has its lively nourishment, concerning the Potter and his
Clay, and do accordingly to those Texts take the same lump therein mentioned,
to be the particular lump of a Kingdom, Nation, City, Town, or particular
person, formerly put into a good condition vertually in Christ, as is proved in
my 1 and 2 and 21 and 22 and 23 Distinctions. And t hat God though he does
create the evil of punishment, as men by natural light account it, for their
doing evilly, and thus fitting of themselves to be made vessels of wrath, as in
ver. 32. yet that he neither does, nor indeed can make any evil vessels, or
originally dishonorable vessels, without respect to sin first acted
personally by man; for it is thereto affirmed, that they procured their evil to
themselves, not because God forsook them first, or before Adams posterity had
actually or personally sinned, as is cleared in Jer. 2.18, 19. and largely in
the latter end of my 16 Distinction before mentioned, but for that they
forsook the Lord their God, Jer. 2.17. first, and that actually also, as is
said to the same effect, Ier. 5.19. and 18.4. Now when men, though formerly so
well formed and enlightened, have marred themselves upon his gracious intending
Potters wheel, by their own wilful persisting in resistance against grace,
and finding fault with his good form put on them; Then God may justly of the
very same lump of every one, such particular person make dishonorable vessels:
Here to take notice what God says in this very point, to those people, the
similized Clay, typically representing every man's condition in this cause, as
is proved in my 2 Distinction, where he affirms,

I had (for my part) planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed, how then
art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? Ier. 2.21.

Thus the honor of God, and all his holy attributes united, is preserved, the
tormentors of the Text confuted; thus is showed, that no man, though by God
made a dishonorable vessel, is wronged, and the amiable agreement of the
Scripture is confirmed.

The thirteenth Distinction, wherein the mistakes of some men, concerning Gods
dealing with Jacob and Esau, is laid open.
HErein note, that because God says, for the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand, not of works, but of him that calls; it was said unto
her, the elder shall serve the younger, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. From this Text, some
men, to maintain that Gods absolute will, and prerogative power, is the only
original cause of election and rereprobation, have concluded, that God did
love Jacob, and reprobatingly hated Esau, before either Jacob or Esau were
born, or had done either good or evil; which affirmation is by that very Text
it self, proved false; for I am very confident that no man will affirm that,
because God said, the elder shall serve the younger; that this proves, that
God hated the elder to eternal destruction as they conceive, no doubt but that
God might declare that such a servitude was to come, and yet not so hate the
elder.

Therefore observe how this Text has been mistaken; for accordingly, as the
Text declares Gods word to Rebecca their mother, before they were born, to be
no express indignation of God, but only a discovery of a secret that was to
come, that the one of those twins should be mightier than the other, and that
the elder should serve the younger, Gen 25.23. so it is in the Text of Romans
9.12. that God said no other, nor expressed any other hatred of his at all,
concerning Esau before he was born, but only declared that in future, the elder
should serve the younger, which so fell out in their offspring.

This servitude was all the hatred that God spoke of concerning Esau, at any
time before he was born; and as for those following expressions in ver. 13.
where it is said, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated;
which words are brought forth by some men, Goliath-like, to maintain that God
does reprobate some men, by his mere prerogative will and power only. But I
pray you beloved observe, what strength is in that supposition; for some men
have conceived, that God did speak those words, to set forth his decreed
intention concerning Jacob and Esau before they were born; whereas in truth,
God did not apply those words to either of them before they were born, but are
words which God spoke to the Prophet Malachy, Mal. 1.2. many hundred of years
after Jacob and Esau were born, in which long space of time, God had a full
proof of Esaus actual malice against his bother Jacob, and of Esaus
profaneness in his selling his birthright, and of the manifold personal
injuries, that Esaus posterity, in that long time, had despitefully acted
against the offspring of Jacob, as amongst other things, appears in Number.
20.17. Obad. 1. and 21. and other places. Then, and not while then, God after
his so long experience of Esau and his posterities actual and personal evil
behavior, both against himself and his people, he puts the question to
Malachi, saying, was not Esau Jacobs brother, yet I loved Jacob, and hated
Esau, and laid his mountains and his heritage waste, Mal. 1.2, 3. but why so?
was it because God by preterition had left him first, without any hope of
saving means, or had, as these people conceive, reprobated him before he was
born, or before he had done good or evil? no such matter; but says God,
because of his hatred and shedding the blood of the children of Israel, Eze.
35.5. Hereby signifying to the Jews, that as Esaus wickedness could not
escape punishment by his being brother to Jacob, who was so well beloved; so
their wickedness could not be sheltred from punishment, by their glorying we
have Abraham to our Father; so at least resting in the Covenant of works, as
the Apostle instanceth in that same, Romans 9.7, 8, 11. hereby you may see, how
far distant God was off to hat Esau as eternally destructive, before he was
born, or had done good or evil.

Again, the Scripture fully confuteth that aforesaid tenent; for whereas you
take Gods being said to hate Esau, to be no less then eternal reprobation or
preterition, the Scripture diverse times renders hatred, to be but a lesser
degree of love, as amongst other places, plainly appears, by comparing Ge.
29.30. with the next verse following, and by comparing Luke 14.26. with Mat.
10.37. And to apply this to Esaus condition you may see, that notwithstanding,
that his inveterate eternally destructive hatred to Esau, which you without any
grounds imagine, yet out of his tender care to Esau, and his posterity, even
after they had personally rebelled, yet he gave special charge to Moses in his
march toward Canaan, that they should not wrong no, not so much as any ways
provoke the children of Esau in their possessions, Deuteronomy. 2.4, 8.

The refore that false surmise, that God did everlastingly distructively hate
Esau before he was born, so that thereby he could not actually or personally
do any good, does prove utterly fallacious; for you cannot prove that God
actually forsakes any one man first, before they actually forsake him, for the
Scripture frequently maintains the contrary, as is by Scripture fully proved
in my last and 16 Distinctions.

Then thereto considering, that the Text, Romans 9.11, 12. does in no sort
express any everlasting hatred, but only an earthly temporal servitude, which
is all the hatred concerning Esau, that ever God spoke of at any time, to any
person, as before Jacob and Esau were born, and that the Scripture uses the
word hate or hatred, when meaning a lesser degree of love only, as is herein
proved.

And that God never mentioned any sort of hatred toward Esau, by the name of
hatred, no, not so much as in temporal effects, until God spoke of it to
Malachi, Mal. 1. after he had many hundred years of experience of Esaus
personal and actual malice and profaneness, and of his posterities actual
tyrannical dealings with Jacobs posterity; as also in Obad. And considering
that accordingly the election reserved for Jacob, in that very Text mentioned,
extends no further in the utmost effects, but to an earthly temporal
superiority over Esau, or his posterity; and also, that the surmised
reprobation wrested from Romans 9.11, 12. is in that very text declared by the
Holy Ghost, to be in the utmost effects, but an earthly, and so a temporal
servitude of Esau to Jacob; and also considering that God predestinates or
rejects men, according to his foreknowledge of men's qualifications, arising
from their well, or evil personal actings in the ability by grace given them
in the common salvation, as is proved he does, in my 17, and 18 Distinctions,
it does manifestly appear, that God in your sense, hates no one man, nor
forsakes any one man, until a just cause be first given, wilfully,
persistingly, actually and personally by that man; but for the further
discovery of the fallacies, which men have put upon, Romans 9. I pray you to
peruse my 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. short distinctions, so much the rather, because
God on the contrary does affirm, that he is (not only good, but) good to all
(and that not only his mercies, but) also his tender mercies are over (not only
some, but over) all his works, and that he is not willing that any should
perish, 2 Pet. 3.9.

The fourteenth Distinction, wherein some men's misconstructions, are discovered
concerning that Text, where it is said, So then it is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but in God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16.
FRom this Text some men have conceived, that God by an Almighty power, by his
showing mercy, over-powreth some men, merely looking upon them as Creatures
only, so that those persons, neither shall, nor can avoid it, but they shall
eternally be saved, whereas the Text shows, that it is not in any man's
natural running or willing, but only in Gods mercy, who in mercy by Christ, to
satisfy justice, has provided a way whereby he may show mercy to mankind,
and by him then does in mercy by an Almighty power in a common salvation,
compel all to receive ability in themselves by infranchisement of their will,
that thereby, in their well usage of that ability, so by Gods mercy freely
given them, they may obtain eternal life, as is proved in my 6 and 7
Distinctions.

Hereto in the first place, we are to take notice, that no one mere man can,
will, or run acceptable in Gods account, any wise rending to eternal
salvation, as he is naturally descended from polluted Adams loins; for on the
contrary, in him the will and affections being ruled by the natural
sathanically deluded judgment, does follow the wisdom of the world, which is
so far from Gods imputation of righteousness thereto, that the wisdom of
this world is foolishness with God, 1. Cor. 3.19. and enmity with God, James
4.4. in this sense it is impossible that imputation of righteousness, should
be settled upon him, that so wills or runs, how industrious soever he be,
for he is yet in the snare of the Devil, and is taken captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26. therefore in this condition, it is no way of him that wills, nor
of him that runs, but in God only that shows mercy, who in mercy so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten son unto the world, John 3.16. who
inlightneth (not only some men) but every man, so that through him all men
might believe, John 1.7, 9. So by free mercy investing all men with an ability
or possibility in themselves, to be eternally saved, which possibility Adam
lost for all; see Distinct 6 and 7.

Thus Christ was not sent to condemn the world, but in Gods mercy, that the
world through him (by their well usage of that ability, might will and run
acceptably) and might be saved, compare John 1.7, 9. with John 3.17. Thus it is
only of God that shows and dispenses this his mercy, in freely giving
ability to all men by Christ, and from this large distribution of ability,
their own acting therein is expected and called for, for from this ground God
commands (no fewer than) all men every w here to repent, Acts 17.30. and to
purge themselves, to put off the old man, and to put on the new man, to work
out their own salvation, Phil. 2.12. and many such like commands are given unto
all men.

And the encouragement is therewith given, saying, for it is God that works
in your (the ability) both to will and to do, even to all men, as it is proved
in my 6 and 7 Distinctions, and that of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. or by
his freely showing mercy, according to this Text. Secondly, we are herewith to
take special notice, that even the wills and affections of those men, which by
their well acting in that ability or infranchisement, so by mercy given them,
do abide in believing, that in those very believers also, their affections,
faith and works, are all imperfect; so that it is not any of their willings or
runnings neither, that deserves mercy; no no: For if God should take notice of
the imperfections that are in their strongest faith, and most exact obedience,
to mark the iniquity of theirs that is therein, who shall stand? Psalm. 130.3.
And this was spoken by a believer, to believers, saying, if we say we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. Therefore
even in the very believers, salvation also is not of him that wills, nor in
him that runs, but in God only that shows mercy, as before. First, in
providing a way in mercy by Christ to do so, by his pacifying the Fathers
justice. Secondly, as before, by giving ability to all men. Thirdly, by passing
by the imperfections even of abiding believers by free mercy. Fourthly, by his
free mercy manifested by his giving of his Son, to, and for mankind, not
only in all these and the like, but also therefrom establishing abiding
believers in the special salvation in due season, though they do not merit
it, but as is by mercy granted for Christ's sake.

Yet further observe, that considering, that it is Gods act in them, to enable
all men, by setting all men's wills free, both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, or of his free mercy, as is proved he does in my 6 and 7
Distinctions; that those men that do humbly act with God in that ability by
mercy given them, strivingly endeavoring thereby by faith, to be obedient to
God, retaining always the sense of their unworthiness and unprofitablenesse;
These men though they be in themselves ungodly, yet God is pleased, according
to the second Covenant by his free mercy established, to impute righteousness
to these men, that do believe in him that justifies the ungodly, Romans 4.5.
And so herein is not the least tincture of any cause, why any such, by
imputation accepted believer, should boast or glory before God, otherwise than
in the living use of his abundant mercy.

Because those believers cannot but know, and also faithfully confess to the
glory of Gods mercy, that they have done, do, nor can do, any thing savingly
acceptable to God, by any ability whatsoever, but what they have in mercy
received from God, and are notwithstanding so far from performing their obliged
duty, as that they are therein unprofitable servants, according to our Saviors
direction, Luke 17.10. although God in mercy is pleased by Christ, to account
them worthy, as in Luke 21.36. Acts 5.41. Thus you see, that in the very
condition of abiding believers, that it is not of him that wills, nor in him
that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Therefore impossible to men that
remain in unbeleefe to besaved by their willing and running, how earnest
soever, considering that they also are by Gods will enabled by believing, to
will and run acceptably, but they persistingly will not. See my 6 and 7
Distinctions.

The fifteenth Distinction, wherein the mistake is discovered, which some men
have fastened on that Text, where it is said, Therefore has he mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he hardneth, Romans 9.18. and also shows, that there is
but one will in God.
HErein to avoid misconceptions, we are to know, that whereas it is said, or
supposed spoken, who has resisted his will? ver. 19. that there is one will in
God, no distinction of wills in God, as some men have imagined, that is his
secret will, and his revealed will, his absolute will, and his conditional
will, for God works all things according to his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. not
according to his wills, but his will, the act of Creation, and all the glorious
various dispensations of his providence, proceeds from the counsel of that
his one will, it is his own one and absolute will, that some of his works
shall be secret, and that some of them shall be revealed, some absolute, some
conditional, and though some men are said to be resisters, Acts 7.51.

Yet it is not so much as the least turning aside of the effects and
dispensations of the counsel of that one will of God; for as all men are by
the counsel of that one will of God, by grace enabled to know the truth, and
accept of grace, as is proved they are all, in my 6 and 7 Distinctions: So the
effects proceeding from that one will of God, does uncontrolably proceed
directly on in its fixed course, and deals with every man, as he finds him
persisting in obedience or disobedience, to the Gospell-condition, and that his
one will does dispose of every man accordingly. Therefore we are in this cause
now in hand, seriously to consider of the two maine dispensations, proceeding
from that his one will, concerning man's salvation, for the counsel of his one
will was at the Creation, to propound to man, his enabled Creature, a Covenant
of works, and if he failed in performance of that condition, then to apply a
propitiation before provided to satisfy his justice, for that offense or
transgression against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20. for all men,
as is many ways proved in this tract.

And also in pursuance to perform the further effects, proceeding from that his
one will, he then also determined (that upon his acceptance on of that
satisfaction made by Christ, by that unsported Lamb prepared before the
foundation of the world, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. and by him accounted of, as if slain
from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.9. to propound a new conditional
Covenant to all men, which is; that he that believes shall be saved, and that
he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16.

Now beloved, we are in rightly apprehending the true sense of this Text. Romans
9.18. to look upon the one will of God, as it is by his own determinate
counsel, to be by Christ dispensed, ever since the restoration before
mentioned, accordingly as men do believe or not believe. Also note, that though
it be said, that he that believes shall be saved, yet you know, or ought to
know, that all believers, during this life, are in themselves unworthy, their
faith and works are imperfect; and though their imperfections are such, by the
inhabitation of the remainders of the old man in them, that men indeed
considering of themselves, as in themselves, may admire why God should be
merciful unto them; yet as his second Covenant was established by that his one
will, so according to that his Covenant of grace, he will have mercy on all
such men (though unworthy in themselves) as by faithful endeavors, do humbly
aim at the performance of that his condition annexed to the second Covenant,
as is fully proved in Ephesians. 1.11, 12, 13. Heb 6. Chap. 2 These. 2.3, 4, 5. James
2.5. And also considering that those conditions annexed to the Gospel, are
according to his will in holy writ published and propounded to the world, to be
observed, John 1.16. What a preposterous injurious taxation do you (that stand
to maintain the effects of his power and will only) in this point, as
separated from all his other holy attributes, cast upon our just impartial
God, and faithful Creator by your (from this Text and such like) affirming,
that notwithstanding what condition soever that God has in his own word, by
his one will so published, to declare to the world, what his will is concerning
man's salvation, by their obedience to the faith.

Yet that he has as you conceive, in effect in this text declared that his
secret mental reserve, is to proceed by his power and will only, to harden
some men to eternal destruction, without any respect of their actual and
personal disobedience against the Gospell-Covenant, though so propounded to
them by himself. Thus ye render up God, by his exalting his power and will to
destroy his Gospell-grace, which is according to conditions performed by men to
be obtained.

Do you not bring in God, placed upon the theater of the world, by you wrapped
up in de^uding Simon Magus his clothes making show to do that for some men,
which in truth, he does not, nor really never did intend to do for them.

Therefore beloved, with consent of Scripture, to gather up our gracious Gods
holy attributes together, which such people have so far dispersed asunder;
let us cheerfully conclude this cause, maintaining Gods impartiality, with the
very words of this Text, that God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy,
and whom he will he hardneth, that he will have all men come to the knowledge
of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. and though even believers are in themselves ungodly,
yet he by his not starting from his second Covenant, and the conditions thereto
annexed made by him, he will have it so, it must be so, though there be no
cause in them deserving it, yet he will have mercy on those, and impute
righteousness unto them that believe in him, that justifyeth the ungodly, and
that it is his declared will also, that he will (...) have mercy upon any such
man, that after ability given him by grace, to be obedient to the faith, yet
will wilfully persist in the sin of unbeleefe, contrary to the condition of
grace, by God himself annexed to the Gospel.

The sixteenth Distinction shows the unwarranted dealings of some men, with
Gods prerogative, by a wrested application of Gods hardening Pharaohs heart.
SOme men have applied these words, where it is said, and whom he will he
hardens, Romans 9.18. as if God by his absolute prerogative will, does harden
some men's hearts, without any regard of their hardening their own hearts first,
and they do attempt to prove that their surmized tenent, by their bringing in
Gods hardening of Pharaohs heart, Exodus 4.21. as they suppose, not in respect of
Pharaohs hardening his heart first, to be the moving cause of God thereto;
therein they, though being Christians, and entrusted with his word, yet ill
requiting Gods loving kindness, by making advantage of a wrong sense thereof,
which makes against his impartiality, and will not on his part therein, take
notice of the true procuring cause of Pharaohs misery, where it is said, that
Pharaoh hardened his own heart, Exodus 8.15. neither do they once own, but
rather conceal Pharaohs proud blasphemous answer, given to Gods message, which
was first of all delivered by Moses and Aaron to him, in a peaceable way to
prevail with him, Exodus 5.15. nor of this tyrannical dealing with his people,
before that message was delivered unto him, nor of his multiplying afflictions
upon his people, after that first message from ver. 6. to ver. 11. Neither have
they on Gods side showed, that Pharaoh hardened his heart again, Exodus 8.32.
nor that Pharaoh sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his fervants,
Exodus 9.34.

But behold ye Christians, that thus in effect do maintain, that God is the
compulsive author of sin and rebellion in some men, even against himself, and
be ye astonished; for behold, the very Heathen Idolatrous Philistines, that
even their Idolatrous I Priests and Diviners, did to provoke the people, to
send speedily away the Ark of God from among them, reprove them, saying,
Wherefore then do you harden your hearts as Pharaoh and the Egyptians did,
when he had wrought wonderfully amongst them, 1 Samuel 6.6. Thus you see here,
that the very Idolatrous Heathens, have gotten the start of all such Christians
in this point, by their laying the fault rightly upon the Creatures, as Pharaoh
and the Egyptians, thereby vindicating the impartiality of the Creator,
according to 1 Pet. 1.17. which such Christians will not vouchsafe to do, but
rather hide the same, although in that Text, 1 Pet. 1.17. it is said, that God
judges without respect of persons, according to every man's works, then not
according to his first hardening of some men's hearts; see the proud rebellious
answer of those people, the similized clay, to the gracious exhorting message
sent from God their similized Potter, Ier. 18.12. and the people hardening their
own hearts as an adamant stone, in direct rebellion against Gods general
exhortations, lovingly propounded unto them, Zech. 7.9, 10, 11, 12. See also in
Romans 1 chap. how graciously God manifests and shows himself to them, ver. 19,
20. and yet how rebelliously they behave themselves toward him. See also the
unstained impartiality, that is in our faithful Creator confirmed, in that he
forsakes no man, before they actually and personally forsake him, 2 Chronicles.
15.2. Ezekiel. 18 chap. Isa. 5.2, 3, 4. compared with chap. 6.9, 10. and Isa.
44.18. compared with Mat. 13.15. and John 1.7, 9. and Acts 8.27. as also Psalm.
145.9. Pro. 21.29. Jer. 7.25, 26, 27. besides, God does not harden any man's
heart first, nor forsake any man first, witness that famous proclamation, 2
Cor. 15.2. And to testify Gods habitual and accustomable impartiality, it is
left to our view upon record; that although God did foreknow, that some Angels
would fall voluntarily, yet it is evident, God did not forsake them first, it
is they that did first forsake or leave their own blessed habitation, which God
had given them, Jude 6. neither although God did foreknow, that Adam would
voluntarily fall by hardening his own heart, yet you know that God did not
forsake him first, but on the contrary part, God gave him directions how he
might keep that blessed estate, of which he was possessed, and not only so, but
therewith gave him power also to observe those his directions, and to perform
them, and did not withdraw that power neither, until the very time that he
himself wilfully expelled, and cast off Gods gracious protection.

And this is much to be noted, because he was the great pattern of Gods
extention of mercy to mankind, yet to draw nearer to our own condition, we
find in our Types, that though God did foreknow, that the people of the Jews,
would in future forsake him, and harden their hearts against him, even unto the
height of Idolatry, and told Moses so; yet it is very observable, that God on
his part, in love, used preventing means with them, by his word declared, and
daily mercies extended unto them, and did not forsake them, until the very
time, or that very day, as the Text says, in which they actually forsook him
first, Deuteronomy. 31.15, 17, 18.

And hereto you cannot choose but know, that throughout the Scripture, that
although God does foreknow, what men will in future do, yet he neither
bestows his rewards, except inabling ones, nor actually executes his
judgments, except gracious teaching ones, until the very time that men are
either actually obedient, or persistingly and actually disobedient to the
Gospel Covenant; besides, to conclude this point, I entreat you to bear in
mind, what blasphemous desperate resolutions, and fearful effects, this their
tenent may, and often does, beget in the hearts of men, thus delusively to tell
them, that God by his power and will only, does harden all men's hearts first,
that ever hardened, whether they do harden their own hearts first, or not.

The seventeenth Distinction is, to rectify some men's mistakes of that Text,
where it is said, For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate, Romans
8.29. and of that Text, where it is said, elect according to the foreknowledge
of God, 1 Pet. 1.2.
COncerning these Texts, we are to observe, that the very Coherence of these
words, Romans 8.29. does lead us to take notice of something before spoken, to be
the cause of Gods predestinating, according to his foreknowledge, and looking
back but to the very next verse, we find, that the Apostle affirms to, and
for those Roman Saints, saying, we known that all things work together for the
best, unto them that love God, ver. 28. And therefore from these words, let us
consider what the object is upon which his foreknowledge does fasten, by which
he does predestinate; if you say that God predestinates only some men merely,
as Creatures, then his power and will so inordinately exalted, without his
other holy attributes annexed, will render all his Gospell-conditions, which
are in point of acceptance, required to be performed of all men, Acts 17.30.
to be absurd and ridiculous; what shall we say then? shall we say that his
predestination proceeds, accordingly as men are of more noble Parentage then
some others? no, these are denied, 1 Corinthians 1.26. James 2.1, 2, 3.

What then, is it in respect of Gods foreknowledge of some men, as bred up in
the most famous Kingdoms or Nations? no, for in this very respect, Peter
says, that God is no respecter of persons, Acts 10.34. What then shall we say,
that God predestinates according to his foreknowledge of some men's
qualifications, in fearing God, and working righteousness (by their well
acting in their infranchisement?) to this the Scripture answers cheerfully,
yes; for in this respect, Peter absolutely concludes, even with admiration,
saying, of a truth I perceive, that God is no respecter of persons, but in
every Nation, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of
him, Acts 10.34, 35. and as for the transcendent benefits, that proceed from
that his foreknowing men, we have them expressly related in the 29, 30, verses,
Romans 8. to be in relation to such lovers of God, leadingly set forth in the 18
verse preceding in the very same Chapter.

Thus we find, that Gods predestination, and other gracious dispensations, do
conjunctively work together for the best (it is not said to those whom he
predestined by his will and power only) no, no such matter, but unto those
that love God, as the lively coherence of that Text, Romans 8.28. and 29 verses
confirms. Those fore-known lovers of God, are those objects, or those men,
which are said to be elect, according to the foreknowledge of God, 1 Pet. 1.2.
and in further confirmation of this truth, behold that Gods gracious
predestination, proceeds from Gods fore-knowing of men's actual first
trusting in Christ, and that God does not actually seal men with his holy
spirit of promise, until after their actual believing.

To prove the first of these, its said, in whom also we have obtained an
inheritance, being predestined, note this being predestined according to
the purpose of him, who works all things after the counsel of his own will
(See here what the counsel of his will is) that that we should be to the
praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ, Ephesians. 1.11, 12. Note this, who
first trusted in Christ, or that we which before believed in Christ, should be
to the praise of his glory, as some translations render it. See also Psalm. 4.3.
Know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself. See also John
6.40. Heb. 6.10, 12. 2 These. 1.3, 4, 5. So that hereby appears plainly; that
Gods gracious predestination of men, proceeds from his fore-knowing them
first to be trusters in Christ, where the Gospel comes, or such as do trust
in Gods goodness only, where the written Gospel is not vouchsafed, as is
proved in my 7 Distinction.

And as for believing, it is not said, after you were sealed ye believed, but
flat contrary (note this) after ye believed ye were sealed with the spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1.13. for in truth, their believing estates them to be in person,
imputatively in Christ, and they, and only they, are thereby, by their
foreknowne abiding in him, those men which are chosen in him before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4.

These submissive abiding believers and trusters, are after their actual and
personal believing and trusting in Christ, in Gods foreknowledge by him
predestined before time, to adoption of children in time, yet still according
to the counsel of Gods will, Ephesians. 1.5. by Christ, although in themselves
ungodly and undeserving ones, as is proved in my 14 and 15 Distinctions.

But it may be some men will say hereto, that if God does by Christ, only set
all men's wills free, and so only enable all men to believe, and abide in
believing, and does further by an almighty power, over power some men to
believe, and to abide in believing, but then leaves it to their will, as he did
to Adam our public pattern.

Then God at all adventure, did commit his dearly beloved Son to suffer
death for all men, not being sure that any one of them would accept of any
benefit therefrom, so that God was not sure, that the glory of his mercy
should be magnified by any of the sons of men, and so you by this your tenent
in this respect, say, Christ might have suffered his agonies and torments of
death in vain.

To which I answer, that Gods mercies aforesaid, would have been magnified in
all men, although all men had refused it.

And for example herein, note, that even those that do refuse that mercy
purchased for they by Christ, shall one day bow the knee to him, and not only
those that do believe in him, but every tongue shall confess (even those that
in this life time, will not that Christ should reign over them by his spirit)
Luke 18.14. shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God,
Phil. 2.11. for the (wilful) unbeleefe of men, shall not make the faith (or
faithfulness of Gods intentions toward them) without effect, Romans 3.3. for
God shall be justified (of all men) when he is judged, Romans 4.26. Psalm 51.4.

And in this point, the unrighteousness of men shall commend the
righteousness of God, Romans 3.5. because his operations, to, for, and in them,
were really and graciously intended for their salvation, though they have
abused his mercy; and the Apostle to this end affirms, if we believe not,
yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. which I pray
observe: Thus we find, that whether men do make good use of Gods mercies or
not, which as the golden Scepter is holden forth to all men, yet not only all
men, but according to Scripture, Luke 2.10. all the glorious Host of Heaven,
shall or will glorify God, not only in his justice, but also for his
faithfulness on his part, graciously intended, and accordingly extended forth
to all men or every man.

You know beloved, that though God did foreknow, that the Angels that fell,
would abuse his mercy, yet he estated them in his mercy, and also enabled them
to remain therein, and he dispossessed not them of that blessed estate, but it
was they that kept not their first estate, and left their own habitation, Jude
6.

You know also, that God did foreknow, that Adam would not continue in his
grace and goodness extended unto him by Creation, yet you see that God
proceeded on, and did Create the world for Mankinds use, and also gave Adam
power to keep that his first blessed estate, and forsook not him, until he
forsook God first; therefore it is no strange thing that God proceeded on, and
did by Christ's performances, establish the restoration of all men in inabling
them in the inward man, though he did foreknow that some men, though
infranchised and enabled by the restoration, would reject his mercy purchased
therein for them by Christ. But in further answer know, that although Adam did
rebelliously refuse to continue in Gods grace of Creation, yet accordinly as
has been proved, that as all men are enabled by Christ; so God did foreknow,
that some men would by that ability given them, by their well usage thereof,
accept of, and abide in his mercy by Christ procured for all, and did foreknow
that some men would cheerfully yield obedience to the faith, so that I hope you
shall not need to be further troubled with that fallacious fear; thus knowing,
that God runs not into any hazard in anything that he has done, does, or ever
will do, or suffer to be done: Observe herewith, that Gods foreknowledge of
what mankind the Creature will in future do, puts no necessity upon any man
so to do, but leaves all men after inablement, in a voluntary estate by
restoration as our grand pattern ADAM was left by Creation.

The eighteenth Distinction is a short application of these last six
Distinctions, for further clearing the cause of election and reprobation.
FOR the discovery of Election and Reprobation, and what is the cause of them
if it please you we will take a little review of what to that purpose has been
said, in my last six Distinctions. In my twelfth Distinction, which is
concerning the Potter and his Clay, it is proved, that God makes no
dishonorable vessels, unless it be by way of just punishment, for marring of
themselves under his well-intending forming hand, and that God does sharply
reprove such men, that do charge him to make an imperfect work, or dismembered
one, or a work that is worth nothing, as some translations have it, Isa. 45.9.
and also it is therein proved, that Jeremy plainly sets forth, that by that
one lump or same lump, Romans 9.21. It is not meant the one total lump of all
mankind, as some men fallaciously, to maintain eternal reprobation would
have it, but that by that one or same lump is meant, the particular lumps of
several Kingdoms, distinguished Nations, and particular persons, which God
has on his part first by Christ put into a good condition, and would upon his
Potters wheel, by good means used with them, under his well intending hand, so
preserve them for ever, if they the Clay, do not persist in resisting his good
intent, finding fault of and for themselves, with his good form put on them by
restoration, as Adam did for all at the blessed Creation, in effect,
complaining against the former good, why have thou made me thus to be governed
by thee, and to depend on thee? no, I will do the abomination of my evil
heart, as those very men, the Clay, answered their gracious exhorting Potter,
as amongst many places, so in Jer. 18.12. wherein the original description of
the Potter and his Clay is recorded, from whence Romans 9.21. is derived, and
that God does not forsake any one man, before that man does actually and
personally forsake him first.

And considering that it is proved in my 13 Distinction, that God does no where
say, that before Esau was born, he hated Esau with an eternal hatred; but that
expression of hatred, is only a recital of what God did speak to Malachi
concerning Esau, many hundred of years after Esau was born, in which long
process of time, God had received long and exact experience, not only of
Esau's profaneness, but also of all his personal and his posterities
tyrannical injurious behavior, both to himself and the posterity of Jacob.

And that the expression of God, concerning his hatred of Esau, mentioned in
Mal. 1.2, 3. was but exemplary to show, that no man's wickedness shall be
sheltred from Gods indignation, by his having to his parent, or brother, or
kinsman, such a person whom God loves.

And that sometimes in Scripture Phrase, hatred is but the expression of a
lesser degree of love, as there in that saying, the elder shall serve the
younger.

And considering, that Gods hatred in their sense, as applied to man's eternal
reprobation or preterition, is so destructively opposite to Gods own words,
that he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. and that he desires not, or delights not in the death
of him that dies, but exhorts them to turn themselves and live, Ezck. 18.32.
and that he is good to all, and that his tender mercies (are not only over
some, but) over all his works, Psalm. 145.9.

And that quite contrary to their imagined conceit, that God forsakes some
men eternally, before, after their infranchisement, they actually forsake him,
God affirms that he does not willingly afflict (no nor so much as) grieveth
the children of men, Lam. 3.33. Why then should not we believe God rather than
men, considering the election and hatred there mentioned, extends but to an
earthly superiority for Jacob, and a temporal servitude for Esau? and that
their fancied preterition from real means, before men do actually and
personally forsake God, is in truth, if ripped open, but a disguised reprobation,
for one that has power to do it, and does keep from a man his food, may as
really kill that man so, as if he cut off his head with a sword.

And considering that it is proved by Scripture in my 14 Distinction, that it
is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs in that darkness, or by
that ability, which he has by generation naturally, from fallen Adams loins,
but of God who does set free all men's wills in due season, and so does enable
all men by his free grace, that they by their well usage of that ability, may
acceptably by imputation, will and run by their believing.

And considering that even then also, it is of God that shows mercy even to
believers, in mercy by Christ opening a way for it, and then in mercy forgiving
their imperfections, both in their faith, and in their works also.

And considering that even believers are in themselves ungodly, it is only of
God that shows mercy; it is of him that will have it so, according to his
second Covenant, in that he does predestinate according to his own purpose,
who works all things after the counsel of his own will (not that those
predestined by his absolute will and power only, should) but that those who
in his foreknowledge, first trusted in Christ, or before believed in Christ
(as some translations have it) or fore-known lovers of God, should be to the
prais of his glory, and that those men should be sealed with the holy spirit of
promise (not before by Gods absolute will and power only) but after they
believed, as the coherence of the Text in plain words rendereth, Ephesians. 1.11, 12,
13. Thus God will have mercy on him, and will impute his faith for
righteousness, that makes war against sin; and yet in the lively
apprehension of his own ungodliness, departs not from the goodness of the
living God, but confidingly does believe in him that justifies the ungodly,
according to Romans 4.5. So by those Scripture-testimonies, spunging out that
gross delusive construction, from that Text derived, that God will have mercy
on some men, and will harden the residue of men, considered of as Creatures
only, as by his absolute will and power only, or for fore-known sin before men
do, or can, actually or personally forsake him.

And considering of the same impartiality of our faithful Creator, concerning
his equal and just dealing with all men, according to 1 Pet. 1.17. as is
proved in my 15 Distinction, and that their mentally concealed partiality of
God, does destroy his Gospell-grace published, which is according to men's
performances of his conditions annexed thereto, by them to be obtained.

And considering that it is proved by Scripture in my 16 Distinction, that God
hardneth no man's heart, before he has persisted in hardening his own heart,
and that the very Idolatrous Philistines, to the shame of some Christians, did
apply Pharaohs and his peoples misery to be by himself brought upon himself
justly, by his and his peoples hardening of their own hearts first as exemplary
concerning all men so persisting.

And considering that it is proved in my 17 Distinction, that God does
predestinate some men to be conformed to the image of his Son, but not
according to his absolute will and power only, nor as he fore-knoweth men to be
of more noble parentage, nor as being more wealthy, nor as being born in more
famous Kingdoms, or Nations, than some others are, nor merely as Creatures,
without having respect in his foreknowledge, either to their doing good or
bad; but that the Scripture affirms, that God predestinates according as he
fore-knoweth men to belovers of God, according to Romans 8. and that in every
Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of him,
Acts 10.34, 35.

And moreover considering, that God does choose no man but in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4.
then you know that no man is in Christ actually by imputation, until he be an
actual believer, therefore he chooses none to salvation, but such as either
are, or he fore-knoweth, will in future be in Christ by actual believing; for
it is manifest, that though God does choose or set apart some men for himself,
yet that he makes not that choice according to his absolute will and power
only; but know, that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself,
Psalm. 4.3. And affirms, that those men do turn his glory into shame, and do
love vanity, that do affirm the contrary, ver. 2. From all these considerations
herein mentioned, and many more in Scripture, we may warrantably and safely
conclude, that neither predestination, election, preterition or reprobation do
proceed from God upon any one man, by virtue of Gods absolute will and power
only, nor that he does forsake any one man, for fore-known sins, but does
continue in using good means, whereby all men in their well usage thereof,
might be eternally saved, until that man does give a just occasion for God to
forsake him, by his wilful forsaking of God first personally, persistingly and
actually, after his inlightenment and infranchisement.

The nineteenth Distinction is briefly to show, what the special salvation is,
mentioned in 1 Timothy 4.10. as distinct from the common salvation, which is in
that Text therewith coupled.
HErein we are to take notice, that as all men are enabled by and in the common
salvation, to believe and abide in believing, so the special salvation is that
condition or estate, which after men's turning in at wisdoms reproof, by their
abiding in believing, and depending on Gods goodness only, she does then
pour out her spirit unto them, and makes known her words unto them,
according to Prove. 1.23. being also according to that Text, where it is said,
in whom after ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise,
Ephesians. 1.13. These sealing testimonies, and gracious and spiritual gifts, are
variable in respect of their quantity, and are communicated, according to the
proportion of the first fruits of the spirit, which is by grace to any believer
granted, as believers by experience well know, and this special salvation,
issues according to Scripture, naturally from the common salvation; which
common salvation, however it has been by some men slighted, yet the believing
of the large and effectually efficacy thereof, concerning all men, as it is
discovered in my 26 and 7 Distinctions, is by Scripture-warrant, the most
direct and most sure way to obtain faith and repentance, whereby and wherewith,
the especial salvation is by grace established to abiding believers, 1 Timothy
4.10. In that estate, believers do not only prove overcommers, but also
perseverers in overcomming, according to Rev. 2.26. in this estate believers
do enter into rest, Heb. 4.3. see the excellency of this estate, Col. 2.7. 1
Pet. 2.4, 5. in this estate they are written in the book of remembrance, to be
made up with Gods Jewels, Mal. 3.16, 17. See also Col. 2.9, 10. in this estate,
they by faith approach unto the very throne of grace, Heb. 4.16. See Ephesians. 1.
12, 13, 14. Romans 8.20. these men by faith, by degrees do enter into that which
is within the veil, Heb. 6.19. which place is in the Type, called the holiest
of all, Heb. 9.3. and by faith they are said to see God, who is invisible, Heb.
11.27. they are passed from death to life, John 5.24. to these believers he
gives power to be called the sons of God. John 1.

These in point of confidence therein, cease from their own works, as God did
from his, Heb. 4.10. in this estate there is an entrance administered unto them,
into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.6.
and also by faith, they do enjoy fellowship with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ, 1 John 1.3. These men with open face, behold as in a glass the
glory of God, and are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, even as
by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. See also their admirable triumph, Romans
8.35, 39.

And though much more might be hereto proved, yet to conclude, they are blessed
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, Ephesians. 3. which
estate they do enjoy even in this restoed second life, according to the
proportion of the first fruits of the spirit, which every believer by grace,
receives therein.

The twentieth Distinction shows, that as all men lost their peace with God
(by Adams fall) which all Adams posterity had by propriety in him, whilst be
stood, so all men are vertually in Christ, and by Christ, reconciled to God
again by restoration, though some men after their inlightenment, abuse that
grace of their reconciliation in him, and do thereby lose the benefit thereof.
HErein to pove that reconciliation of all men in Christ, we are to note, that
the eternal curse of the Law is taken away for all men, which is proved in my
4 Distinction.

And also to observe, that Christ's death was satisfactory for the
transgressions, not that are, but were against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15.
Romans 5.20, 21. or Moral Law without Limitation; to prove which, it is said,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, by being made a curse for
us, for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on the tree, Gal. 3.13.
and to prove, that by the word (us) is meant all men, observe that that verse
is grounded upon the fore going 8 verse, where it is said, and the Scripture
foreseeing, that God would justify the Heathen through faith, preached before
the Gospel unto Abraham; saying, in thee shall all Nations be blessed,
according to those unlimited promises, often repeated to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, that in their seed, no fewer than all the Nations, and all the Families
of the earth should be blessed, as you may find in Genesis 18.18.3.22, 18. and
26, 4.20.14. and as that 13 verse of Gal. 3. is immediately derived from that
general application in the 8 verse preceding: So also the cause why Christ
has redeemed from the curse of the Law, is showed (in the 14 verse, being the
very next verse following) to be this expressly, that the blessing of Abraham
(in whose seed, as before is showed, that no fewer than all Nations and all
Families of the earth shall be blessed) might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ; which general promise made unto Abraham, is called the Covenant,
which was confirmed before in Christ, which the Law cannot disanul, as
appears plainly in the 15, 16, 17, 18 verses next following, in the very same
Chapter, as a conclusive confirmation of the very same discourse, which
evidently proves, that the taking away the curse of the Law, is so large for
all Nations and Families of the earth, as to bring in the blessings in Christ (
abraham's seed) over all men. See Romans 5.18. Note also, by that his hanging on
the tree he tasted death; and hereto the Scriputre shows us, that thereby and
thereon, he tasted death (for no fewer than) every man, Heb. 2.9. whereby his
hanging on the tree in that Text mentioned, he become the propitiation for (no
fewer sins, than) the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. being the
Transgressions against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20, 21.

And as the curse was (by his so being made a curse) taken away for all men; so
consider, that accordingly as it is said, that he is the Savior of (no fewer
than) all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. as is before discovered. So also the Apostle
affirms, that Christ dyed for all, 2 Cor 5.15. and from that general ground
by him there laid down, that Christ dyed for all; he in pursuance of the same
discovery, coherently gives us to wit, in the 19 verse next following, that God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them: Herein is cleared to open view, that by Christ's being
therein, the worlds public man, and general representative, by hisbeing
reconciled to God in the worlds behalf for the world; the world is accounted
of, as reconciled to God in Christ, verse 18. even in him vertually; for you
see, that by the worlds being so reconciled to God, and God in his justice and
attribute of his truth, unto the world in Christ, the worlds trespasses are not
imputed to them, which has conherent relation unto that unlimited speech
immediately going before, that Christ dyed for all; and upon the same ground it
is affirmed, God laid upon him the iniquities of us all, Is. 53.6. against the
first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.20.

And accordingly, in the discovery of the reconciliation of all men in Christ,
it is said, that God had purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of the
fullness of time, to gather together in one, all things in Christ, whether they
be things in Heaven, or thing on Earth, even in him, Ephesians. 1.10. And further to
make it to appear, that this large affirmation is spoken of a reconciled
gathering, not only of all men who are Gods choice earthly things, as in
reference to the Creation, but of all things together, in one in him, observe
that the Apostle affirms, that it pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell, and having made peace by the blood of his Cross, by him to
reconcile (note) by him to reconcile all things unto himself, by him I say,
whether they be things on earth, or things in Heaven, Col. 1.20.

Here also we find proved by Scripture, that this general reconcilement of
all men for the transgressions against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans
5.20. or Convenant of works, was made to God in Christ, according to the good
pleasure of God will, by the blood of his Cross, by the shedding of which
blood thereon, he tasted death upon the Cross.

But note this, that it was not for the elect, or believers, or Christians
only, but for no fewer men than every man Heb. 2.9. or all, 2 Cor. 5.15. not
excepting any one man; and also he thereby became the reconciling propitiation
for (no fewer sins) than the sins of the whole world, against the first
Testament, as has been said; for this his reconciledly gathering together of
all things in one, unto himself in Christ, does unavoidably prove, that all
men being his choice earthly things, are all of them, no one excepted,
reconciledly to himself gathered together in one in him, even in him,
according to the said Text, Ephesians. 1.10. Col. 1.20. being compared in him
vertually, though some men wilfully through unbeleefe (after their
infranchisement, as in my 6 and 7 Distinctions) will lose the benefit of that
reconciliation, personally; besides, to conclude this point, all the Nations
and Families of the Earth, could not be blessed in him, as it is proved they
all are, in my next Distinction, except all men be as in these former Texts,
reconciled to God in him, even in him.

The one and twentieth Distinction proves; that whereas all men were involved
under the curse of the Law, by the destrucvtive first Adams fall, so all men
are again blessed virtually in Christ, the restoring second Adam, though some
men will, after inlightenment, voluntarily lose the eternal benefit of that
blessedness.
IN this point, though we have many proofs, yet considering that the Scripture
uses the very same language, to confirm the same truth, I will only cite to
your consideration, the large extent of Gods promises, made to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; as where he says of Abraham, all the Nations of the earth shall be
blessed in him, Genesis 22.18. And again to Isaac, in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 26.4. and as unlimitably again to Jacob,
in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed, Genesis 28.14. For as
has been proved, that Christ as a real cause of great joy for all people,
according to Luke 2.10. is the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. as a saving
ransomer, or ransoming Savior, according to 1 Timothy 4. and 6. verses, compared
together by a ransoming price paid, 1 Cor. 6.20. to recover all men, or ransom
all men, out of the impossibility without Christ considered, to be eternally
saved, which came over all men by Adams fall, and to estate all men in the
inward man, mind and will, into an ability or possibility in themselves to be
eternally saved, as is largely proved in my 2, 6, 7 Distinctions, which is a
blessing far furmounting all temporal blessings whatsoever; therefore if we
will but vouchsafe to mortify our own natural inclination, to interpose our
own interpretations, and faithfully grant as we ought to do, that in those
unlimited promises, made to abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that in their feed no
fewer number than all the Nations, and all the Families of the earth are
blessed.

That the Holy Ghost does without any mysterious mental reservation, include
all men, and does not confine some men to temporal blessings only; and also,
that in plain words, the Scripture speaks the full and plain truth in the
litterall sense, there will be no cause for me, to being any further proof to
confirm this affirmation, especially considering that the Apostle shows us
the hard conditions that be in such blessings, which are but temporal
blessings only saying, If in this life we have hope in Christ, we are (not only
of some men, but) of all men (not only miserable, but of) all men most
miserable 1 Cor. 15.19.

Therefore considering that Christ is a real cause (not only of joy, but) of
great joy (not only to some, but) to all people, according to the scope of Luke
2.10. I conceive that you will not, or dare not account, much less maintain,
that these blessings proceeding by that blessed promised seed to all Nations,
and all the Families of the earth, to be intended of God, but for temporal
ends only, to any man, or some men, for then to those men, by reason they are
to give account for the exact proportion of quality and quanity, and time they
have enjoied them.

The gift of them, though from a gracious God, will in reality prove to be to
those men, rather an intended mental cause of of aggravation of curses, than
real blessings. But observe herewith, though all men be in Christ vertually
blessed in their generations, yet that no man is by imputation personally
blessed, until he abide in believing; for though Christ has taken away the
eternal curse of the Law, or first Testament, and the eternal sting of the
first death, as is proved he has done, in my 4 and 5 Distinctions, for all or
every man, and so reconciled all men unto God, in the attributes of his justice
and truth, unto all men in himelfe, and so are all blessed in him, and does
enable all men in the inward man in due season, to accept of that blessing, and
abide therein in believing, as is proved he does, in my 6 and 7 Distinctions;

Yet some men do not, or will not accept of that great act of grace; and so
though being delivered from the eternal curse of the Law, or first Testament,
their thoughts and actions prove to be sins against grace, and so are sins
against the second Covenant and by their wilful persisting in that unbelief,
they prove, and are by themselves converted into the sins against the Holy
Ghost, as in my 10 and 11 Distinctions.

Thus these men, though having by Christ escaped the eternity of the first
death yet do involve themselves, into the irrevocable, eternal, cursed
condition of the second death; but to abiding believers though their faith and
obedience be imperfect, and in the outward man they be ungodly, yet to the
believers God will not impute their sins, or frailties, or infirmities,
though by them acted against Christ, in or under the Covenant of grace, as is
proved in my 10, 14, and 15 Distinctions, but covers them, in and by Christ.
From hence it is said by the Apostle Paul, from the Prophet David, blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is
the man, to whom the Lordwill not impute sin, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Rim. 1.8. Thus
though all men are blessed in Christ from their transgressions against the
first Testament, which unavoidably comes upon them by Adams fall by their being
not imputed unto them, as in my 4, 10, and 11 Distinctions;

Yet some men will, as has been touched, by their wilful persisting in
unbelief, transform all their actual sins, into sins against grace, and
so against the Holy Ghost, and thereby never obtain a personal blessedness
in themselves, by a non-imputation of those their sins against the second
Covenant, or covenant of grace, which they might have escaped, if they had well
used their ability given them in the common salvation, or blessed condition,
where with all men are infallibly blessed in Christ vertually, as is proved not
only in this, but also in my 4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11, 20, 22, 23, and 24
Distinctions.

The two and twentieth Distinction shows, that all men are by restoration
sanctified in Christ vertually, though some men do abuse the same, and so
wilfully lose the benefit of that their Sanctification.
HErto note, that in our Types, Moses with the blood of Calves and Goats,
sprinked the people, Exodus 4.8. and he sanctified (not only some, but) all the
people of the Jews, for none is excepted, Exodus 19.14. which are our examples
or Types, 1 Cor. 16.6, 11. Also note, that the bodies of those beasts that were
brought in by the High Priest, for sin, were burnt without the Camp, Heb.
13.10, 11. therefore note here, that as all the people were sprinkled with the
blood of those beasts, not one man excepted, Heb. 9.19. that from this very
ground, the Apostle to perfect this his discourse, concerning that general
sanctification, says,

Therefore even Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,
suffered without the gate, ver. 12.

Thus when he satisfied Justice for the sins of the people, he suffered
without the gates of Jerusalem, but yet the question may be, how many people be
thereby sanctified, by his so suffering death without the gate; to which
question the Scripture answers readily, saying he dyed for all, 2 Cor. 5.15.
and that he tasted death for (no fewer than) every man, Heb. 2.9. and that
thereby he became the pacifying propitiation for the sins of (no fewer
people, than the sins of) the whole world, 1 John 2.2. By these undeniable
testimonies is proved, that our Savior Christ sanctified in himself, as many
people with his own blood, by his suffering without the gate, as he there dyed
for, which is all, or there tasted death for, which is no fewer than every man,
as those Texts maintain.

And considering that his body is the typified Temple, John 2.19, 20.21. for
sanctifying uses to the world, as the Jews Temple was to that whole Nation; we
ought not to grudge, to give our consent with the Scriptures, that by his
suffering death without the gate for all men, or every man, that even so all
men or every man, were thereby sanctified in him, although some men do
profanely abuse that their sanctification in him, as in the Type some
sanctified Priests, and vessels, that were once sanctified in the Jewish
material Temple, and set apart for holy uses; yet notwithstanding, were many
ways, many times so by them abused and profaned, as that thereby, their
former sanctification was nullified.

Again, for our satisfaction in this very point, it is said, the unbeleeving
wife is sanctified by her believing husband, and also that the unbeleeving
husband, is sanctified by his believing wife, whiest they do willingly abide
together, as in the 1 of the Corinthians, 7.13, 16.

Now beloved, can we believe this in the Creatures, nay even in (as considered
of themselves) ungodly Creatures? and will we not yield to our blessed
unspotted Savior, who is not only as in the special salvation, more
peculiarly the head of his Church, but also in the common salvation by
restoration, the head of (no fewer than) every man? as in 1 Cor. 11.3. shall we
not yield him the honor to acknowledge, that by his precious bloodshed for
every man, that thereby all men are sanctified vertually in him by his
restoration, and should so continue, if they after their inablement, did abide
in him? as the unbeleeving wife does not lose the virtue of her sanctification
that she has in her believing husband, if she depart not from him,
especially considering that our Savior Christ affirms, saying, and I, if I
be lifted up, will draw all men unto me, John 12.32. not accepting any one man,
and he draws no man for destructive ends, Luke 9.56.

And considering that not only all men, they being in reference to Creation,
Gods choice earthly things, but also all things both in Heaven and in Earth,
are not only gathered together, but also reconciledly gathered together to
himself, in one in Christ, even in him, as you may see they are, by the peace
made by the blood of his Cross, if you will be pleased to compare together,
Col. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.10. and 2 Cor. 5.15, 18, 19, 20. And even as the believing
husband, and the believing wife, are in that Text exhorted, not to put away the
unbeleeving wife, or unbeleeving husband, except the unbeleever do wilfully
first make choice to depart from the believer; so christ puts none away from
him, nor does forsake any one man, before that person makes choice to depart,
and does first actually forsake him, as is by Scripture proved in my 16
Distinction.

But to take away all stumbling in this very cause, the Scripture very fairly
steps forth, and plainly tells us, that there are are some men though by grace
drawn to him, and reconciledly gathered together in one in him, as aforesaid;
yet notwithstanding being not able easily to go back, will put to more
sathanicall strength, and wilfully draw back even to peridition, Heb. 10.39.
and though bought by him, do deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.1. and
thereby not God by preterition, but themselves do bring upon themselves swift
destruction, and that there are some men, that although they are brought unto
the knowledge of the truth, 1 Timothy 2.4. Romans 1.19. that will sin willingly,
after they have received the knowledge of the truth, Heb. 10.26. And also the
Scripture shows us, that there are some men, that although they be by Christ
drawn to him, and reconciledly gathered together in him, even in him, as before
said, that notwithstanding, will tread underfoot the Son of God, and although
they be also with his blood sanctified in him, yet will count the blood of the
Covenant where with they were sanctified (note this where with they were
sanctified) an unholy thing, and do despite to the spirit of grace, ver. 29.
which you know no man could be rightly said to do, if they were not so first
bought, and so drawn to Christ, and so reconciledly gathered together in him,
and first sanctified with the blood of the Covenant in him, even before they
do deny the Lord that bought them, and before they do account the blood of
the Covenant an ungodly thing, with which says the Apostle, if we will believe
him, even those Apostates were sanctified, Heb. 10.19. then what need any
further proof in this point?

The three and twentieth Distinction declares, that all men by restoration,
are justified in Christ vertually from the curse of the Law, and first death,
though no man is by imputation personally justified, until he be a confiding
believer.
BUT in this discovery, I will first, if you be pleased, distinguish what the
nature or extent of this justification of all men in him is: Therefore thus;

First, all men are by Christ's performances in the common salvation mentioned
Jude 3. and 1 Timothy 4.10. justified vertually in Christ before God, from the
transgressions against the Moral Law, or first Testament, and first death,
according to the scope of Romans 5.18, 20, 21. and Heb. 9.15.

Secondly, that by believing, such believers are by imputation personally
justified, not only before God, but also in their own sense and feeling, by a
well grounded peace in their consciences by faith settled.

Thirdly, that by good works and words, men are declaratively justified in the
view of the world.

In the first of these senses, all men are justified in Christ before God, by
Gods non-imputation of the worlds sins unto them, 2 Cor 5.15. compared with the
18 and 19 verses following, and with Romans 5.20, 21.

In the second, sense abiding believers are not only personally justified
before God, by a non imputation of the worlds sins, as before, but also by
Gods imputation of Christ's righteousness unto them, they are apprehensively
justified by the pacification of their own consciences, by the blood of Jesus,
Heb. 4.3.

In the third sense, one man is justified in the sight of another, as far as
men may judge, Mat. 5.16.

Now beloved, take this for granted, that in all causes concerning the common
salvation of all men, I do always mean in the first of these three senses.

Hereto note, that as all men lost their righteousness, by the destructive
first Adams fall, which all his posterity had respectively in him, whilst he
stood, to show unto us, that that great loss is repaired in Christ, the
restoring second Adam, Acts 3.21. Observe that in this point, it is said, and
he shall be called the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. So accordingly it is
said, he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

This is Gods end on his part in him, for all men, and to make it appear
clearly, that the expressions, our us, and we, in those Texts used, are not
usually meant of the elect or believers only, as some men do vainly imagine,
but of the world, or all men of the world. Note that this 21 verse is naturally
derived from the 19 verse immediately going before, where it is said, that God
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, also that both these verses do relatively follow in his
direct pursuance of his discovery, to confirm the largeness, and effectual
extent of Christ's dying for (no fewer than) all, as in the 14, 15 verses
preceding in the same Chapter, being his fundamental foundation of that his
large discovery.

And for further proof herein, the Apostle having showed that by the Law, all
the world became guilty before God, Romans 3.19. then from that very ground, he
says in the 23 verse, all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God,
being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Romans 3.23. and 24.

Now note, it is not here said, all have sinned, and the elect or believers
only, or that some men only are justified, but the coherence of the Text says,
all have sinned being just fied, but as in his groundplat he said, that by the
Law, all the world became guilty before God, and in this Text, that all have
sinned.

So in clearing that general guiltiness, he brings in that precious antidote
of Christ's the Lambs blood, for no fewer than all, that as all have sinned and
become guilty before God, so all are justified, all have sinned being justified
(but still) freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.

And you know that redemption by a price paid, by his precious bloodshed, is
no other in effect, but a ransom paid. then hereto note, to show the
largeness of redemption, that he gave himself a ransom for (no fewer than)
all men, 1 Timothy 2.6.

And the genuine sense of that Text, Rom 3.23. is utterly destroyed, if we do
not grant, that there are as many justified in him before God, by that
redemption which is in Christ Jesus, as have sinned, which the Text tells us, is
no fewer than all men, for says the Text, in substance all have sinned, being
justified freely by grace, from the curse of the Law or first Testament,
Hebrews 9.15. Romans 5.19, 20, 21.

But note further, though all men are thereby so justified in him, whether any
man do believe or not; yet not any man but believers, do personally enjoy the
comfortable use of the benefit thereof, neither are any imputatively justified
in themselves, from their sins of frailty against grace also, but believers
only.

Again, to justify the truth of the justification of all men, by, and in
Christ, before God, from all the aforesaid transgressions; it is said
therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men unto justification of life, Romans 5.18.

And to make this more plain, I find it in another reformed Bible, thus;
Likewise then, as by the sin of one, condemnation came on all men, even so by
the justifying of one, comes the righteousness that brings life upon all
men.

Here you see fully proved that by Christ the free gift, his being given to the
world, John 3.16. such a justification proceeds therefrom, as does bring life
upon no fewer than all men, though some men after their infranchised ability
restored do wilfully refuse life and light, and do love and choose darkness,
which our Savior says, is the punctual cause of condemnation, John 3.19.

And beloved, the litterall Text makes this truth yet more plain, even to
open view: for from the same ground in the same Chapter, as it is affirmed,
that the Law entered that the offense might abound; so it also restifieth with
this reserve,

But where sin abounded grace did much more abound, ver 20. So hereby is
expressed, that as sin abounded over (no fewer than) all men, as in this Text,
Romans 5.12. and Romans 3.19. so answerably this Text affirms, that grace did
much more abound, where sin abounded; by these Texts compared, it is hereby
proved, even in the very litterall sense, that as all have sinned, even so
grace did much more abound over all men, which is the same still as before,
only further strengthened, that all have sinned, being justified freely by his
grace.

And the reason why this justification, in and by Christ, is extended to all
men, is therewith given to be this, in the same Chapter, Romans 5. That as sin
had reigned unto death (even over all men, ver. 12.) even so (largely and
timely) might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus
Christ our Lord, ver. 21. and as it is here said, that even so (might) grace
reign. So observe, that it is said as has been touched, That he has made him
to be sin for us, that we (might) be made the righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. 5.21. Note that to set forth how many men is meant by the word (we) it is
said in verse 15. that he dyed for all, for the world, verse 19. From thence is
granted, though not that all men are made, but that all might be made in this
life by believing (if they resist not) imputatively the righteousness of God
in him, and might be made at the resurrection of the body, inherently and
perfectly righteous in themselves.

Note herewith, that no one of Adams posterity, either had or shall have an
inherent personal righteousness, either in him, by him, or from him, the
first Adam; yet by Creation it was possible, that they all might have proceeded
from him by generation, inherently righteous, but that possibility being lost
by his fall, we find that there is a restored possibility in and by Christ the
second Adam procured, though not that all men are made, but that by the good
means by Christ performed for all men, and in due season communicated to and
in all men (according to the Text) as all men are by and in Christ made
righteous before God, by a non-imputation of their sins against the Law: So
thereby in their well usage of that ability given, all men might be made
imputatively personally righteous before God, in this life time by their
believing, and in their so abiding might be all made as inherently righteous,
at the resurrection of the body, as Adam was by Creation. For beloved, our
Savior Christ has been, and is, but upon the work of eternal safety, which
he has on his part intended, and does intend to finish for all, if so be that
men do not mar themselves wilfully, upon his well-forming Potters wheel of
restoration, after ability given them to do the contrary, as Adam did for
himself and all his posterity, contrary to Gods gracious prime intent in the
Creation.

For considering that a reconciliation is by Christ made to God, for the sins
of all men, or the whole world; so that thereby their sins against the first
Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.18, 20. are not imputed to them, as is fully
proved in my 20 Distinction. This does undeniably prove the justification of
all men, from all those sins by Christ before God; and from this gracious
justification of all men by Christ, the transgressions against the first
Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans 5.18. or the sins accounted to be directly against
the Father, as in my 9 Distinction, which sins are called the sins of the
whole world, 1 John 2.2. are called the sins past, or the sins which are of
God passed by, Romans 3.25. and from that reconciliation made, they are called
old sins, from which some men are said, through their wilful unbeleefe to
forget that they are purged, 2 Pet. 2.9. and by that reconciliation, those
sins are counted transgressions, not that are, but which were under the first
Testament, Heb. 9.15.

And from that reconciliation made, those sins are said not to be sins that
do reign, but that had reigned unto death, Romans 5.21. although some men do by
their wilful unbeleefe and disobedience, though having so escaped those
pollutions, yet do return with the dog to the vomit, and with the sow that
was washed, to the wallowing in the mire of transgressions against the second
Testament, or Covenant of grace graciously prefented to all men in due season,
by the Holy Ghost.

But notwithstanding this rebellious Apostasy of some men from God, by their
wilful unbeleefe, after their inabling abidingly to believe, as is in my 6 and
7 Distinctions proved that all men are in due season.

Yet beloved we are to observe this still, that all that do believe are
justified, not only from the curse of the Law, and the eternal power which
would have thereby seized on them by the first death, as all men are, whether
any man do believe it or not, but also (in a further sense) they are justified
from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses,
Acts 13.39.

For the clearing of which Text, I entreat you to take notice, that
notwithstanding Christ's so effectual and timely taking away the eternity of
the curse of the Law or first Testament, and abolishing the first death due for
the transgressions against the covenant of works, even for all men, as it is
proved that he has done, in my 4 and 5 Distinctions, from which the Law of
Moses could not justify any man, so that no sins of that nature against the
Covenant of works, or the Fathers Covenant, written with his own finger on
Mount Sinai, Exodus 31.18. are imputed to the world, 2 Cor. 5.18. Col. 1.20.
Romans 5.18, 19, 20, 21. because God has laid upon him the iniquity of us all,
Isa. 53.6. even us, all men, and although this remission is effectually
procured by Christ, to remain for ever, for the benefit of all men, whether
any man do believe, or do not believe the same: Yet notwithstanding men's
actual sins, even to an idle word, Ma. 12.36. are ever since Christ's
ransoming all men by the Fathers estimation and application of the virtue of
his blood (as if it had been actually shed at Adams fall, as is showed in my
ninth Distinction).

Sins not against the Law, but against grace procured by Christ for all men,
from which also the Law of Moses cannot justify any man, which sins whilst
they remain in any man, to be only sins of ignorance, frailty and infirmity,
as Christ has purchased a power to himself, to forgive those sins as Son
of man, Mat. 9.6. Mark 2.16. So he has promised, that verily all those sins
shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, Mat. 12.32. Luke 12.10. even until
they prove sins persisted in against the Holy Ghosts gracious dictates, as
those Texts do manifest, for then those men by those sins so far persisted in,
do totally exclude from themselves, the benefit of the Covenant of grace, and
those persons have then thereby, no relation to receive pardon by the death of
Christ, as is fully proved in my 11 Distinction, for Christ dyed only to take
away the transgressions, which were against the first Testament, Heb. 9.15.
Romans 5.18, 19, 20, 21.

Yet whilst these sins against grace, are not so far persisted in, as is
before said, but do remain as Paul's sins, and others before inlightenment, 1 Timothy 1.13. Acts 12.17. which though indeed being sins against the very
Gospel of grace, yet being sins through ignorance, infirmity, and frailty
acted.

Though the Law of Moses be much more unable to justify those transgressors
for those transgressions, yet they have been, are, and shall be all pardoned (as
men being so restoredly enabled, as before is proved that all men in due season
are) do faithfully endeavor to perform the condition annexed in the second
Covenant, which condition is beleevingly to confide in God and his mercy and
goodness in Christ, where the Gospel is vouchsafed, and where it is not, to
confide in his grace and goodness only, as in my ninth Distinction.

Notwithstanding the strictness of the Law of works, and men's apparent and
abundant falling short, in the performances thereto required, and
notwithstanding their failings through frailty, against the Covenant of grace
also; yet if they fixedly do confide in this only that God is good and gracious
unto sinners, and ungodly ones, strivingly endeavoring to walk before God
accordingly, they are accepted; of which goodness of God, the Holy Ghost does
by one means or other, discover to every man in due season, 1 Timothy 2.4, 6. Romans
1.19. John 1.7, 9.

Yet further note that this faith, though it be in believers, yet also being
considered of, as in reference to themselves, is defective and unworthy, yet
God is pleased by free grace, to account them worthy, and although their works
also are accordingly imperfect, yet he is pleased to impute righteousness unto
them, according to his new treaty made with the world by the application of the
virtue of Christ's blood, as if it had been actually shed at the fall of Adam,
as has been said and proved, 1 Pet. 1.19. Rev. 13.8.

So by this means it appears plainly to our apprehension, not only how far,
and from what all men, even whilst they do remain in unbelief, are fully
and freely, by Christ's performances, justified before God from all that, from
which the Law of Moses could not justify them, this justification remaining
accomplished for ever, for all men, whether any man do believe it or not.

That is to say, from the eternity of the curse of the Law, and first death,
from which the Law of Moses could not justify them; but also it is hereby made
manifest, that those that do believe are justified, not only from the curse of
the Law, and danger of the first death, which was due for the transgressions
against that Law of first Testament, as it is proved all men are, in my 4 and 5
Distinctions; but also abiding believers, according to that Text, 3.39. are
justified also from all (other) things or offenses which never were, or are nor
can be punishable by that Moral Law or Covenant of works, called here the Law
of Moses, neither could, nor can, nor shall the Law of Moses justify them,
from those offenses in any measure: Yet as is said, the obedient humble
believers, are with Paul and others, justified by grace even from their
failings, by ignorance, frailty, or infirmity past, present, or to come, by
them so acted against the Covenant of grace also.

But this justification is peculiar to believers only, in the special
salvation, expressly so accounted of, in 1 Timothy 4.10.

And the general justification of all men by Christ's performances, from the
eternity of the curse of the Law and first death, are gracious effects issuing
from the common salvation mentioned, Jude 3. and accomplished by Christ for all
men, who by removing of the impossibility to be eternally saved, which came
over all men by Adams fall, is the Savior of all men, and so styled in the
same verse, 1 Timothy 4. Yet even the humble obedient believers, though being by
faith so justified before God, and by grace imputed and counted just men before
God, yet even they must live by faith, by the forsaking all selfe-conceited
justification, which shows us the meaning of that place, where it is said,
that even the just (man) shall live by his faith, Hab. 2.4. which is also
affirmed in Rom 4.5.

The twenty fourth Distinction, wherein is proved by plain Texts of Scripture,
that as all men by Adams fall, were blotted out of Gods book of life, that came
in with the Creation; so all men are in and by Christ and his performances
alone, again written in the book of life, that came into the world by Christ's
restoration, and that no one man has been, is, or shall be blotted out
thereof, but by his own personal default, showing also herein, the
fundamental eause of the heretical error of the Papists doctrine, hinting
herein; also what the Lambs book of life is.
HErein we are to consider, that all men were by Creation (respectively in the
first Adam, until his fall) innocent, righteous, and blessed of God, Genesis
1.27, 29. Eccl. 7.29. and also that God affirms, that he blotteth none out of
his book, but in respect of their (not foreseen, but) actual sin, as
appears in Exodus 32.33. being compared with the 23, 30, and 31 verses, in the
same Chapter preceding, and with Ezekiel. 18. being in this point the scope of the
whole Scripture, testifying that God forsakes no man whatsoever he foreknoweth
that men will in future do, until they do personally and actually forsake
him first, as is also fully proved in my 16 Distinction.

And you know, that before Adams fall, no man had sinned, nor actually forsaken
him, so that Adam himself and all his posterity, respectively in him, were all
then overcommers in Gods estimation. Hereto God promises, saying, of him that
overcommeth, I will not blot out his nome not of the book of life, Rev. 3.5.

But upon Adams being overcome by sin, he being the public man, of whom the
Scripture says, the first father has sinned, Isa. 43.27. and so was the
procurer of wrath, whereby he lost in that effect his fatherly place; whereupon
Christ graciously accepts of that general government, and is called the
everlasting father, the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. which has been all along in
this tract, clearly testified, that by the fall of the first father Adam, who
sinned, no fewer than all men, were blotted out of that book of life, for
although none of Adams posterity had then personally and actually sinned, as
appears by Jacob and Esau, Romans 9.11. who are said to have done neither good
nor evil before they were born; yet by the then coming in of sin, the earth
and all the inhabitants thereof, would even then have been dissolved, if Christ
the everlasting Father, and Prince of peace, had not assisted, which
dissolution would have plunged all Adams posterity in a non-being, and would
have also separated Adam for ever, from Gods blessed presence, as is proved in
my 9 Distinction; and then by all men's being blotted out of that book of life,
thereby the blessedness intended of God for all men by Creation was
extinguished, and the blessed first life therewith was ended, and then the
first death entered, which without Christ the everlasting Fathers gracious
performances considered, would have been eternal even over all men, for there
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and death passed
over (no fewer than) all men, Romans 5.12. and that this death was the first
death, antecedent to the second death, mentioned in Rov. 2.11. and 20.6, 14.
appears plainly in this, that this death passed over all men, Romans 5.12. but
the second death set forth in those texts in the Revelations, neither has
done, does, nor shall pass over all men, for there are some men are blessed,
by having a part in the first resurrection, on whom the second death has no
power, Rev. 20.6.

Thus we find that the spiritual book of life, pertaining to the observation
of the first Testament, established by God, as appertaining to the very act of
Creation, was by the shall of Adam into sin and rebellion, utterly nullified,
so that all men by the fall of Adam, as before is said, were blotted out of the
same.

But now beloved, we may easily discern, that of free grace by Gods
foreknowledge of the fall, the shedding of Christ's precious blood for a
propitiation, for those sins of no fewer persons, than the sins of the
whole world, 1 John 2.2. John 1.29. was foreordained before the foundation of
the world 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.

And that also by that unspotted Lamb of God, his being in Gods acceptance and
estimation, accounted of as if he had been slain from the foundation of the
world, Rev. 13.8. And also that by virtue of the same general reconciliation
made, Col. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.10. by that prepared precious antidote, its being so
timely and seasonably applied to the contagion, to expel the poison of those
sins, even at the very entrance of sin into the world, that by that same
efficacious means, the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. or
transgressions against the Moral Law, or first Testament, Heb. 9.15. Romans
5.20. or sins directly against the Father, as in my 9 Distinction, were
perfectly not imputed to them (the world) 2 Cor. 5.18. for God laid upon him
the iniquity of us all, Isa. 53.6. even of us all men, considering he tasted
death for (no fewer than) all men, 2 Cor. 5.15. or every man, Heb. 2.9.

Thereby abolishing the curse of the Law, and the eternity of the power of the
first death, even for all men, as it is proved in my 4 and 5 Distinctions.

Thus Christ, who is the everlasting Father, and Prince of peace, is the light
of the world, John 8.12. and the truth and the life, John 4.6. the
infranchising restoring Adam, Acts 3.21. who swalloweth up the first death in
victory, as is fully proved in my 5 Distinction, by that means he did bring in
a restored life and immortality to light, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10.
whereby appears why it is peculiarly fixed on him, that in him we live, and
move, and have our being, which is not that condition of life, which came in by
Creation, for in that respect, its said, In the beginning God created Heaven
and Earth, and in the plural number, let us make man, in hiding the blessed
Trinity, Genesis 1.26. that life and being was to have stood by the perfect
obedience to the Law of works; but that blessed first life intended for
mankind, being nulled by the fall of Adam for all men, then this
Gospell-restored living, moving, and being of all men, as you see is
appropriated to him our Lord Christ, and his restoration, for all power is
given unto him, in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.18. who in restored immortal
life, at the final resurrection, will fully take possession of all men, good
and bad, believers and unbeleevers, though wilful unbeleevers will turn the
blessedness of that immortal life, formerly intended for them, into a curse,
as appears by those differing sentences pronounced concerning all men, where
it is said, when the Son of Man shall come in his glory, come ye blessed of
my Father, etc. and depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, Mat.
25.31, 34, 41. which saying fully proves the immortality of that cursed life,
which is called the second death; and although some men do thus wilfully
perish in the second death, though being by Christ and his performances,
perfectly delivered from the first death, yet we find, as is before proved,
that life and immortality is brought again to light through the Gospel, by
his restoration from the first death for and to all men, to secure not only
those Apostates, but all men from perishing in that grisly cursed condition of
the first death, which otherwise would have been eternal to all.

By which means accomplished by Christ the everlasting Father, and Prince of
peace, for all men, the restored book of life, wherein all men were then again
(according to Scripture Language) written, entered into the world; for from this
very ground, as I find said, the free gift came upon (no fewer than) all men
unto justification of life, in Romans 5.18. So also I find it thus, verbatim, in
some reformed Bibles, said, Likewise then as by the sin of one, condemnation
came on all men, even so by the justifying of one, comes the righteousness
that brings life upon all men, Romans 5.18.

Thus the grace of God that brings salvation unto (no less number than) all
men, has appeared, Tit. 2.11. And hereby we find that there is a restored book
of life brought into the world, by and with Christ the free gift, his being
given to the world, John 3.16. wherein by him and his costly gracious means
used, all men, were again written; and also accordingly, we find God
graciously appearing to the world again, with this restored book of life, by
Moses his desiring of God for the preservation of the Jewish Nation, saying,
blot me out of the book that thou have written, Exodus 32.32.

Also there is express mention made of his book of life, Psalm. 69.28. but we
need no further in this cause to traverse those records; for as has been
somewhat touched, so more fully to satisfy the world in this very point, it is
plainly said, he that overcommeth I will not blot his name out of the book of
life, Rev. 3.5.

Is not this a clear testimony of Scripture to maintain this canse? we cannot
shut our internal eyes so close, if we be but rational men, but that we must
needs know hereby, considering the book of life, which came in by Creation, was
extinguished by Adams fall, that even those men's names which do not overcome,
were once again written in this book of life, that came in by Christ's
restoration, for else how is it possible that their names should or could be
blotted out of the book of life, for their not overcomming?

But as you see that this is proved in the negative, so for further
satisfaction, behold the same truth also confirmed in the affirmative, where in
Scripture it is said, If any man shall take away from the words of the book of
this prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, Rev.
22.19. Hereby we are enforced to grant that even such offenders have a part in
the book of life, until it be taken away, even out of that book of life for
their offense. For you know those offenders parts cannot be taken away out of
the book of life, if even those so transgressing men, had not formerly a part
even in the book of life.

And whereas at the last great judgment, Rev. 20.11, 12. there is mention made
of books opened, in the plural number: These manifold books may be fitly
understood to be every particular man's book of his own conscience; and whereas
it is said, another book was opened (in the singular number) which is the book
of life; from hence it appears, that those books of the secrets of every
particular man's conscience (their consciences bearing witness, and their
thoughts accusing or else excusing one another, according to Romans 2.15.) shall
be then and there opened together with that one book of life, in the days of
that great judgment aforesaid, or in the day when God shall judge the secrets
of men, according to the Gospel, ver. 16. whereby will manifestly appear, as
it were by a true pair of tallies, that there is no more men's names cut off
from that tally, nor blotted out of Gods book of life, then that the book or
tally of their own Consciences, being comparedly put together to that tally of
Gods book of life, shall clearly make manifest, that God has not blotted out
any one man's name out of his book of life, nor taken away any one man's part out
of that book, but only the names and parts of such men, as have first on their
parts personally and actually given a just occasion for God to deal so with
them; the books of every man's conscience then and thereto clearly justifying
God in all his proceedings. And from these Scripture-discoveries aforesaid,
being considered of together, it appears plainly, that the Lambs book of life,
also mentioned Rev. 13.8, 21, 27. and 10.15. is composed of those, and only of
those over-commers names, which are then found written in that book of life not
blotted out; this the Lambs book of life is the book of remembrance, which by
that means proves the book wherein Gods jewels are recorded, Mal. 3.16, 17.

But how far this Scripture-modell (of the discovery of the common salvation)
in this tract set forth to view, does vindicate the glorification of our
gracious God, in all his holy attributes united. How it presents the amiable
consent and concord of Scripture, agreeing and declaring it self by it self,
with out humane glossing or interpretation, or jarring with it self, as some
men would enforce it to do, by interposing humane art.

And by proving the extent of the common salvation, how excellent, fair,
comfortable, and sure foundation is thereby rendered in Christ, for all
distressed consciences to procure repentance, and to build their faith and hope
upon, as upon a rock, or the sure word of prophecy, until the day dawn; and
the day star arise in their hearts; in the mean time by their patient waiting
for their establishing in the special salvation, depending on the comfortable
general promises, proceeding from God in a common salvation expressed in his
written word; when as on the contrary, all rotten sandy foundations of faith,
built up upon men's altered qualifications, or legal reformations, do either
beget doubting with unsatisfied unbeleeving Thomas, concerning the extent, and
gracious effects of Christ's actual death, and personal resurrection,
especially as in relation to their own eternal happiness: or else for want of
their election, being discovered to them from Heaven supernaturally confirming
their acceptance with God to eternal life, they do either drown themselves in
superstition, or else they do desperately cast themselves headlong into a
dangerous untimely death.

How far this tract by proving the infranchisement, or setting free of all men's
wills in the inward man, mind and will, in due season does take away from men,
the occasion of these and such like blasphemous speeches, by their saying, or
at least in their secret thoughts, concluding thus, or in the like manner; if
God do bestow the ability to repent and believe, but upon a few men, and has
decreed accordingly who be those persons, as I am by some learned men taught:

Then why should I wast my self with melancholy dispute, about my acceptance
with him; for if I be elected, then how careless soever I be on my part, yet I
shall be saved; and if I be reprobated, then how industrious soever I am for
safety, yet I shall be damned, therefore why should I strive for my salvation,
as if I could and would alter or hinder Gods decree?

To prevent which evils; how far the belief of this Scripture-modell,
concerning the infranchisement of the wills of all men in due season, will
enable all men experimentally to confess to the glory of God, and men's own
shame, that the fault is not in the supposed preterition of God, as some men
imagine, but in themselves, in that they will not repent, and in that though
they being by God enabled thereto, yet will not believe or be obedient, whereas
otherwise by their being taught, that God decreedly withholdeth saving means
from some men, they are ready to make advantage of that desperate doctrine, and
to satisfy carnal affections, to lay the fault on God and his partiality,
affirming that they cannot repent, and that by the operation of his decree,
they cannot believe, and so become carelessly desperate.

And although indeed this tract does by Scripture maintain, that no one mere
man, has freedom of will so much, as to think one good thought, much less to
act in the least measure, as savingly acceptable to God, no not by imputation,
as he is naturally descended from polluted Adams loins; Yet how firmly this
tract proves by Scripture, contrary to the Protestant tenent (who do limit the
ability given of God but to some men) that God does by the grace of the
general propitiation, mentioned 1 John 2.2. effectually set free every man in
the inward man, mind and will in due season, so that no one man shall perish
eternally by Gods preterition, for foreseen sinners, before act; as some men
have vainly imagined, that some men as mere Creatures, or for foreseen sins, do
by Gods eternal reprobation or preterition, but only through his own personal
default, actually committed after his inlightenment and infranchisement.

From hence how far God is hereby glorified and justified, in all his promises,
threatenings, rewards and punishments, exhortations and dehortations, being
frequently spoken to all men for them themselves to do, or leave undone, who
will have by Christ in due season, their wills and apprehensions freed, as is by
Scripture proved in my 6 and 7 Distinctions, so that thereby they are enabled
spiritually to hear and understand, and fear, and love, and be obedient to
the faith.

How far this tract discovers, what fallacious scholasticall shifts, some
erroneous Protestants are in many considerable Scripture points, enforced to
use, by reason of their not being guided by the litterall sense of the plain
Texts of Scripture, which do unanimously confirm the common salvation or
infranchisement of all men in the inward man in due season, and that thereby
some of them have and do confirm, that God did by decree by his absolute will
and power only, reprobate some part of mankind, without any respect by him
had, to their doing evil, merely as Creatures, without any cause done, or
foreseen to be done on the creatures part. Thus they charging God contrary to
his own word; with palpable tyrannical partiality, and respect of persons, or
else with some other Protestants, that dare not stand to that horrid and
hideous affirmation, do say that God did not so tyrannically reprobate any man:
But they thinking to moderate the business, yet by being deluded also by
humane art, do as fallaciously maintain, that God fore-knowing all men fallen
into Adams sinning, did only by preterition pass by some men, so as decreedly
they should not have any such means used with them, whereby they might be
enabled in their good use thereof, to obtain eternal life, but that some men
of Adams posterity, must upon necessity eternally perish, though it then could
not be in their own actual sins, yet in those sins which unavoidably, as a
violent irresistible inundation, overwhelmed them originally by another man's
offense, to which sins they never actually consented, and to which
transgressions, they much less personally acted it being committed by Adam,
before they had a being, or before they were born. They by that means rendering
our good God, who is a faithful Creator, unfaithfully forsaking some men of
Adams posterity, even whilst they were, as concerning their own personal
consent, or act, innocent Creatures, and also before they were after the fall
enabled to depend on him, and also before they had actually or personally
forsaken him; which tenent is proved by Scriptures to be absolutely false, in
my 16 and 17 Distinctions, which preterition by them imagined, if you do but
view the intrals of it, you shall find it to be in effect, no other than a
disguised, or masqued tyrannical decreed reprobation; for as has been said,
he that has power, and does keep from a man his sood of livelihood, may as
really kill that man so, as if he cut off his head with a sword.

How far this tract does detect the error that is in the protestant tenent,
concerning Christ's giving himself a ransom for all men, by their affirming,
that Christ does not effectually ransom any man, except that man be eternally
saved, which fallacy is ripped open to view, in my 2, 6 and 7 Distinctions,
wherein is proved, that Christ does effectually ransom all men, and save all
men, from the impossibility to be eternally saved, that came over all by Adams
fall, and estates them by himself, with a possibility in themselves to be
eternally saved.

How far also (though not meddling with the impertinent tradition of popery)
this tract does show plainly, that the many heretical errors of the Papists,
upon which the whole rabble of their false destructive doctrine, and
fantastical ceremonial discipline, does depend, was hatched, and is nursed by
their not making use of the large and true Scripture extent of the common
salvation of all men, in setting free all men in due season, in the inward man,
mind and will, by free grace, so that in their well usage of that means, they
might believe and might be eternally saved; for by the Papists casting away
this Scripture-truth, confirming the gracious setting free of all men's (by the
fall) diabollically captived wills, they do fallaciously affirm, that man has
free will by nature, or by original descent from Adams loins, which natural
freedom of will, by its consenting to good, is the disposing cause of our
justificarion.

For as I find recorded, they say, that works Congruo, are the disposing cause
of our justification, Andrad. in Conc. Trid. Ses. 6.
which as they say is of men's selves, and stands of the assent of men's wills
and reason, and this faith say they is Catholic and perfect, but yet unformed,
and as soon as works are thereto joined they call it formed, and then say they
it is meritorious, condign, and justifies; for say they, we are justified by
faith and charity together, as the disposing cause of our justification as a
necessary cause to obtain at Gods hand, the grace of justification, but rather
by charity, Conc. Trid. Ses. 6.
than by faith, because say they, that charity goes before our justification,
as a necessary cause to obtain at Gods hand, the grace of our justification,
and adoption of his children. Thus by the Papists rejecting the
Scripture-testimony, concerning the setting free all men's wills by free grace,
by Christ procured in the common salvation, as is proved in my 6 and 7
Distinctions, they are so wildred an deluded, that they do heretically
appropriate the disposing power; to act, meritoriously well unto men's well
acting in the freedom of their natural wills. Conc. 6.9.


And because the Scripture does maintain so strongly, that no mere man has
freedom of his will by nature, and that as in the tract is proved, that no
mere man whatsoever, no not Adam if he had stood in his estate of innocence;
much less any believer, who are all as concerning themselves, defective,
cannot, nor could not have the least footstep at any time, in any one thing, to
challenge the least reward as due of debt to them, from their Creators hand,
otherwise than he by whom they are, what they are, and from whom they have
received whatsoever good they have, is pleased according to his Covenant made
by his own free grace, to account them worthy, and that though all believers
are not in themselves in this life righteous, yet by Christ to impute
righteousness unto them that do believe in him, that justifies the ungodly.
But this Scripture-truth is so mortally destructive to their fancied
meritorious life with God, that rather then they will lay down their
bosome-imbraced delusions, and humane traditions, they will venture at one
stroke desperately to hazard to deface the Holy writ it self; and as I find
recorded, that some of their deceived Grandees, have thrust into the world,
this blasphemous conceit, that the written Gospel is but as a nose of was,
Vita Pont.
which may be set or turned diverse ways, as it best pleases the humors of
men, that steer the course for their doctrine and discipline, or as some of
them have said, the written Gospel is but a fable of small profit.

But how far and how clearly this aforesaid tract, does confute these, and many
such like errors, both schismatic, and heretical, and steps in to put an
end to frivolous and fruitless contentions, I leave to the judgment of any
man, who will vouchsafe to give this short Scripture-modell, a considerate
perusal, and does not shrink or draw back from the averment of the truth,
which is infallibly by one gracious means or other (in due season according to
the will of God, 1 Timothy 2.4, 6.) brought to the knowledge of every man; and
thus I do conclude these my 24 Distinstions, for the discovery of the
effectual extent of the common salvation; And the Temple was open in Heaven,
and the four and twenty Elders which sat before God on their seats, fell upon
their faces, and worshipped God, and cast their Crowns before the throne,
saying, Thou art worthy Lord to receive glory, and honor, and power, Rev.
5.11, 14. and the 11.16, 19. And accordingly, that God in Christ may be truly
glorified by his word, and in all his holy attributes united together, to the
great increase of mankinds cordial love, and faith full obedience to God, and
men's augmented comfort in Gods abundant grace, testified in mankinds Jubilee,
is the daily prayers of me, his unworthy Instrument, and thine officious
servant, by, and under the protection and direction of Jesus Christ our
eternal blessed Lord, the everlasting father, and Prince of Peace.

Christopher Wade.

Observations considerable, appertaining to the former discourse.
HEreto I pray you be pleased to take notice, that in the discovery of the
wonderful mysterious conjunction of the Jubilees, with some remarkable
passages of Gods gracious dealing with all men by Christ. As I find by ancient
acute Chronology, that the first Judaicall Jubilee, or the first year of their
Jubilaicall general redemption, without any price paid for their imbondaged,
either in respect of Persons, Lands or Good, Lev. 25. did fall in just upon the
50 Jubilee of the world, counting 50 years for every Jubilee, from the Creation
thereof; for that first Jubilee of the Jews, fell in, as I do find it, upon
the 2500 year aster the Creation, so being not a Jubilee of 50 years, as the
Jews Jubilee was, Lev. 25.10, 11. but a Jubilee of 50 times 50 years, for 2500
years, contains 50 times 50 years; so that thereby it appears, that the first
year of the Jews Jubilee, fell in upon a Jubilee, which was a Jubilee composed
of 50 Jubilees, counting 50 years for every Jubilee, from the Creation from
thence being a Jubilee of Jubilees.

And also as I find, that the 30 Judaicall Jubilee, did fall in just with the
30 year of Christ's age about which time he began to preach, compare Luke 3.28.
with 4.17, 22. Even so it proves by providence (not though of by me, until
after I had entitled this Treatise, Mankind's Jubilee) that this former
discovery of the extent of the common salvation, or Mankind's Jubilee, or good
tidings of great joy for all people, did fall in upon the 33 Jubilee, being
counted 50 years for every Jubilee, from our Savior Christ's birth; which
number of 33 Jubilees being expired in the Jubilaicall year, Anno Dom. ^^50, in
which year I wrote this tract, agrees exactly with the number of 33 year of
our Savior Christ's age, about which time he upon the Cross, did actually and
personally finish Mankind's Jubilee, or general redemption, in such manner,
and to such real ends for all men, as is discovered in this former tract. But
what Gods further intent is, in the marvelous conjunctions of Jubilees, with
the typical general atonement, Lev. 25.9, 10. representing Christ's gracious
performances, and with our blessed Savior Christ's beginning to preach the
Gospel, or deliverance to the captives, that being the condition of all men by
nature, 2 Time. 2.26. and also in the number conjoining this former discovery,
as aforesaid, with the number of the 33 year of Christ's age, about which time
he by his death finished the pacificall propitiation, for no fewer sins, than
the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. I desire humbly to leave to Gods
further gracious manifestation, and your beloved serious consideration.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 11. line 21. read their freedom. p. 40. l. 12. r. well usage. p. 47. l.
7. r. it is said. p. 48. l. 30. r. for them. p. 59. l. 9. r. as if. and l. 28.
r. all the. and l. 37. r. are sins. p. 62. l. 21. r. in the abuse. p. 63. l.
18. r. and gathered. p. 77. l. 18. r. that are. p. 39. l. 21. r. does not
further.


