MERLINI ANGLICI ERRATA.

Or, The Errors, Mistakes, and Mis-applications of Master Lilly's New Ephemeris
for the year 1647.

Discovered, Refuted, and Corrected.

By C. GEORGE WHARTON, Student in Astronomy.

Printed in the year 1647.

To the Reader.
IT is a common Proverb: Dogs bark more for Custom, then Fierceness. And had
I not assuredly known this Whelp Lilly, to be one of that bawling Litter; I
should not have suffered his perpetual snarling with that Patience and temper
I did: but before this, would have alighted from my Saddle, to hurl him one
stone (at the least) to gnaw on. But, as he is now grown bolder, and blacker
in the jaws; I must begin to have an eye over him, and a care to keep him at
a distance, lest he byte me till I bleed, and thereby I become maniaque, or
Brain-sicke like himself, and so be more desirous of his Liver, then his
Heart. I shall scorn to take notice of his former Grinnings; nor will I
trouble my self, or the Reader, with any repetition of his bypast Fooleries,
frantique expressions, and but a few, (if any) of his many Errors and Mistakes,
so grossly committed, in every of his Lowzie-Pamphlets (for them (indeed) I
have tied and twitch'd up together in a Pack-thread, as thinking them fitter
for his Quondam Hell, then the meanest Shelfe in my study) but I will content
my self only, with that dainty bit, this sweet bratt of his own begetting,
Merlini Anglici Ephemeris, the 4th (and perhaps the last) of that name: And
examine I shall, and that strictly, of what metal it is compounded, or
whether it be simple (like the Dad of it) and the truth you have freely, as
follows.

The Errors, mistakes, and mis-aplications of Mr. Lilly's New Ephemeris, etc.
I Will not trouble my self, or the Reader in taking notice of any thing in
his Long-winded-Preface, save only the reverend mention he has made concerning
him, whom he is pleased to term an A. B. C. fellow, viz. Naworth of Oxford, by
whom (as he pretends) he found himself intollerably abused in Print, and
could do no less, then vindicate himself in point of Art,

As for the Name, Naworth, which William Lilly, and John Booker (to make their
Worships merry) have so often, and as wisely, as wittily, inverted to No-worth,
and Worth-nothing: it is well known, to be the Letters of my name long since
transposed, purposely to avoid the Scandal and obloquy, which both these
Mounte-banks so greatly delight in, and endeavor so much to assume. For,
whereas I observed, the Common people generally possessed of a confident
belief, or rather a foolish conceit, that such as could write Almanacks, were
esteemed (with a Country-reverence) Wisemen (like Lilly and Booker) or (if I
shall render it in their own Dialect) Conjurers, or such as can tell all
things, past, present, and to come: And so were usually haunted (by the silly
people) with a number of unlawful, unnecessary, and ridiculous questions by
means whereof, many ingenious and honest Artists, have not only been branded
with the titles of Conjurers, Necromancers, Wizards, Sorcerers, and
Figure-Casters (in the worst sense) but have often been imprisoned, and
Indicted and proceeded against upon the Statute, against Witchcraft, etc. and
hardly escaped with their lives, (especially when they came before Judges, that
were ignorant in, or disaffected to Astrology) after they had suffered several
years imprisonment, and thereby wasted and consumed their estates: I say, that
I having resolved to write yearly, which was not usual without prefixing a
name; (nor for the reasons abovementioned, would I then publish any thing of
that nature, in my own name:) I therefore Anagramatiz'd my name to Naworth,
and by that Name I writ an Almanac for several years together, and continued
unknown, unless to some two or three of my friends; whereby I seasonably
prevented the before-named inconveniences and hazards, which otherwise I should
inevitably have shared of: And I presume that in doing this, I neither wronged
my self, nor abused the Country where I lived: And what ever other witty
construction may be made thereof, by these two trifling Gypsies; by this they
may perceive, I took no delight (as they do) to be termed a Conjurer, a
Magician, a Cabalist, a Merline, a trucking Mercury, or any thing else, whereby
they desire, and endeavor so much to promote, and propagate their deceitful
and unwarrantable dealings.

And whereas Lilly, in the same Preface, charge me under the same name to
have wrested many false judgments from Astrology, against the Parliaments
actions, intending thereby to prepossesse the Kingdom with a vain fear, that
his Majesty and his designs should take place, etc. I must tell him, that
this his Accusation, is most maliciously false: And let him show me (if he can)
but one Aphorism, or Sentence that ever I delivered, for which I either quoted
not my Authors, or gave a sufficient reason in Astrology: or that ever (of
which I shall hereafter prove him apparently guilty) I wrested any part of
Astrology from the Genuine sense thereof, either to make for his Majesty, or
against the Parliament? And if it has pleased God, to suffer the loyal party
thus to be trampled over, it is for their sins: and carries with it a
supernatural Cause and Reason above the stars, which could not be discerned by
the clearest mortal eye. No Symtome of such (our sufferings, could be read, or
observed by any man in the great Book of Heaven; but rather the quite
contrary, as I could instance for many reasons in Astrology: And whatsoever I
spoke, or writ, was (as your own sense implies) ever with submission to divine
Providence.

But I will not busy my self so much, as to examine and retort every Tatter
of his ragged-Preface: nor shall I need to vindicate his Majesty's Officers,
(whom he is therein pleased to term Ravenous) from his polluted lips: I see
no reason why they may not meet with a fitter occasion and opportunity to
requite him: but the thing I have proposed to my self, is first, to ferret the
poor Quack in point of Art, and afterward in matter of Judgment.

The first thing, and indeed the only thing that is worth my observation is, his
Transcript of Eichstadius his Ephemerides, for the year 1647. wherein (indeed)
he has taken a great deal of pains, and deserves to be commended for this
indifatigable Labor: but withal, I must tell him, that he has therein
greatly betrayed his own ignorance in Astronomy, or showed himself
exceedingly negligent and careless, in that he has not fitted the places of
the Sun, Venus, and Mercury, (but especially the Moon,) to the Meridian of
London, as he has done (to his thinking) in the Lunations and aspects of the
Planets, nor (which had been more easy, and sooner done) prescribed any Rule,
or Direction, whereby to supputate their true places for that Meridian, or any
other place of the Kingdom: And this Error he has been guilty of throughout
the two former years: whereby our young Tyro's are much deceived in the
Merline, when they think they have the places of those Planets therein exactly
Calculated to the Noone-tide of every day at London: for, although in the
higher Planets, whose motion is but slow, there be no sensible difference:
yet, in the Sun, Venus and Mercury, there is an apparent error: For, when they
are in their swift motion, their places at noone, as Lilly has set them, will
differ above 2. min. and often 3. min. from the truth: And in the Moon (whose
motion is far swifter then any other of the Planets) her Error is
intolerable (especially when she is in her swift motion.) For example: the
first of January 1647. the Diurnall motion of the Moon is 12. degr. 24 min.
(being then but in her slow motion.) The difference of Meridians, betwixt
London and Uraniburge^ to which place the Longitude of the Planets, (as Will.
Lilly has printed them) were Calculated by Eichstadius,) is 50 minutes, (by
his own confession in his Anglicus 1645. Page 54.) that is, the Sun comes
later to the Meridian at London, then he does at Uraniburge, by 50 min. of
time; so that how much soever the Moon moves (according to longitude) in that
space of time? by so much has Lilly erred in the Moons true place at noon,
for every day in the year: which, what it is for the said first of January; I
examine thus:

If the Moon in 24 hours, move 12 degrees, 24 minutes in Longitude, What
moves she in 50 min. of time?

Facit 26. min. fere.

And by so much has Lilly erred from her true place the said first of January
at Noon: So that whereas he has placed her that day in 21 degrees, 10 min. of
Pisces, she ought to have been in 21 degrees 36 min. of the same Sign.

And when she is in her swift motion, he commits a greater Error: as the tenth
of March 1647. (if you examine it according to the former rule) you shall find
just half a degree (or 30 min.) error; and in stead of 26 degrees, 3 min. of
Virgo, (wherein Lilly has put her that day) she should be in 26. degree 33
min. of the same Sign.

The next thing which I mean to take notice of, is, his Scheme erected to the
Apparent time of the Moons Eclipse upon the tenth of January 1647. at 9.
hours and 19 min. P. M. as he has taken it from Eichstadius, by deducting 50
min. for the difference of Meridians betwixt London and Uraniburge: and to the
same time I erect the Figure of Heaven, according to the Doctrine of
Regiomontanus; and comparing his printed Scheme with that, which I had more
curiously set, I find Lilly still bungling and botching, but without any result
of truth: For, whereas he has made the Cuspe of the tenth House 22. degrees 20
min. of Gemini, according to exact Calculation, it is no less then 23. degr.
30 minutes, whereby it appears, that Master Lilly has mistaken 1 degree, and
10 mi. in the Cuspe of the Medium Coeli.

And in the Ascendent of the same figure, he has mistaken above one whole
degree, viz. 1 degr. 10 min. for he has made the Cuspe thereof but 23 degrees.
and 51 min. of Virgo, which should have been 25 degrees, and 1 min. and the
like Errors follow in the seventh house of the Figure; and proportionably in
all the rest, which makes me wonder with what face this senseless botcher dares
term me an A. B. C. fellow, when all men may perceive him so shamefully
ignorant in the very fundamentalls of the Art he pretends to, and that I am
able to correct him in every point and particle of his Profession: For, I
desire the Reader to consider but thus much with me, that if (as Sir
Christopher Heydon has said, in his unparalleled Treatise, written in defense
of Judicial Astrology against Mr. Chambers) that Astrology is an Art which
teaches by the Motions, Configurations, and influences of the Signs, Stars,
and Celestial Planets to Prognosticate of the natural effects, and mutations
to come in the Elements, and these inferior and elementary bodies: How (I
pray) is it possible, that this fellow can Prognosticate rightly of the
natural effects and Mutations to come in the Elements, and these inferior and
elementarie bodies, before he be able to Calculate exactly the true motions and
configurations, etc. of the Signs, Stars and Planets, which you clearly see,
he is not? And I marvel much that Lilly should be no more tender and
cautilous of his credit, then thus foolishly and frequently to divulge his
unskilfulnesse: for me thinks, as he knows that he cannot Calculate the
houses exactly, either by the Doctrine of Sphericall Triangles, or (which is
more ready, and built upon the same foundation) by the Tables of Directions in
Regiomontanus) to the degree and minute of each Cuspe, yet he should have held
it a safer way (if he purposed to palliate his defects) to have set down the
Cuspes only in whole degrees, and not have published himself thus erroneously
scrupulous, which he might have done very easily, by the Domifying tables,
without further help. But I perceive him so impudent, and shameless, that he
neither heeds, nor cares what he does, or otherwise he would have been more
wary in supputating the places of the Planets: For (according to Eichstadius,
whom he endeavors to follow) the Sun (at the middle of the Eclipse) should
have been in 56 minutes of Aquarius, and the Moon in 56. min. of the Opposite
Sign Leo, Venus in Capricorn, 24 degr. 29 min. and Mercury in Aquarius, 3
degr. 17 min. But this man's discretion has put the Sun in 53 min. of
Aquarius, and the Moon in 53 min. of Leo, Venus in 24 degr. 39 min. of
Capricorn, and Mercury in the 3 degr. 20 min. of Aquarius; So that he has
erred 3 min. in the places of the Luminaries, and Mercury; and 10 min. in
Venus, as may appear to every man, that will take the pains to Calculate the
true places of these Planets by Eichstadius his Tables, to the Mean, or Equal
time of the said Eclipse.

And in like manner, has he played the Botcher in his Figure at the Vernall
ingresse: for according to the time therein posited, the Cuspe of the tenth
House ought to be 13 degr. 44 min. of Taurus, and the Ascendent 25 degr. 48
min. of Leo, yet he has made the tenth House 14 degr. 0. min. of Taurus, and
the Ascendent 26 degr. 0. min. of Leo: so that he has committed 16 min. Error
in the Cuspe of the tenth House, and 12 min. in the Cuspe of the Ascendent, nor
is he less erroneous in collocating of the Planets here, then in the former
Figure, but especially in the Moon, whom he has placed in 27 degree 48. min.
of Virgo, whereas she ought to have bin in 28 degr. 14 min. of that Sign,
wherein he has mistaken no less then 26 minutes.

And thus much I conceive sufficient to prove his ignorance, in point of Art:
Now will I also unmaske his Errors, defects, mistakes, and mis-applications in
matter of judgment.

I will not meddle with, or question upon what grounds Prince Charles left his
Native. Country of England, nor who were the original causers of this his so
long absence; It is sufficient that Will. Lilly confesses him to be Enforced
upon necessity, exiled, or banished, for the honor of the English Parliament.

I will not enquire further, then of the Scottish Papers, whether the King be
at present restrained of his Liberty, as Lilly tells us he is; Nor dare I
interrogate by what Law of God, or Man, the King of Englands Person, ought to
be imprisoned, or be disposed of, by either, or both of the two Kingdoms, or
by any, or all of his Subjects: Or whether His imprisonment, etc. be intended
for the defense of his Majesty's Royal Person, etc. and the Liberty of the
Subject? Or how it can consist with the Honor of the English Parliament to
suffer his Majesty's Honor thus to lie at the stake, and his Sacred Name to
be traduced, by such Pamphlet-mongers as Lilly and Booker, and that
Pillory-man Walker, without any restraint, or punishment.

Neither do I care, whether the Eclipse in Aug. 1645. pre-signified the P. of
the Earl of Essex, or whether he have merited so much Honor, as to have a
Statua in Crown Gold erected at the Charges of William Lilly, and an Epitaph
made (and thereon engraven) by Martin Parker, or Mercer (the Scot;) These
things are all beside my Text, my intention being only to examine Master
Merlin's Astrologicall discourse, and to show him, and all men wherein it is
invalid, and no more.

The judgment he has given, is generally deduced from the position of the
Heavens, at two distinct points of time, viz. From the Lunar Eclipse the 10 of
January, 1647 Suns entrance into Aries, March 10.

The Eclipse he makes the first general subject of his Discourse, the effects
whereof of (as he tells us) may be somewhat put forward by reason of a
non-apparent Eclipse in the 15th degree of Capricorn, December 26. 1646.

What the Simpleton means by Putting forward, I know not, it is no term in
Astrology: but surely I have Put him out of doubt in my Prognostication 1647.
that Eclipses are not hurtful at all to those Regions, or Cities, where they
are not visible; yet lest the testimony of that learned Author therein
mentioned should not be enough to convince him of his Folly, I shall further
recommend unto him the words of Cardanus upon Ptolomy, lib. 2. cap. 5. Text 26.
(if he can translate them any better then he has done the first 50 Aphorisms
of the Centiloquie) they sound thus; Ut igitur locus a deliquio affici^ debeat
in Luna, duo sunt necessaria: unum quod Luna tunc temporis in hemisphaerio
superiore illius loci sit, and cum provincia illa concordet signo, vel trigono
saltem: secund^ cum civitate in solis loco, vel Lunae, vel Ascendentis, vel cum
medio coeli illius qu^ regit civitatem ipsam.

In sole vero necessarium est, praeterid quo^ fit supra terram, and conveniat
locus ejus provinciae vel civitati Eclipsis ipsa appareat.

Whereby it is clear, that unless (in a Lunar Eclipse) the Moon be above
the Earth, and likewise on the Sign, or at least in the Triplicitie of that
Sign, whereunto the Kingdom (in whose Hemisphere the Defect happens) is
subject: And unless that the Sun, or Moon place, or the Sign ascending or
Culminating, be also the Horoscopicall sign of the City, or Town (you live
in, or enquire after) the effects of such a Lunar Eclipse, shall not any way
concern that Kingdom or City.

But in a Solar Eclipse it is necessary, (besides that the Sun be above the
Earth, and that his place agree to the Kingdom, or City,) that the Eclipse be
also visible to the Kingdom or City, or otherwise the effects shall in no
wise concern the one, or the other.

Now the Solar Eclipse, here (by him) mentioned, is not visible at all to us,
for it appears in the Islands de S. Pedro, Barbados, de Don Alfonso, de
Praxaros, and to such as sail beyond the Equator, and under the Tropic of
Capricorn through the Persian Sea: and (indeed) in 13. and 14. degrees. of North
latitude, it will be a very great Eclipse but of what concernment is this to
England; or why should it put forward this Lunar Eclipse in January, seeing it
is neither visible to us (for at London it happens at their 11. aclock at
night, and so the Luminaries are both under the Horizon,) nor yet is the degree
Eclipsed in the Sign, or Triplicitie of that Sign whereunto either England or
Scotland are thought to be subject, which is required (by Cardanus his Rule)
before the effects can concern either. Whereby it appears that this
Nonapparent Solar Eclipse can no way help or harm us, nor augment, or put
forward the effects of the Lunar Eclipse, and that William Lilly in thus
preferring his own idle fancy, beyond the experience, and more solid Reasons
and Rules of Campanella, Cardanus, and of all other Authors that ever I read,
or heard of, has very much abused the Reader, and rendered himself a very
Novice and fondling in Astrology.

As touching the Lunar Eclipse in January 1647. I have writ of it already in
my Prognostication, wherein you may see what the effects of it are; and those
that desire further satisfaction, may have recourse to Origanus, page 460. upon
Mercury's being Lord of an Eclipse, as he is of this. But although this Lunar
Eclipse be visible, and fall out in a sign of the Fiery triplicity, and in
that respect does generally concern England: yet in regard it is so small,
viz. but 4. digits, 47 min. 42 sect. its effects will scarcely be felt, or
observed by any body; For, as, Eclipses nihil nocent illis Regionibus in quibus
non videntur; So, parvae Eclipses parum nocent, and in pauca operantur.

It is true, as both ( Lilly in his Anglicus, and I in my Prog.) have in effect
observed, that, in caeremoniis, religione (to which he adds in reditibus
regiis) ac legibus mutationes affert: A likelihood (as he says) of some
change, or alteration in Church affairs, in the Revenues of Kings, or more
properly, in such matters as at present the Parliament make use of, for
maintenance of their Wars and affairs: and of altering or abolishing many
laws formerly in use. All this I grant him, and why may it not admit of thus
much malignancy in the application thereof, viz. That the Kingdom are weary of
the Presbireriall Government, and will not endure the smell of Elders, for
Gentlemen are (commonly) Scholars, and do naturally affect freedom in the
Exercise of their Religion, and scorn to be constrained to give an account of
their Belief to Broom-men, Cobblers, Tailors, and Tinkers, or to any such
illiterate, mechanique and profane fellows, or to subject their
understandings to the sense and interpretation of so unsanctified a Society,
and shall therefore wish for, and (most justly) endeavor a change of
Government in the Church. So likewise may his Majesty's Revenue (so long
detained from him) be in a better possibility of regaining, or in some part
restored to him, or at least great means used to persuade those that have
usurped the Possession and profits thereof to resign and account. And that
many Ordinances, Orders, and Votes that have passed and been formerly enjoined,
and observed, as Laws must admit of alteration and abolishment: but (as I have
formerly noted) these things will not be done effectually this year, in regard
of the smalness of the Defect, so that we shall be scarce sensible of its
operation. Yet without all doubt the Dragons head in the tenth House (in the
intercepted sign Cancer) bodes very much good to his Majesty to be begun and
wrought by the Scottish Nation, who shall partake of that influence. And whereas
Lilly adds, that C^lerem Regis, Principis, vel nobilissimi viri alicujus
infirmitatem, vel praeclari viri cujuspiam mortem adducit: That this small
Eclipse portends some sudden infirmity, or casualty to a King, Prince, or
worthy man, perhaps some eminent and famous Man's death, etc. he had done well
to have cyted his Author, or given his Reasons for what he says here, for I
cannot pick out any such signification from this Eclipse, as Mercury is truly
and really Lord thereof: nor as he has made Mars and Saturn to be sharers
with him: Indeed Mars stirrs up Wars, intestine Seditions, tumultuous uprores,
the wrath of Princes, and by that means some unexpected slaughter: And Saturn
premonstrates perturbation of the Humors, Fluxes, and Quarten Feavours,
Poverty and Banishment, Dearth Penury, etc. but I find no such sudden
infirmity, or casualty to befall any King or Prince, etc. as he chattles of,
yet I Will undertake for him, that if prince Griffith should but this year fall
asunder of the Pocks; the next year after, Lilly will tell you that this
Prediction was verified in him. Nor know I any reason why Scotland should be at
all concerned in it, seeing the Eclipse happens in the Fiery Trigon, and that
the Ascendent of Scotland, which is Cancer, is of another, viz. the Watery
triplicity, nor at all aspected by the Sign, wherein the Eclipse happens,
nor afflicted by either of the Malevolents, but rather fortified by the
presence of the Dragons Head in it (as before I noted) in the Mid-heaven; and
although the Eclipsed Body be Dispositrix of the sign Cancer, yet for the
reasons formerly given, the effects of the Eclipse cannot be at all discerned
in Scotland, or scarce in any part of England, and therefore it is but a
foolery in William Lilly to make such a fluttering and a noise about nothing:
But I am well pleased to hear him scatter that one truth (if so it prove) that
the Scots will stand like Oaks unshaken to their first Principles, etc. It
behooves some body else to remember their Covenant, etc. And truly the Scots do
owe William Lilly a great many thanks for his confiding Epithites: but I
fear, I fear I shall hear him ere long, lash out of his open Sepulcher as
much and as vildly as ever he did against the King and the Cavaliers, though
now he Court them, with the Titles of Prudent and Wise People. I hope they will
be wise enough, for those they are to deal with.

What he says against the Irish is not material: the more the Fox is cursed,
the better he thrives. But I suspect Lilly to be one of those London
Adventurers, who were dividing the Bears skin, before he was taken, (as his
Majesty once told them) If he were, I presume a man might purchase Lilly's
share of the Land in Ireland, at an easy rate: And although out of his Malice
he tell them their Ruins approaching, and threaten them with Cupps, and even
brimmers of vengeance; I believe he may drink them their off himself, before
they once pledge him. And although Booker (in his bloody Irish Almanac) has
disgorg'd a filthy and confused heap, and mass of misery, ruin and vengeance
to befall that Kingdom, yet you have not heard of any considerable loss that
they have sustained since first that malicious lying Pamphlet peeped out into
the world, which bears date on Tuesday the 17th of March, 1645/6. But on the
contrary have been exceeding victorious, and successful beyond expectation,
and at this present have all, or the most part of the Garrisons and strong
Holds in that Kingdom under their subjection; But I shall not (at present)
take any more notice of that notorious piece of Nonsense of John Bookers,
because I have reserved the Examination and confutation thereof, to a
particular discourse coming out shortly, wherein I discover his gross Errors
and mistakes in point of Art, and plainly prove that his Pamphlet to be stuffed
with nothing but inveterate malice, and unparalleled ignorance.

Lilly. J will add no distempered conceptions to this Discourse ensuing, lest
J be thought an Incendiary, J can break out at what time J shall see my Pen
may be useful, and profitable for the cause J so much honor,etc.


Wharton. No (Sir) you must first have your Ink tempered, before you can
counterfeit without suspicion: those things you call your conceptions so
natural Rough, must be first Polished, before they can advantage the Cause,
and run smoother, and with more show of truth ere they shall deceive me. You
dare not, you will not heartily, and impartially relate what you find recorded
in the Register of Heaven, lest you should be taken for an Incendiary: that
is, one that moves not by the wyre of the great Engine, one that speaks the
truth without fear, or flattery; and 'twere your utter undoing, should the
least scruple of ingenuousnesse be observed in your Lines. Therefore (say you)
I can break out at what time I shall see my Pen may be useful and profitable
for the cause; That is to say, when I perceive the Scots and the Parliament
fall asunder, and dis-joynted in their opinions and affections, then will I
make the Stars every minute pick quarrels with the Scots, I shall then break
out of a sudden, and prophecy nothing but loss, ruin, and destruction, and
beggary, to that perfidious Nation: And that the States of England shall be
victorious over them: I shall encourage our Soldiers, and disanimate the
Enemy, etc. whereby I hope to be useful and profitable for the Cause I so much
honor, and be rewarded well for my pains.


Lilly. The English wearied with the sad attendents of War, seem at this
present Suns ingresse into Aries, to be desirous of Peace, yet not willing to
be baffled, or curbed by any neighbor Nation, Kingdom, or People, or to have
Laws imposed on them, contrary to their native humors and Customs, etc.


Wharton. Great cause have the English, and especially the poor Inhabitants of
the North to groan under, and to be weary on, and to shake the intolerable
burden from off their shoulders, which so long they have been forced to trudge
under like so many Asses: but where is the man that sometimes so much hugged
himself with the very name of Liberty, that endeavors now but to ease, though
not to free the poor Country from that bondage and slavery? who was the cause
of their present misery? who was is that hired, and brought your dear
Brethren (the Scots) first into the bowels of this Kingdom? and where lies
the fault now they are not sent home again? Have the Scots baffled and
outwitted your wise and grave Senators? Have they put you in mind of your
Covenant, and thereby blasted the fruit of your four years --? What pity it
is you must not enjoy your Humors; what grief it is you must yet be troubled
with a King?


Lilly I do still confide in the Integrity of the Scottish Nobility and
Clergy, and hope there may be unity betwixt the two Nations,etc.


Wharton. You Confide, and you Hope, but what is that to the Portents of
Heaven? It is expected that you should Astrologically, and thereby impartially
relate, what the Signs, Planets, and Stars do premonstrate to happen in
these Kingdoms, what signs they have of War, or what of Peace. Or in plain
terms, whether the former Unity and League, betwixt the Scots and the
Parliament is likely to be broken, or continued: and of this it is that people
would be satisfied, and not of your hopes, and your confidence, and yet any man
that warily reads you, shall find you very dubious in your expressions, and to
carry your self so cunningly, and in so equal a poize, that (for ought I have
observed, the Reader may be as well satisfied (in that point) from Erra Pater,
as from your Anglicus, as hereafter shall appear. And now we have done with
the Prologue, the play begins.


Lilly. Come we now to the matter, and let us believe this will be a year of
admiration, if we do credit Bonatus, fol. 514. Aspice etiam in revolutione
Anni, utrum Jupiter ingrediatur in ^, vel sit in eo quoniam tunc augmentatur
ejus virtus, and majorificantur ejus significata, significat enim res magnas
and mutationes mirandas, and nominatas and durabiles, ad bonum tamen, etc.
Behold, says he, if Jupiter in the Revolution of a year be in Cancer, or
enter that year into that Sign, then shall his influence, virtue, and such
actions as he naturally signifies, be exceedingly augmented, and take place to
purpose, then are matters designed by him exalted and magnified, then shall be
wonderful alterations, and eminent changes upon the Earth, matters durable and
tending to the benefit of mankind, or all things inclining to Peace and
Tranquillity,etc.


Wharton. Having already discovered his decrepednesse in point of Art, I come
now to rip him up in matter of judgment, and shall begin with this his first
Aphorism, wherein the Reader may observe himself sufficiently abused, in the
very quotation thereof: for, whosoever will pursue that place of Guido, Colum.
514. may observe, that Lilly (to fit the words for his turn) has left out at
least two lines of the Aphorism. For, thus the words are in Guido: Aspice
etiam in revolutione anni, utrum Jupiter ingrediatur in ^, vel sit in eo maxim
in 15. grad. ejus, quoniam tunc augmentatur ejus virtus, and majorificantur
ejus significata, Et eo fortius si receperit dispositionem alicujus fortunarum
significabit enim res magnas, and mutationes mirandas and nominatas, and
durabiles, ad bonum tamen, etc. So that the words here marked (by a different
Letter) he has quite expunged, whereby it is plain, that this Aphorism has
but little force, unless that Jupiter were in the 15 degree of Cancer (which
now he is not) or that he received the disposition of the Fortunes, which in
this Revolution he does not, for Jupiter is in the 28 degr. 25 min. of Cancer,
and within 3 degrees of Malevolent Mars, whereby he is much afflicted and
weakened: and although he be in the Sign of his Exaltation, yet he is there
slow in motion, Occidentall of the Sun, and Retrograde, and Planeta Retrogradus
nihil boni significat, donec dirigatur, A retrograde Planet has no
signification of that which is good, until he be direct. It is true, that
within five days, he begins to move slowly forward, yet, that brings him to a
perfect Conjunction with Mars the 23 day of March, and they will not be fully
separated from each others Beams of a sudden, by which Jupiter is very much
debilitated: And notwithstanding that Mars is in his Fall, yet he is the
strongest save one in the Figure; so that I cannot perceive upon what ground in
Astrology he should Prognosticate of Peace and Tranquillity from the Position
of Jupiter in the latter part of Cancer, considering him so weak and unhappy,
by reason of his Conjunction with Mars, etc. and that he stays no longer in
that Sign then the 15 of April. Besides, let him consider what Messahalack
tells him: Conjunctio Jovis and Martis significat accidentia quae fiunt ex
pluviis, and nivibus, and corruptionem aeris atque bellum: Si autem vincit in
eorum Conjunctione fortuna, significat fortunam, and si malus malum: Scito
etiam quia quotiescunque juncta fuerit fortuna cum malo, apparebit natura
fortioris eorum, etc.

The Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars has signification of such Events as are
caused of Rain and Snow: It foretells corruption of the Air and War: And if
a Fortune predominate at the time of their Conjunction, he signifies that
which is wholesome and good, but if a Malevolent, the contrary: understand also,
that so often as a fortunate Planet shall be joined with a Malevolent, the
natural Effects of that which is strongest shall appear.

Now if William Lilly could but have set a Figure rightly to the Apparent time
of this Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, which happens (by the Rudolphine
Tables) upon the 23 day of March, at seven a clock and 14 min. P. M. in the
Meridian of London, and would but have taken the pains to collect the several
Fortitudes and Debilities of Each Planet at the time of their meeting, he might
have found Mars much stronger then Jupiter, and likewise elevated above him (
secundum Latitudinem:) he might also have observed the Conjunction to be in
Scotlands Horoscopicall Sign, and near the Cuspe of the 10. House, Saturn
(their Senators Significator) unfortunatly posited in the house of Death, etc.
And the Moon (his Majesty's as being Lady of the tenth House, and Dispositria
of the Conjunction in the fifth in a mutual Reception with Jupiter, beholding
Saturn with a Sextile aspect, and the Sign Cancer with a Trine: and Venus yet
in her Detriment, and applying to the Quartile Aspect of Jupiter and Mars: and
the Sun the other Significator of his Majesty in his Exaltation, etc. with
Mercury in the 6. House from the Ascendent: Which several Positions being
deliberatly considered, and rightly applied, could have afforded him but small
ground of pronouncing Peace and Tranquillity.

Moreover, Conjunctio Jovis and Martis, significat mortem divitis and magnae
famae, idque eo fortius, si fuerit in Signo fixo: The Conjunction of Jupiter
and Mars, portends the death of a rich and famous Man, and so much the rather
if it happen in a fixed Sign: but Cancer is a moveable Sign, and by so much
the less fear there is of the death of such a person: I rather conceive that
this Aphorism presages only that some such person shall have his Honor, (and
may be his life) questioned, and be thereby in some peril of being deprived
of both. However, you may perceive by what has bin said, that William Lilly
has greatly deceived the Reader, by this false quotation out of Bonatus, and
that all things considered, he had no cause or ground in Astrology to delude
the world with a vain hope of Peace and Tranquillity, when nothing but
Contention, Warring, and Bloodshed is threatened by the great dominion of Mars,
and the unfortunate positure of Jupiter in the Revolution. And if Lilly would
learn when this shall happen Lupoldus will tell him; Belli tempus est cum
fuerit Mars in opposito, vel Quartili aspectu Jovis, vel Saturni: When Mars
shall be in an Opposite, or Quartile Aspect of Jupiter or Saturn: And when is
that? Let but our Ephemeris-master look in May 1647. and against the 22. day
he shall find a hateful Square between Saturn and Mars; and in October
following upon the 21 day will be a most terrible Opposition of Saturn and
Mars, which will be very dreadful and ominous to many parts of England and
Scotland; and upon the 28. day of the same October, is another Square betwixt
Jupiter and Mars: and no doubt but we shall hear of much Contention and
Bloodshed about those times. I have noted every of these Aspects
beforementioned in my Calender for 1647. against the day of the Month whereon
they happen, to which I refer you.


Lilly. In the interim let those whom it may concern (and many are herein
concerned) receive from me this Astrologicall Caball judgment, either in
jest, or in earnest, as they please, etc.

He or they, King or Kings, Prince or Princes, Nobles, Gentlemen, or of any
Quality soever, shall endeavor the advance of a Foreign Army or State
amongst us (as it is certainly determined) to yoke us, and destroy this present
Parliament, he or they shall never attain his or their desires, shall perish
in the Design, shall never again make his or their peace with this Kingdom
of England. I know we are threatened, it must be so, but woe to the invader;
Invaders, or procurers of our Invasion; the Invaded shall prevail, viz. the
Parliament and Commonalty of England; and although we shall be in danger of
betraying, yet shall we behold another providence contradicting that
Treachery, even in the nicke of time, for this Kingdom ofEngland, is not
ordained until the worlds end, to be any more conquered, we shall give, but
not receive Laws, etc.


Wharton. All the ambition and aim of this trifling fellow is to be thought a
Necromancer, a Conjurer, another Lullius, Trithemius, or the Ghost of Agrippa,
or what ever you will have him to be, so he may but obtain a popular esteem,
and by that means more easily cozen and cheat the poor people of their
money, for otherwise why should he monstre such a confured heap of ridling
trash without giving any reason, or naming any Author for what he says: and if
you peruse it seriously, and compare it with the 4. last lines of the 4th
following Page, you will find him plainly contradicting himself, for whereas
in his Caball judgment, he says that the Advance of a Foreign Army or
State is certainly determined to yoke us and destroy the Parliament, etc. yet
there he affirms that we shall not be oppressed with any invasive, or
domestique War: And if Invasion were but attempted, I believe it would puzzle
us, and more then oppress us: But were Astrology the ground of this judgment
of his, he might have told us a more probable, though not so pleasant a story
as he concludes with. For, let this Cabalist but look into Lupoldus de
Revolutionibus, and he shall find these words, Victor erit qui invadit, si
dominus 4tae, vel 7ae in prima fuerit, vel in 10ae. If the Lord of the fourth
House, or the Lord of the seventh House shall be in the Ascendent or
Mid-heaven, it signifies that the Invader (or Invaders) shall prevail against,
and overcome the Invaded. And now (Good Man Merline) is not Saturn Lord of the
seventh House, and posited almost in the very Cuspe of the Tenth? If this
Aphorism prove true (as possibly it may, if the Scots and Parliament fall to
pieces) you must invent other Epithites for the Scots, then Prudent, Wise, and
Religious people, or else I know what will become of you. I will not urge this
Aphorism any further, as how far it may concern Ireland, or France, etc.
lest I be counted an Incendiary; but a few months longer will produce a
Miracle, etc.

And for this Caball judgment, be it in jest, or be it in earnest, I hold it
for no better then a mere Scar-crow purposely devised to deter his Majesty's
friends from any longer adhering to him; but it is in vain, for so much true
Policy have that Party, that if any design were a foot, whereby to restore his
Majesty to the Rights of his Crown, etc. and to regaine their own, they
would not be discouraged in the prosecution thereof, upon the reading of your
fooleries, and this (sir) you may believe upon the reputation of a Cavaliere.


Lilly. If we consider the profectionall Figure of the last Conjunction of
Saturn andJupiter, we shall find Aries ascending, and the Sun, Saturn,
Jupiter, and Mercury all in Cancer, both the one figure and the other, as also
that of the Annual return of the Sun to his place at the Parliaments
beginning promise us exceeding fair this year, etc.


Wharton. I have considered the Profectionall Figure of the last Conjunction
of Saturn and Jupiter, and find the Sun, Saturn Jupiter and Mercury, as you
say all in Cancer; yes, and more then that I observed Aries ascending, and
Pisces Culminating, Venus in Gemini, and Luna in Libra: and I have made
inspection into the sixth Revolution of the Sun, to his place at the
Parliaments beginning, and there I meet with the seventh degree of Virgo
ascending, and the last degree of Taurus Culminating, and that Mercury Lord of
the Ascendent is in 12 degr. 45 min. of Scorpio and subradiis solis: and the
Moon is in 5 degr. 20 min. of Aquarius in opposition to Jupiter and Mars, who
are near unto a perfect Conjunction in the eleventh House of the Figure in
Leo, and she is also hastening to a Quartile with Saturn in the ninth. And I
think (sir) you will not deny but that Mercury and the Moon are your Senators
significators: so that how fair soever you imagine these positions to promise
you: I am assured they will perform but slowly, you had done well to have
shown us some testimony of the Peace you mention, but as you have denied us
that favor, let me instance you one testimony to cross your conceit. You may
see (sir) that Jupiter and Mars are there also in Conjunction, and that in Leo,
a Sign of the Fiery Triplicitie, which is far worse then their Conjunction
in Cancer; for, Mars in Leone significat bella and contentiones, and paucitatem
annonae in partibus orientalibus, and erit Mars in hominibus, and maxim in
juvenibus 40. Annorum usque ad 50. in pueris tamen erit hoc fortius. It
signifies Wars and wranglings, and scarcity of Corn, in the Eastern parts,
and Mortality amongst men, but especially to such as are betwixt 40. and 50.
years old. Notwithstanding, this shall be most operative amongst children. And
thus fair (and no fairer) are you promised by the Annual return of the Sun
to his place at the Parliaments Commencement, if you will credit Bonat. Colum.
365. so that you see what ever our Merline has endeavored to gull the people
with, yet the Heavens speak no such Language, they tell us of nothing but
War and strife, etc. What the Position of Saturn in the 10. signifies in the
Vernall Ingresse, I have published in my Prognostication: And if I should grant
him what so much he desires and urges, viz. that Saturn's being in the
Midd-heaven should portend some sorrow and affliction to the King: yet
Albumazar (a man of better credit) affords us this comfort; Si fuerit dominae
decimae domus Venus (as she is in this Revolution) significat quod sequetur ex
hac tribulatione prosperitatem atque sublimitatem and gaudium atque profectum.
If Venus be Lady of the tenth House, it shows that his affliction and sorrow,
shall be turned into joy, prosperity, sublimitie, and advantage, the sight
whereof, will even break the Malicious heart of this proditorious peasant.


Lilly. And for the signification of Venus, who is under the Sun beams, and
thereby much impedited and descending into the eighth, though now locally in
the ninth, it portends a disturbed fancy, and a person not free, or much
enlarged, for the Sun Lord of the 12. and Venus are within Orbs: her
debilities promise him no great good: significat enim, quod eveniat Regi in
revolutione illa ira, and tristitia, and contentio, similiter atque timor: she
as posited, is the signifier of much anger, malecontentednesse, and
controversy, and the Conclusion which is worst of all, says, that he shall be
in great fear, etc. of what, I am silent?


Wharton. I have told you in my Prognostication, that Venus her fortitudes,
exceeds the number of her Debilities by 8, and is therefore to be accounted
strong and powerful in the Figure, so that what detriment soever her
debilities might promise, her fortitudes (being so many more in number) do
utterly extinguish and annihilate, whereby is clearly signified good fortune
and authority to Officials, and other of the Kings head Officers, and that the
King shall prosper in his affairs. So that the Reader may perceive your own
Fancy so disturbed, and clowded, as that you cannot fancy, or discern any
sentence or Aphorism that has any show in it of good toward his Majesty,
but endeavor to conceal all things that tend thereunto against your own
conscience, and the Principles of Art. Nor can (in my opinion) the Sun and
Venus their being within Orbs, portend any kind of restraint to his Majesty,
but rather absolute freedom, in regard they are both his Majesty's
significators, and behold the Cuspe of the twelfth House with an Aspect of true
and perfect Amity.


Lilly. But let me examine Astrologically, whether there be any affection, or
unity, betwixt his Majesty and Subjects, which you may discern says Bonatus,
Fol. 526. Per Conjunctionem significationem ad invicem, viz. by the Conjunction
of each significator to other, or with other; vel per eorum aspectum cum
receptione, quia ille ex significatoribus qui recipit alium, committit illi
dispositionem, or by the mutual aspect of the Significators with Reception;
for observe whose Significators receives the other, commits his disposition, or
virtue to the Planet received, or more properly may be said to be ruled or
directed by him. Here do I find the Sun Significator of our Honorable
Patriots at Westminster, in his Exaltation, receivingVenus (his Majesty's) in
her detriment, viz. in a low condition, etc.


Wharton. If the Conjunction of the Sun and Venus had seen by Application, or
a perfect conjunction, you had said something to the purpose, but (Mr. Wisdom)
you see Venus is separated from him, and the Moon, who is Significatrix of
your Honorable Patriots is hasting to an Opposition with them both, which are
signs of small Affection, or unity betwixt them; and as for that Reception
you mention to be betwixt them; I will not grant any, for I learned when I was
in my A. B. C. of Astrology, that Receptio est duplex, una ex domicilio, altera
ex exaltatione: It is either from House, or Exaltation, which you cannot find
here betwixt the Sun and Venus; for, althought the Sun be in his Exaltation,
yet Venus is not in hers, so that there is no Reception in respect of
Exaltation, and for matter of House you will grant there can be none. Yet I
remember Zael admits of this, and one more, as a kind of Reception; and
Origanus takes notice of them in him and Schonerus, and calls them Receptiones
minores but he does not commend, or allow them, but rather sets a mark upon
them for invalid and superstitious, for says he, posteriores receptiones non
nisi in particulari et ad superstitionem inclinante judicio locum habent. Page
427. So that if the Commonalty, or Kingdom be no more obedient and kind to the
King, then this reception inclines them to, I shall despair of any Peace or
Tranquillity this year, nor expect better success of their formal addresses,
then formerly.


Lilly. If we run a strain above Astrology, the Hermeticall Learning will tell
us, that the Angels Samael, and Malchidael are the Intelligences, or presiding
Angels of the English Commonwealth and Kingdom, and Generally every
Astrologer is satisfied, that Mars is the Planet, and Aries the sign to which
Great Britain is Subject. If the greater Angel and his Minister stand firm
for us, as its thought they do, and if the Planet be well fortified and the
Ascending sign of this Kingdom not afflicted, I see no cause in nature to
mistrust any gewerall misfortune to happen within this Kingdom to the
Inhabitants thereof in this present year 1647. For though we find Mars our
English Astrologicall, Planet in his Fall, yet we have him very potently placed
in the Heavens, in Conjunction withIupiter and Caput Draconis, in the 11.
house, and what Authors deliver upon such a Position as this, you shall be your
own Judges that read the discourse: Si Jupiter fuerit in undecima, significat
lucra et merces in omnibus rebus, Haly 378. When Jupiter is in the 11. House he
intimates much trade and merchandising, and great wealth obtained thereby. Si
quidem Jupiter fuerit in undecima significat laudem et bonam famam ex part
amicorum, et quod gaudebant homines, et erunt in alacritate, et bonus effectus,
et profectus in rebus de quibus habebunt homines fiduciam, et de quibus sperant
bonum Bonat. 567. Jupiter as new posited portends great comfort from friends,
and that they shall merit honor and a good name, that men shall rejoice and be
cheerful, and have good effect and encouragement in the actions they seek
after, and of which matters they themselves expected good. If we would dilate,
or exemplify, why from hence may we not expect all faithfulness and
honorable correspondency from the Scottish Nation; contrary to the expectation
of some, and those not a few that divine otherways.


Wharton. If William Lilly run out quite from his Wits, I shall here make him
understand (if not acknowledge an other very gross Error of his,
notwithstanding the Angels Samael and Malchidael do both of them take his
part: for though I grant him that Mars is more powerful then he speaks of,
yet is the Sign Ascending of this Kingdom sufficiently afflicted, by the
Platique Square of Mars unto it, (who is also within 3. degrees of Conjunction
with the Lord of the eight House, which is the House of death, labor sadness,
and heaviness, heritage of dead men, and the end of life, and the Ascendent of
the revolution is no less afflicted by the Quartile of Saturn unto it: and
the Moon, who is Lady of the Hour (although he has here forgot to mention
her, is separate from the Sextile of Mars and in a partill Sextile with
Jupiter, but comes immediately to a Diametricall configuration with Aries
Englands Horoscopicall Sign; whereby you might have seen (if you had not
been worse then purblind) cause too much to mistrust some general misfortune
to befall the Inhabitants of this Kingdom: I do not love to create new
jealousies and fears, but I presume Will. Lilly will not (upon second
thoughts) deny what I have said, nor that he has played the fool in giving
judgment of Jupiters positure in the eleventh only, withour mixing the nature
of Mars with him, who is there likewise so powerful, and near unto
Conjunction with him. But I have elsewhere told you what their Accidental
Site there does signify, and therefore shall not need to give him any further
answer in this particular, since what he here reiterares, is, only to clear
his Brethren the Scots, lest they become unruly, and kick out that small
proportion of his idle brains.


Lilly. And surely were not Mars overswayed by the presence of Jupiter in that
Nations ascending Sign, I should somewhat doubt of them my self, but I do
not, for the truth is Religion and Faith, overmasters their natural Policy,
Really; Mars in undecima inimicitias amicorum praenotat: Mars in the 11.
destroys the Leagues and friendships of People, etc.


Wharton. And surely William Lilly a Horne-book-blade, he would not divulge so
much of his ignorance at one clap, as to say that Mars is overswayed by the
presence of Jupiter, cujus contrarium verum est; for as before I have proved,
Mars is the strongest save only the Moon: and Jupitar the weakest but Mercury
in all the Figure, as will appear to any man that will take the pains to
collect the Dignities and Debilities of the Planets respectively in the Figure.
And therefore he has good reason to doubt of himself, and to suspect the
Scottish Nation will become Converts: which if they did not, we (Malignants)
should have questioned, whether they had any Religion, or Faith at all? But to
the matter: Mars in the 11. House presages something else then amicorum
inimicitias, if you had not abused Guido Bonatus Colum. 571. and in him the
whole Kingdom: whose words (if he had not been interrupted by this unmannerly
clown) had been thus; Mars in 11^ domo, significat paucitatem lucri, seu
profectus in rebus de quibus spaeratur utilitas; and quod cadent in inimicitias
amicorum, and significat diminutionem substantiae, and desperabant homines
derebus in quibus habebatur siducia, and quibus spaerebatur: That is, Mars in
the eleventh House foretells but little profit, or gain in those things by
which profit was expected, and that they shall fall at enmity with their
friends. Also, the diminution of their substance, and that men shall utterly
despair of ever obtaining what they most trusted to, and expected. This
Aphorism carries a great deal of matter in sit, in relation it has to the
differences depending and impending betwixt the Scots and the Parliament: and
therefore it was not held fitting to be published, or communicated (by our
misterious Merline) without a Fee. The plain English of it is, that (according
to natural causes) it is most evident that the Parliament, etc. shall be
frustrated in their expectation; that they shall be mvch deceived, and deprived
of the profit and commodity, which might have accrued unto them, by having the
King at their own disposal: and that for this cause they shall fale fall at
difference with, and incur the dislike and enmity of those that were formerly
their friends and confederates, who shall account them no otherwise then such
as have forgot and neglected their Covenant with God and man, etc. And hereupon
they despair of the Scottish Religion, because it is come nearer the Kings,
and of their Faith, because they have not so much credulity as to interest them
alone in the disposal of his Majesty's Person: and hence arise new discords
and contentions, and greater taxes are imposed then ever upon the poor
Kingdom, whereby men's Estates are exhausted and consumed, and fresh miseries
daily approaching, if not timously prevented.

What he cites out of Haly concerning Jupiters positure in the 11 House, I have
sufficiently answered and explained before, upon the words which he quoted from
Bonatus, for the same thing.

And thus far has Mr. Lilly made his progress in preaching Peace and
Tranquillity to the People, to what purpose I have sufficiently declared? and
now he comes to the Quality of the year, wherein I scorn to detract the
least scruple from him of what is his due, but shall agree with him in every
thing which he performs but any thing like an Artist, (though he stumble of it
against his will) his quotation of Bonatus Page 55. (by great fortune) is very
true and pertinent, whereby is proved a year of scarcity of Corn and other
Provision for the use of man: But the application of his next Aphorism out of
Haly is very illicite, and ignorant, for although he affirm it shall assuredly
come to pass in those parts of this Kingdom, which lie South-East, and full
South from London, but nothing so violently as in the Kingdom of Ireland: I
shall prove him here and errand Bo^cher: For, if he had understood the
Aphorism; Saturn ought to both unfortunate in alto loco, and elevated above
all the other Planets, or otherwise it has no signification, which he is not
in this Figure; For although he be weak in his Essential Dignities, yet
considering his other Accidental fortitudes, he is indifferent strong and
powerful, so that the Aphorism will not serve for this Position. And if you
will know the principal ways by which a Planet may be said to be elevated
above another, they are three, viz.

In respect of their Latitude from the Ecliptique. Nearness to their Auges,
Position in the Figure.


A Planet is said to be elevated above another (according to Ganivetus (cap. 1.
differ. 3. of his book entitled Amicus medicorum) who has greatest Northern
Latitude from the Ecliptique: now if we Calculate rightly, we shall find Mars
elevated above all the rest of the Planets, the moon expected, for he has 3.
degrees of North Latitude, and Saturnes Latitude is meridionall no less then
2. degrees 6. min. So Jupiter has 0. degree 47. min. of North Latitude, Venus,
1 degree. 10. min. and Mercury 2 degree 5. min. both South, and the ^ indeed
has 4. degree 47. min. of N. Latitude so that in respect of Latitude, Saturn
is the most depressed of all the Planets in the Figure, and the moon most
elevated next Mars, and then Jupiter.

The next way is in respect of a Planets pro piuquitie to his Auge, according
to Altohazen Haly in his Comment upon Ptolomy: So that the Planet which is
nearest the Summitie of his Epicyle, is elevated above another, which is
further removed thence, and if we consider here which of the Planets is most
elevated secundum Augem, we shall find that Mercury is in Apog. Epicicli. 12.
March Mars is in Apog. Eccentr. the 14. of March, and Saturn is not in Apog.
Epicicli until the 4. of May following: so that this way Mercury and Mars are
both elevated above Saturn.

And hereby the way will I put Mr. Merline in mind of one mistake in this kind
committed in his Englands Prophetical Merline Page 78. Where he has put
Saturn transire Apoge. on 20. Martii and Jupiter Epicicli sui superiorem partem
23. Martii, whereas Saturn is in Apog. Epicili the 10. of March and Jupiter the
13. so but only 10. days Error in each committed.

The 3. way by which a Planet may be said to be elevated is in respect of their
places in the Figure; as he that is above the earth is more elevated then he
that under is the Horizon, he that is in the 12. House is elevated above an
other Planet in the Ascendent, he that is in the 11. above any i^ the 12. and
he that is in the 10. above any other in the Figure as indeed Saturn is now:
And if all the Planets were under the Horizon, then that which is nearest to
the Ascendent is said to be most Elevated; but this is not so much considedered
by Astrologers as their elevation in respect of Latitude, and of their
proximitie to their Auges, or if it were, yet you see there is two to one
against Will. Lilly: For Saturn is neither elevated above all the other Planets
in respect of Latitude, nor in respect of his Auge, and therefore that
Aphorism of Halyes has no signification here, Saturn being neither
infortunatus in alto loco, nec sublevatus super omnes alios planetas as William
Lilly supposes him: So that the South, and South-east parts of this Kingdom
need not fear this positure at all.

Next I desire the reader to observe that he has cut off* corrupted, and
misunderstood that Aphorism in Bonatus 574 viz significat naufragia repent,
etc. For that Aphorism is not deduced from the dominion of Mars in the 4 and 9
houses of the figure, but (as you may see in Guido) from the situation of Mars
in Cancer and his triplicity, and the words of Bonat: are these, Et si fuerit
Mars in Revolutione anni in Cancro, vel elus triplicitate: and maxim in
Cancto, erit apparitio eorum, quae significaverit in partibus
Septentrionalibus: and thus much of that Aphorism Master Merline has quite
left out, which is thus much in English: if Mars in the years revolution shall
be in Cancer or his triplicity, but especially in Cancer, the visibility of his
effects shall be in the Northern parts of the Kingdom: Further In Cancro
significat naufragia repent venientia ex forti atque subito flatu ventorum,
and significat rixam atque contentionem, and bellum, etc. Mars in Cancer has
signification of unexpected shipwracks, happening by fierce and sudden gales of
wind; he also portends strife, contention, and war, etc.


Lilly Gaudebunt Reges, and habebunt laetitiam, and securitatem, that our
principal Governors and officers that have with such industry these many
years steered the affairs of our Kingdom shall in this year rejoice.


Wharton (indeed) Lilly) you steer by a false Chart, for there is no such
thing absolutely signified to the Governors you speak of from the sun as he
is Lord of the ascendant, for he that will look into Guido Page 575 whence he
takes this judgment, shall find the words to carry another sense, viz. Et si
fuerit Sol Dominus, Anni, ac Dominus ascendentis fueritque liber a malis, dixit
Albumazar, gaudebunt Reges, and habebunt letitiam and securitatem, so that if
you expect to have benefit by this aphorism the Sun must not only be Lord
of the ascendent, but free from the Malevolents, but he must also be Lord of
the year, which he is not in this revolution; and how far soever this
aphorism may be in force, the King will have the best share thereof, if the
Sun be the natural significator of Kings as all authors accord: nor shall
those Governors he talks of want their part of what the Suns accidental
position in the 8 house does signify. viz. depressionem Divitum and Magnatum,
seu Nobilium atque potentum, eorumque diminutionem, and mortem, ac improperium
Bonat. 577. I Will lay my life this aphorism belongs to the Roundheads. What
Venus portendeth in the 9 as she is significatrix of his Majesty, I have told
you in my Prog. and what Mr. Lilly has added out of Bonat 579 is not amiss;
only his application is like all the rest, as idle and foolish as may be, in
that it concerns all the Clergy in general, and not the Prick-ear'd Divines
only, as every Artist can testify.

Now, for that William Lilly seems to be very much offended with one Master
Geere, who (as he says) was sometimes a priest of Tewksbury, and has lately
writ a Pamphlet called Astrologo-mastrix, (which indeed is as full of old idle
Sophistry, as Master Lilly is of Malice, and Ignorance) yet I hold it no
sufficient answer to tell him a story of a Weathercock, or a Cock and Bull, in
stead of denying and avoiding his Arguments by better Reason: nor is it
Scholar like, or favors at all of Common Civility, to fall upon scandalizing
of a man's Reputation, when he has not wit enough to require him otherwise. I
think ( Lilly) you would scarce accept of it as a sufficient answer from me, if
in stead of correcting your errors, I should tell the world that you were but
a Taylours Boy in Saint Clements Parish, and that the summity of all your
honor was to be afterward a Scriveners Man, and that he dyng your Mrs taught
you first to write Secretary, in which respect I account you not worthy of the
just revenge of my Pen: This (though it be true) were but mean Logic, but the
truth is, you are lame of that leg, and therefore you may do well to borrow a
crutch of Master Thomas Challoner, that precise Logitian, etc.

Nor does it grieve me at all that I suffer so much for the justness of the
Cause which I have undertaken and sworn to, as to be traduced by you, with the
terms of an obscure footman, ungownd, and unbooted, etc. the time was when I
have been on Horseback, where neither Lilly, nor Booker durst have shown their
faces, and it is no matter whether I wear Boots or Shoes, either shall content
me: I have both, and if I want a College Gown, I believe (Sir) you are not in so
much credit as to take one up for me till my nex years Almanac may defray
your engagement, however you are not so much Master of your trade, as to make
it for me, for (to say the truth) I was told you Master was a woman's Tailour.

I find nothing left now worthy my notice, save only the Quadrate Aspect of
Saturn to Jupiter, which hapeneth this year, which (Master Merline) says only
signifies mutationes. and res multas (...) in Negotiis Regis, similiter and in
lege, very great aterations, and many things concerning his Majesty's affairs
and the Law: but you see Master Merline dare not tell us his author, and
(indeed) he either will not, or dare not; yet nevertheless I have traced him,
and found Haly to be the author of those words, and of some other proceedings,
which you may guess he was unwilling to publish, by the tenor of them, Haly
page 391 they run thus: Significat (says Haly) quod existent Rebels qui
adversabuntur Regi, and qui querunt regnum, etc. The plain English is this, it
signifies that there shall be Rebels (and traitors, who shall rise and oppose
themselves against the King, who shall endeavor to deprive him of his Kingdom,
etc. and this together with the former, is the genuine signification of the
square of Saturn, and Jupiter; and these very words I had noted in my Almanac,
but the Printer maliciously expunged and altered them and diverse more, whereby
he has unworthily abused me, and made my Almanac look weatherbeat lik himself.

As for the Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Taurus, which Master Merline,
says, has been so learnedly handled by John Booker; I have sufficiently laid
him open in that discourse I formerly mentioned; and no doubt, but it will
serve both their turns: yet I cannot pass by one gross error (above all the
rest) committed by this wooden Prick-eare John Booker, in his new Almanac for
1647 (which may be easily known, by the sign of the Logger-head in the front
of it) upon his judgments of the year at the Vernall ingresse, where he says
that Jupiter is in Ascendente hora revolutionis, and accordingly draws fine
Peaceable judgment from Jupiter, being in the Ascendent, when notwithstanding,
Jupiter is above 30 degrees (or a whole sign) distant from thence, and so in
the 11 house, as you may see in William Lillies Figura mundi, in his Anglicus,
erected, for the same time and place, by which the Reader may perceive what
certainty can be in this dull fellows Prognostics, who is thus palpably and
intolerably erroneous, as to miss no less then a whole sign in the place of
one Planet?

And thus have I diligently and carefully examined William Lillies Discourse,
wherein I find him very foolishly rash, and even brim full of malice and
ignorance; and do now assuredly know him unworthy the name of an Artist. I
could have taken notice of a great many more Errors, etc. and particularly in
his Translation of those first 50 Aphorisms of Ptolomi^s Centil^qui, wherein
he shows himself ignorant in the Original, so has he infected some of them
with his own foolish Commentaries, and (amongst the rest) a ridiculous story of
a suit of cloths, that he tore many holes in, in going a nutting, when the Moon
was ill dignified in Lea, which suit he says did never do him any service
after: whereby you see that Lilly is as bad a Tailor, as he is an Astronomer,
that could mend his own clothes no better. The truth is, he was not born to be
a workman. But I shall reserve my other more serious observations till I hear
further from him, which if ever I do, I promise to lash him without mercy, in
the interim I should advise such Gentlemen as desire to be instructed in this
kind of Learning, to shake off these ignorant fellows, and apply themselves to
Doctor Nicholas, Fisk Doctor Scarborough, Master Jonas, Moore, or Master,
Holland, who are all of them singular Artists, and men of honest and clear
intentions.


FJNIS.

