The Black Book of Newgate: OR, AN EXACT COLLECTION OF THE Most material
Proceedings AT ALL The SESSIONS in the Old baily, For Eighteen months last past.

Particularly relating to the Trials of John Smith George Marshall John Darkin
Michael Jones Charles Potter Henry Seabrooke Elizabeth Longman Frances Watson,
alias Riggs. Charles Godfry Roger Withers Matthew Walkenden John Evans John
Seabrooke William Minors Arthur Minors Richard Shaw Thomas Sadler William
Johnson Robert Dine William Dine and Margaret Dine Nicholas Throckmorton
William Dennis Mary Hicks, etc.


AS ALSO REFLECTIONS and OBSERVATIONS on several Passages.

Set forth for a Public Warning to all that read it, by W. W. Gent.

With Allowance.

To. L'Estrange.



London: Printed for D. M. 1677.

The Proceedings at all the Sessions in the Old-Bayly for Eighteen months last
past.
THough this Collection was intended only for one year past before this present
Aug. 1677, and thence (if encouraged by General Acceptance) to be annually
continued, yet we shall reflect a little further, and begin with.

An account of the Sessions before Easter-Term 1676, beginning April the 5th.
There were then no fewer than Fifteen men and One woman Convicted (per
Patriam) upon fair Trials for their respective Crimes, who received sentence of
Death; of whom Eight of the least notorious, by mercy of Authority, upon
consideration of Circumstances, mediation of Friends, and solemn Engagements of
future Amendment, obtained the gracious favor of Reprieves: the other Eight
were executed April the 19th, their Names and Crimes as follows:

John Smith, George Marshall, and John Darkin, for Robbing the Parish Church of
St. Giles in the Fields, and stealing several pieces of Plate,
Communion-Chalices, etc. which they performed by the help of and Engine of
Villainy, called a Betty, of incredible force for forcing open Doors, Locks,
Bolts, etc. this was made by Darkin, an extraordinary Artist at such black
works. These Prisoners did aver in Newgate, that when they were got into the
Vestry and breaking open the Chests, a Spectrum or Apparition did visibly stand
before them; but so resolved they were on their wicked Design, that even the
Devil himself could not scare them from it. Michael Jones and Charles Potter,
for a Burglary and Robbery in Dukes-place, taking away several bags of Money,
Plate, Clothes, etc. Jones at Tyburn made a very penitent Speech, declaring how
Idleness, Disobedience to his Parents, Ill Company, and lewd Women, first
brought him into bad Courses, and consequently to this untimely Death. John
Maxfield, for robbing a Brick-maker in Frog-lane, whom he and his Crew
barbarously stripped naked. He was about a fortnight afterward taken by the
Watch, (or rather by their Dogs, for had it not been for them he had escaped)
being, it is probable, going again on the like Design. Anthony Tailor for a
Felony and Burglary, and Elizabeth Simmonds, for murdering her Bastard-childe,
which she threw into a Pond.
At the Sessions after Easter-Term 1676, holden the 10th and 11th of May,
There was Nine Condemned, but Five Executed; and of those, Three Condemned the
Sessions before, viz. Henry Seabrook concerned in the said Robbery in
Dukes-place, but reprieved, pretending to discover the rest of the Cabal; which
not making good, he was now executed.

Robert Scott for Felony and Burglary: He had been indicted and acquitted one
Sessions, convicted and burnt in the hand next Sessions, condemned and
reprieved last Sessions, and now, though a Prisoner, found to contrive and abet
Rogueries abroad, and thereupon hanged out of the way.

Elizabeth Longman, an old and impudent Offender, having been above Twelve
times in Newgate, she had been lately transported; but returning, stole a great
quantity of Silks; for which she was Convicted last Sessions, and employed
Edward Wall and Edward Russel to engage a Gentleman of Quality to solicit a
Reprieve for one of her Companions. In this Gentleman's Lodgings they observed
abundance of Plate, and speaking of it, this Bess Longman cries, And did you
only see it? you dull Fools, go take it into possession: Which, at her
instigation they effected; but being young Thieves, were soon discovered;
pleaded guilty to the Indictment, and now suffered with her.

At a Sessions the 28th of June 1676.
Three men and Two women received sentence of Death, but only Four suffered,
viz. Alexander After and Thomas Fowler, for Robbery on the Highway, being
Rogues of the Foot-pad that used to pillage Market-women, etc.

Richard Hazlegrove for having Two Wives: Upon his Conviction he prayed the
benefit of his Clergy, which was granted; but not being able to read, was
Condemned and Executed: A Case that seems a little severe; but so the Law
directs: which may admonish Parents to bestow, and Children to study at least
to read well, since sometimes a man loses his life merely for want of it.

The fourth was famous Frances Watson, otherwise called Mrs. Riggs the younger.
Thieving had been her Trade from her infancy; her Mother often Condemned, and
then under Transportation; one or two of her Brothers, and several pretended
Husbands or Gallants hanged; to which she brought her self now by her own
simplicity: For, lying for Transportation, she sent for several people she had
robbed to get money of them, under pretense of helping them to their Goods
again; not doubting but she was safe now from being indicted for them: but
therein her Newgate-Counsel failed her; for her pardon extended only to remit
the Crime for which she was convicted: So that she was now arraigned afresh,
and found guilty upon her own Confession, and so followed the fate of her
Family.

At the Sessions Aug. 23, etc. 1676.
Sixteen Condemned, only Eight suffered, viz. Tho. Moore, and James Parker
Convicted of a Felony, which appeared to the Court to be a Burglary at Cue in
Surry; and so excluding benefit of Clergy, one of them refusing to plead till
he was put into the Press, and so bruised, that without further Execution, it is
thought he would not have survived.

Charles Godfry and Rogers Withers for a like Crime committed in Hartfordshire;
but being taken in Middlesex with some of the Goods about them, were tryable
here.

Richard Cook, Matthew Walkenden, and Martha Harman, for several Burglaries.
The later was a matchless young piece of Confidence, who broke open a house at
Islington; a Crime rarely attempted by that Sex: she had four times before been
tried for several Offenses, but now could not obtain further indulgence.

The last was John Evans, a lad not above Fifteen years of age, but old in
Roguery: He had several Indictments for Felonies against him, and had been both
whipped and burnt in the hand before.

At the Sessions 11th of October 1676.
Sixteen in all received sentence of Death, but only Five Executed. The most
remarkable business was the Trial of Henry Graves for murdering one William
Parker a Ditcher at Islington. The Prisoner and his Brother (not then taken)
fell upon him without cause, swore they would beat out his brains, and with a
stake did at last kill him; yet the Jury, for I know not what reasons, found it
only Manslaughter: but Providence not suffering Murder so to escape, when he
came to his Book, though a pretty good Scholar, and well tutored before, yet he
could not read a word, and thereupon was deservedly hanged.

The other four were John Seabrook, William Minors, Arthur Minors, and Richard
Shaw, for several Burglaries and Felonies.

At the Sessions held Jan. the 17th 1676/7.
There were Two Condemned, a woman of above Forty years of age for murdering
her Bastard-childe, who was Executed, and a man for Personating another man as
Bail before a Judge, who at the Gallows received a gracious Reprieve. At this
time was that blasphemous Impostor Lodowick Muggleton tried, and sentenced to
stand three days in the Pillory, his Books to be burnt before his face, to pay
Five hundred pounds fine, and give Bail (not of his own Party or Gang) for his
good behavior.

At the Sessions 7th of March 1676/7.
Was Tried and Executed the renouned Thomas Sadler, and William Johnson, for a
Burglary in the house of the Lord High Chancellor of England, and stealing the
Mace and two Purses. Sadler as he had lived impudently, so he died pitifully,
and with little generosity of Spirit; but Johnson, with a becoming resolution
and staid temper that at once showed his sense of his sins, and faith in his
Savior, made a very repentant and pithy Discourse at the place of Execution,
endeavoring to warn all others by his Example, etc. At the same time there
suffered Francis Webb, Matthew Gammond, and Anthony Richoake, for several
Burglaries: There being in all Fifteen Condemned, the rest obtained Reprieves.

The Sessions 25th of April 1677.
Was famous for the Trial, Condemnation, and Execution of Robert, William, and
Margaret Dine, two own brothers and a sister, for disfiguring, and in a
barbarous manner mangling the Nose and Face of one Jane King, contrary to the
late Act of Parliament in that behalf. They all absolutely persisted to deny
the doing this cruel fact, and asserted their innocence to the last gasp, and
died very much pitied by many people that knew them. At the same time suffered
one Margaret Spicer for murdering her Bastard-childe: As also David Hackley,
Jeremiah Dawson, and Mary Brown, all notorious Offenders, and formerly burnt in
the hand, now convicted of several Felonies.

The Sessions the first of June 1677.
There were then Condemned Mr. Nicholas Throckmorton, for robbing two Ministers
on the road three miles on this side Vxbridge; taken by the most commendable
courage of one of the Ministers men, who alone fought with the Prisoner and his
Companion for above half an hour; and at last with the help of his Master,
moved (though without a Weapon) by his servant's brave defense, to assist him
what he could, made one of the Thieves ride away, and took the other. He
suffered very penitently on the 13th of June: At which time was likewise
Executed William Dennis for murdering a poor Tub-man, who being in a furious
passion against his Wife, and having beat her exceedingly, a Crowd of people
were gathered about; whereupon taking down an Half-pike, he swore he would kill
some of them; and accordingly dispatched this harmless man, sitting on his
Water-tubs, without the least provocation. Which may teach all men to moderate
their passions, and not let them run unbridled to mischief, lest thereby they
bring themselves to some such shameful End.

The last Sessions in July 1677.
Was sufficiently crowded to hear the Trial of that Monster, rather than woman,
Mary Hicks, who suffered her self to be Buggered by a Mungril. This detestable
Villainy was sufficiently proved by Three witnesses; and for the same, the vile
wretch was executed on the 18th of July, the Dog being carried along with her
in the Cart, and hanged upon a Tree near the Gallows before her face.

One of the Evidence being great with Child, there has been a scandalous
Report spread abroad; that the same day this woman suffered, she should fall in
Labor, and not being able to be delivered, confess that she had herein
forsworn her self out of malice; which Report, and others to the same effect,
are utterly false and groundless; the said Witness continuing in perfect
health, and well satisfied in the integrity of her Testimony.

The same day suffered John Gimbold and Mary Russel, both old incorrigible
Offenders, and now Condemned for several Felonies.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
Happy's the man that learns by others harms,
And against such fatal Crimes his Spirit arms.

FINIS.

