THE TWO SPEECHES OF THE LORD WHARTON, Spoken in Guild Hall, October. 27. 1642.
In which are contained a full and true Relation of the Battle between the two
Armies at Kinton. Corrected by the Authors own hand.

London Printed for Sa: Gellibrand, 1642.

The Lord Wharton his Speech.
MY Lords, and you the Aldermen, and Commons of this City, in a business of
this very great consequence and concernment, it was very well known to my Lord
General, that you could not but be full of great expectations: whereupon my
Lord according to his duty took care for to give information to the
Parliament, to those that had sent him, of what had proceeded; in the very next
place it was his particular respect to this City, to my Lord Mayor, the
Aldermen, the Common Council, and all the Commons of this City, that they
might likewise be acquainted with the success of that business, toward which
they themselves had been at so much expenses, and had showed so much love and
kindness in all the proceedings of this business: for that purpose, because
that Letters might be uncertain, and might miscarry, there being great
interception of them, (the Forces of the Armies being close together) my Lord
thought fit to send Master Strode, a Member of the House of Commons, and my
self, who should not willingly have undertaken to have been messengers of ill
tidings, and for the truth of our report, though we already hear that there
are those that have so much malignity as to oppose it, yet the certainty of it
will clear it self, and therefore there shall need no Apologies to be made,
but that which shall be said to you shall be nothing but the truth, in a very
clear way of relation of what has past.

Gentlemen, I shall open to you as near as I can, as it comes within my
memory, those things of circumstance which are worthy the taking notice of, and
one in the first place shall be, the occasion why so many of the Forces were
not then upon the place, which you will find to be upon very good ground and
reason, for the preservation of the Countries that were behind, and of this
City, which is the particular thing in the care, and now under the diligence
of my Lord General to preserve. There was left at Hereford, which lies upon the
confines of Wales, a Regiment of Foot under the Command of my L. of Stamford,
and a Troop or two of Horse, that the power of Wales might not fall in upon
Gloucestershire, and upon the of river of Severn, and so upon the West. There
was likewise left at Worcester (which you all know how it is seated upon the
river of Severn, and what advantage it has to intercept all force that shall
come from Shrewsbury down into the West) a Regiment of my Lords Saint John's,
and Sir John Merricks. There was for the safety of Coventry (for that was a
Town it was likely the King might have fallen upon) the Regiment of my Lord
Rochford; but it seems that his Excellency the Earl of Essex his Army did so
quickly come up to the Kings, that the King thought it no way fit or
advantageous for him to spend any time upon those places, for certainly they
would have quickly been relieved, so that the King slipped by Warwick and
Coventry, though they are Towns, as particularly under the eye and care of
those which direct the Kings Counsel, as any other in the whole kingdom,
excepting this. There was likewise upon the suddenness of my Lords march, two
Regiments of Foot, one under the command of a Gentleman you all know, Colonel
Hampden, and the other under the command of Colonel Grantham, with some 10. or
12. Troops of Horse, and these were one days march behind for the guard of
some powder, and ammunition, and artillery, which my Lord would not stay for,
purposely upon his diligence and desire that there should not be an hour lost
in his march up to the other Army, and that he might make all have in coming
up to the safeguard of this Town, and his desire thereof was such, that he kept
for 2. or 3. days together a days march before those Forces before named with
Col. Hampden, and so there being another Regiment lodged in Banbury,
occasionally for their own safety, there was with my Lord when the Battle was
fought upon the Lords day, 11. Regiments of Foot, and about the number of 35.
or 37. or 40. Troops or Horse. That which makes me say this to you, is partly
for your satisfactions that you may know the reasons of the absence of so many
of the Forces, and partly that you may give the more glory to God for his
blessing, and for his preservation of that remnant of the Army which was
together; being as I have said about 11. Regiments of Foot, and a matter of 35.
or 40. Troops of Horse.

Upon the Saturday at night about nine or ten a clock at night the Army came
to Kenton, and the next morning about 7. a clock (though all that night there
was news came that the King was going to Banbury) we had certain information
he was coming down a hill, which is called Edgehill, which has some
advantage by nature for breast-works, and such things as those are; that hill
the Kings Army came down, his Army coming down, my Lord of Essex presently
drew out into the Field and drew his Army into a place of as good advantage as
possible he could, though the other Army had the advantage of the hill, which
they were possessed of before, and at the beginning of the day the wind it was
against us, and was for the advantage of the other Army. The preparation on
both sices was for the making of them ready for fight, and the Kings coming
down the hill was so long, that there was nothing done till 3. or 4. in the
afternoon, saving the shooting of some Cannon. And Gentlemen I shall tell you
the worst as well as the best, that you may know all, and that when you have
known the worst, you may find it in your judgments, to give the more praise to
God for his mercy, after there was so much probability of having the worst of
it.

After that we had shot 2. or 3. pieces of Ordnance, they began for to shoot
some of theirs, and truly not long after, before there was any near execution,
there was 3. or 4. of our Regiments fairly ran away. I shall name you the
particulars, and afterward name you such of those as at the present shall come
within my memory that did the extraordinary service, whereof you will find
those of this City to have been very extraordinary instruments. There were
that ran away, to be bold with my self first, my Regiment, my Lord Mandevils,
Sir William Fairfaxes, Sir Henry Cholmleyes, these did fairly run away in
despite of the Officers.

Gentlemen, you see by this time I am like to tell you the truth of every
thing; but yet I must say this, that though they did so, yet I hope there will
be a convenient and good number of them got together again, that may show
themselves in better condition, and better way of service then yet they have
done, I hope so, and by the blessing of God it may be so, for they are but
young Soldiers, and we have seen very good experience of some that have this
last battle done very extraordinary and gallant service, who had the misfortune
before to be under a cloud. Not long after there was a charge upon the left
wing of the Horse, and there I conceive there was a matter of 18. or 19.
Troops, and truly I cannot say they did so well as they should though I hope
that they will be brought together again to do very good service hereafter;
but so it is they had the worst of it; by this you will see that at the
beginning of the day we might think it would not prove so well as it pleased
God it did afterward in the close of the day, for 4. of our Regiments were
departed and one half of the Horse were not in good order; but it pleased God
then to begin to show himself for after they had past the left wing of our
Horse, I cannot attribute it to any thing but Gods own providence, their Horse
that had past through ours went to the Town where all our baggage was; the
baggage of the Officers and the private persons of the Army, not they of the
Artillery or public treasury, but the Colonels carts, and the Captains
Carts, and such provision as that; there they took a bait upon our pillage
and fell a plundering, while the rest of the Army was a fighting, and indeed my
Lord General had some more loss then ordinary by some clothes and money he
had there, but we thank God for it, for thereby the rest of our Army had
better opportunity to do that service they did.

My Lord General himself upon this extremity did begin to show himself to be
more then an ordinary man, and indeed I think more then I have heard tell of
any man, for he charged up at several times, both with Horse and Foot, and
perticularly at the head of one of the divisions of his own Regiments of Foot,
which was raised here in Essex, and though so many ill passages happened
before, yet with his Excellencies valor, conduct and encouragement, his own
Troop of Horse fell with that division of his Regiment of Foot upon the Kings
own Regiment (which they had most hopes of) and was called the red Regiment,
and after a sore and bitter fight (for to give them their due both sides fought
very well, and particularly my Lord Generals Sergeant Major who did very
gallantly) there was killed the Kings Standard Bearer Sir Edw. Varney, they
took the Kings Standard which was raised up against the Parliament, and it was
brought my L. General, and he delivered it to a servant which was not so
careful as he ought to have been, but lost that by carelessness which was
gotten by force. We took likewise the Kings General prisoner, and carried him
away; we took prisoner my Lord Generals son, my L. Willoughby, that person you
have heard so much of, and been so well acquainted with here, Col Lunsford
which should have had the tower, he was likewise taken prisoner and Sir Edward
Stradling, Col. Vavasour, and diverse others of quality, My Lord Awbirney, and
Munroy a Scotchman of great quality was slain. While these were upon this
service. I must give the right to diverse other of the Officers of the Horse
which were upon the right wing, that they did extraordinary service too, that
was my L. of Bedford himself, who did very gallantly, and Sir Will. Belfore the
late Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Philip Stapleton, and all that Troop which
formerly had been under some other kind of report, they did extraordinary
service, charged very bravely, after they had stood as I am informed seventeen
shot of Cannon shot against them, by all which God be thanked not a man of them
hurt: there was likewise very extraordinary service performed by my Lord Gray,
and Sir Arthur Hazlerig, who indeed was a help to give a great turn to the
day, by cutting off a Regiment of the Kings, which was called the blew
Regiment, and there were many other Gentlemen of great worth, that did very
extraordinary service too; I would not have you understand, that others did not
do, because I remember not their names, for I speak to you now but on the
sudden, naming only these that come to memory, and you will hear more of the
rest upon other occasions. Upon the close of the day, we know it for certain,
that the best Regiment of the Kings was cut off, and the next best Regiment,
which was that under my L. of Lindsey: there was all the prisoners taken I told
you of: there were those persons of quality slain I told you of, and there
was as we conceive (this I tell you upon information, as we conceive, and are
informed by the Contrymen that saw them bury the dead next day, and bring
them up into heaps, there was I say, as is informed and conceived) about 3000.
of theirs slain; and we cannot have any information, to give us reason to
believe that there was above 300. of ours slain; And this was to be observed of
Gods providence in this days work, that though the battle began so
improbably of our side, yet before the close of the night we had got the ground
that they were upon, we had gotten the wind, and we do not know, nor by
information conceive, that there was 20. men of ours killed by all the Kings
Cannon: when it was night there could be no more fighting, we drew our Forces
together, and so likewise did the King, they were then but at a reasonable
distance, it may be three times, or six times the distance of this room, or
some such like distance, but in the night the Forces of the King withdrew up
the Hill from whence they came; and my L. General amongst others sent my self
for to bring on those forces which I told you were a days march behind with
Colonel Hampden, which about one or two a clock at night came up accordingly;
and joined with the rest of the Army, when the King had drawn his Forces up the
hill, my Lord General about one or two a clock drew us a matter of three
quarters of a mile further from the hill, that he might be out of the power of
the Cannon. We stood to our Arms all the night, in the morning we drew our
selves again into the fields, but we heard no more news of the other Army,
more then we saw some scattering men, and some Troops of Horse on the top of
the hill, which came to bury the dead, and take away some of their Cannon, and
such things as those were, but they came no otherwise down the hill, neither
that day, nor on Tuesday, though there were diverse reports flew abroad and I
believe came hither, that there was fighting on Monday and Tuesday, yet there
was no fighting, for the King kept on the top of the hill, and when Master
Strode and my self came away on Tuesday at 4. a clock, we can assure you there
was no more action, then was on the Lords day.

Gentlemen, I shall after I have declared this narration to you, say no more
then this, that certainly my Lord General himself, has deserved as much in
this service for his pains and care, and for the particular success that was
upon it, as truly I think ever any Gentleman did; and in the next place, that
as God of his own immediate providence did thus declare himself for the owning
of his own cause, so you will not forget to apply your selves to God, to give
him the glory, and to entreat his blessing upon the future guidance of the
great work.

The Lord Wharton his second Speech.
GEntlemen, I shall trouble you but with a word or two, the one is upon part of
that narrative, which I began with all, wherein truly I take my self to be very
much beholding to that Gentleman that; spoke after me, that he did not forget
to inform you of the extraordinary blessing, that God bestowed upon the
courage of honest pious and religious men: for truly there was very few that
did any extraordinary service, but such as had a mark of Religion upon them:
That which I omitted to tell you, was this, that one great cause of the
preservation, and of the success of that day, was that the Troops under the
Command of Prince Robert, while we were a fighting, not only pillaged the
baggage (which was but a poor employment;) but killed Countrymen that came in
with their teemes, and poor women, and children that were with them; this I
think comes not amiss to tell you, because you may see what is the thing they
aim at, which is pillage, and baggage, and plundering, and the way which they
would come by it is murdering, and destroying, and therefore it will come in
very properly, to encourage you to that work, which these two noble Lords have
so well opened unto you, which is, the standing upon your defense, and to that
I shall only add this, that when you shall have done that in that measure,
and in that proportion (which we do not doubt but you will do, because you
have always showed your affections, and your wisdoms, to be so great in the
carriage on of this business, I say, when you shall have so behaved your
selves,) there is no doubt but Gods blessing will be upon it, and you will be
sure to have an extraordinary back, the Army will be sure to be on the one side,
when you with your strength will be on the other side, and when that Army shall
lie between these two, without question it will come to a very short
conclusion, when you may reap the fruit of your labors that you have been at,
to your benefit, and your posterities.

FINIS.

