The Copy of a Letter FROM Master Tristram Whitecombe, Major OF KINGSALE* IN
IRELAND. Dated the 21. of April. 1642. To his Brother Benjamin Whitecombe,
Merchant in LONDON.

Alderman Plurie of Gloucester moved the House that this Letter might be
Printed, whereupon it was Ordered the 26. of April, to be Published.

It is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, that the Ministers of each
several Parish give public thanks to God for the good success it has
pleased him to grant the English against the Rebels.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Com. (...) Parl.



London, Printed for Joseph Huns^^tt. 1642.

From Kingsale, April. 21. 1642. Brother Benjamin,
I Have received diverse Letters with several dates, wherein you tax me for
not writing to you; you have no cause so to do, in regard all passage by Land
has been stopped in these parts by the Rebels; many have I written, and
doubtless some of them which I wrote might miscarry, For I assure you, I have
written by every passage that went from hence, which were by Barques that
carried passengers, and poor distressed people, which have been landed in
Wales, Padstoe Ilfordec^^e, and Barnestable; but none of them at their return
have brought any Letter from you, my Wife, or any friend thereabouts. In
shipping away the poor people, I have taken a great deal of pains, and
disbu^sed much moneys to pay for their passage, and there is still as much need
of doing the same, as before; for though the number of receivers be not
altogether so many, yet the givers are much decreased, the inhabitants of this
Town, I mean the English, were for the most part Tradesmen, who of a long time
have not gotten a penny, but gone wasting and consuming the little which they
had, and in a very little time more, we shall be all of one condition, and
suffer a like (but to the purpose.)

The Rebels have persisted in their cruel, and their tyrannical ways, blocked
us up round about, and have taken from us whatsoever we had lying without the
Gate, what was not useful for them, they despightfully burnt, and whomsoever
they took of our Nation, whether man, woman, or child, have most cruelly, and
inhumanely hanged and murdered; and for this three weeks space we have not
been able to sond a Letter to the Lord President, but by water, and that with a
great deal of difficulty, but praised be God, about seven or eight days since,
the Lord President upon our bleeding importunity, appointed the Lord Baltingl^^
his half Company, to come hither by Sea to help us, which consisted of 44. or
45. men, who arrived hear the 15. and brought with them eight Barrels of
Powder, and a hundred Skears of Match, whereof six Barrels, and fifty Skears,
were allotted for Bandonbridge, the other fifty Skeans, and two Barrels, do
remain bear for the defense of the Town, which did savor well with us, because
is was the first that ever we received. The 16. the Troops of Bandonbridge came
hither to renew, and carry away the said provisions, and for their better
Conv^y, we sent with them our Troop, which consisted of about 40, horse, and
40. foot, which went with them about four miles, and drew up all our forces we
could make, to make good the retraite, if occasion had been; our forces no
sooner parted from our friends, but those of Bandon fell into an Ambuskadoe,
which was laid purposely for them, consisting of about 300. men, who fired each
upon other; such was the great work of God Almighty, that ours consisting of
about 80. horse went through in despite of them, slew, or killed about 80. of
them, without the loss of a man, they wanted four, which they imagined had
been slain, but they remained here, playing the ill husbands, and went not with
their friends; our people in their retreat, pillaged, and burned all the houses
they could espy; and being come altogether, we marched in a body, toward a
multitude of them, which appeared upon a Mountain toward Belgolie, and lay in
ambush on the further side of the Mountain; the Hills round about us were
covered with them, we marched within Musket Shot of the main body of them, and
made a stand, every man desirous to march up to them, but night was at hand,
and they had very much advantage of the ground; while we stood in sight of
them, they made many hideous shouts, calling us English Rebels, and traitorous
villains, and threatened, that before Monday following, to burn, and ransick our
Town; but these were but flourishes, for that night, they retreating to their
accustomed place Belgolie, where their Camp lay, many of their people run away,
and it seems their Sabbath-Sacrifice wrought little effect, for the chief of
them, which was Barrie Oage and Jeremy Long, commanded the armed men, to march
toward my Lord of Muskrie his camp, and the rest they advised to shift for
themselves: we are informed that many of the armed men, did not march far,
but run every man his way; this I conceive, could not be in any policy, but
merely the Finger of God, that struck their hearts with such fear and t^rrour,
as they could not stay any longer.

On Monday morning we marched thither, where we found good store of provisions,
some we brought away, the rest we burned with the houses, and all the Country
thereabouts, so they cannot in haste incamp themselves there again with any
commodity; some few straglers we found there, which were kill^d, only two or
three, which we brought home prisoners, which I believe we shall hang this day;
some things they have discovered, but to no great purpose, that it was merely
fear that drove them away, thinking those ^^s^erly winds which then blew, had
brought n^ great store of men out of England.

On Tuesday we went forth again, and took possession of a Castle called
Arcloyne, where we have left a guard of 12. Musketeers, it lies a mil^ from
the Town toward Bandonbridge, which was good service, for by that means we have
gained a Mill, which lies under command of the Castle, and hope we shall keep
it, we had not the use of any Mill this three weeks, till now, which caused us
(though we have store of Corn) to want Bread.

We have certain advice, that about seven days since, the Lord Presidents
forces, about 600. foot, and 200, horse, sallied out of Cork, and let upon my
Lord of Muskrie, and Lord General Barries great Camp, which consisted of about
8000. the Rebels stood a while, but at last as many as could did fly, only on^
Company led by Mac Finins, Brother of Glonerogh, which was known by a nick
name, Captain Sogone, who fought very valiantly, and received 7. or 8. shot
into his body before he fell to the ground, his head and his hands, are brought
in, and set upon the Gates of the City. There were slain of the Rebels no man
knows how many, our men brought in about 600. Muskets, and Pikes, which lay
amongst the dead, they brought in abundance of provisions, my Lord of Muskries
Plate, and Apparel, and many other good things, So I hope they will not be
able to recover in have such a head again; their Bogs and Woods must be their
chiefest Forts. A passage, or two more, though I be something tedious, I will
relate; In my former Letters, I related the great loss sustained, at a Farm
which I had called Eneskonnis, it yielded me 92l per anuum, and the stock was
my own, the Tennant was to make it good at each years end, only I had great
store of Corn which I could not get threshed, to bring it away; for after this
Rebellion began, none of the villains would labor; I had of Wheat the growth
of 35. Acres, and as good, as any in the Country; besides, Barley, and Oats, my
Landlord Patrick Rach of Polelodge, taking it for his own, as he formerly had
done with my Castle, and all things else, got two or three hundred with their
Colors, to come thither to thresh, and carry it away, half for himself, and
the other half for those that did labor and stand by to guard him, but whiles
they were about it, the Troops of Bandon, and a few Musketeers fell in among
them, killed near 100. of them put the rest to flight, and carried with them a
great part of the Corn, which was made ready at their hands; and in this
service they lost not a man, a while after some of the Rebels attempted to
steal away some Cows near Bandon, and took two or three small Children that
were keeping of the said Cows, which they killed most barbarously, took them by
the Legs, and Arms, and tore them a sunder, one of the Children they found
stabbed with a Sk an, in a douzen places, which did so incage them, that the
next day they made another sally upon the Rebels, and afterward set upon a
Castle called ^doniell Castle, where sometime the Iron work stood; it was so
full of men and provisions, that they had made Linnies without side, against
the walls of the Castle, which they filled with hutches of corn and
household stuff: which they had taken from the English: Our men placed
Musketeers round about them, in such manner, that none of them within durst
appear upon the Battlement, nor peep out their nose at the Loop-holes; sent in
five or six men that were skillful in Myning under the said Linnies, who
labored so lustily, that in 3 or 4 hours they had made a hole through the wall;
where they put in furze and straw, which did set the lower rooms of the Castle
on fire, so that the Rebels and the provisions that were within, were burnt
together; of what was in the Linnies they saved about 200 horse load, and
carried it by degrees to the Town of Bandon: had we but 3 or 400 men more, we
should soon be able to clear the river of Bandon, upon which are three Castles
very well fortified. Kilg^bane, Polelonge, and Corge^^^, the Landlord of
Polelonge Pat: Roch fitz Richard was a Parliament Man, and has been a long
time out in rebellion, and his eldest son is made a Captain amongst them. Had
I men in place, I would be content to maintain them with victuals and pay at
my own charge, until I had taken the said Castle of Polelonge, so that I might
enjoy the said Castle and Land thereunto belonging, which is nine plow-lands
and a half, and so of the rest of the Castles. I pray, if you have any friends
amongst that Honorable Assembly, petition for some thing that might do us good:
For my part, I have lost all, and for merchandising there will be no little
hopes while I live in this kingdom; so that unless it please God to move their
hearts to support me in some good way, I must be enforced to stere such a
course as after so much loss, will not well suit with my age.

The Irish Inhabitants of this Town, Cork, and Yongball are no better than
those that are abroad in action; they did generally give intelligence of all
that passed, and kept all things from us: I have discovered that many of the
chiefest of the Town did go daily to Belgolie Camp; and if friends to them,
they must needs be enemies unto us: I have laid hold of some of them, I will
advise my Lord President of their proceedings.

Had not God Almighty dealt thus mercifully with us, that the hearts of those
miscreants should thus fail them, to fly when none pursues them, that in our
encounters with them we lose not one for 100; and seeing that all these la^^
Easterly winds have brought no supply for us out of England, we should have
been in despair, and clean cut off; but it does plainly teach us. That it is
his mighty hand and stretched-out arm, and not an arm of flesh that does
protect us.

At the beginning of these troubles our watches were mixed Irish and English
together, but since we have divided our selves, the English have all retired to
the water side, and the Irish keep the upper old Town; so that if they profess
any treachery, the Fort and our Ship Charles will presently beat down their
houses about their ears, and do us no harm. My Lord President and Colonel
Banester did very well approve of their doings: now a little of business I
take notice what you write of the Ship Charles, I have thereupon thought it the
best course to persuade Mr J. Brooks to go over to inform that Honorable House
what manner of Ship she is, and what she has and will stand us in to set her
forth completely to Sea, she will stand us upwards of 5000l. I shall defire you
to be an assistant to the bearer Mr J. Brooks, to petition to the Parliament to
have satisfaction for the time we have spent in Harbor from the 12 day of
January, for the defense of the Fort, Town, and Harbor, which, under God, was
the chief preservation of them all; for till of late, the Fort was very weak,
and ill manned; and to gether to be employed in the Kings service, and to allow
us the rates which other Ships have, three pound 16 per Month each man: she is
already in place, and doubtless may do as good service as any Ship that is
employed; she will carry, and has ports for 30 pieces of Ordnance; we have
already 24 Barrells of Powder, five Cables, and double Sails: but for this I
refer you to the relation of the Bearer, praying you to assist him
effectually; he is a very able deserving man he carries a Letter from Captain
Dewricke; a part owner to a kinsman of his, one Mr Norcket, a good friend to Mr
Pime and M. Strowd; the said M. Strowd is a very able deserving Gentleman, I
knew him when my Brother Nich. Glanfield lived in Panestocke, but I believe he
does not remember me. I pray God direct their hears; that we may have some aid
come over in time, to keep them from reaping what they have sown, and before
they have Powder and Arms from other parts, lest they should take head again:
10000 men in M^^st^r would, in my opinion, in a very short time do the
business, and fetch back our Cattle and Horses which they have driven into
Musgro^^ Woods. If I had but 200 men at present, to what we have, I am very
confident I should do some service to Gods glory in the defense of my Religion
and Nation; and thus much believe of my conceited opinion, That if these
Rebels be pardoned, this kingdom will never be secure; the abuses are so
unhumane, and so devilish, that if it become pardonable, none will care what
offense be commits: and the hatred between the Nations is so great, that it
is impossible that ever it can be forgotten. Let us have leave to fight it out
to the last man; or if not, and that they must five here, set us have leave to
depart, and seek some other place for our ^^bitation.

I have between 6 and 7000l in debts upon the Irish, which will be all lost,
and never expect a penny of it; and I have not a penny left, only what is in
the new ship, and those that are gone for Gennoa, and a little provision for my
self and Family for 5 or 6 Months if I can keep it, which I hope I shall, or I
shall lose my life with it. Pray be helpful to my Brother Salie in what he
shall desire you, and think not upon any Trade for these parts for a while, for
the Country affords no commodity, neither is there any money to buy any
commodity that is brought to us, unless you can contract with the Honorable
House of Parliament to furnish these Ports with provisions, making your
condition at some reasonable gaining rate, to be paid out of the Chamber of
London. We have at present abundance of Corn, by reason of two or three prizes,
Frenchmen laden with Wheat and Rye brought in by our men of War. It is a gre^^
oversight, that in all this time we have not more Ships, one or two to ride
constantly in each Port, to hinder the coming of provision and Ammunition to
the Rebels, which cannot be so securely done by keeping a few ships at Sea:
the sure way is, as I have said, to have a ship or two to ride constantly in
each Port, and half a dozen of nimble ships to keep at Sea upon the head Lands.
I pray be vigilant, that we may have satisfaction for our losses, and some
reward for our honest endeavors. I have furnished his Majesty's Fort of this
place, Cork, Kings ship, and otherwise in his Majesty's service, to the value
of 400l in Deal boords, Iron, Pitch, Tar, Train, Ammunitions, and Moneys, and
know not yet when, or by whom I shall be satisfied for the same; and whatsoever
I have yet remaining, I will willingly part with in the said service, and am
ready to seal this my intent to the last drop of my blood. There have been a
great many of our Nation who are very able both in person and estate to serve
in this cause, that have stolen away, and carried their estates, moneys, and
provision with them; it were good, in my opinion, that an inquiry were made
after them in England, and compelled not only to return in their own persons,
but to being over others upon their own charge; it would be but an easy
punishment for their cowardly baseness. I shall desire you to be mindful of
us in your prayers to God Almighty. In whom I rest

Your loving Brother, TRISTRAM WHITCOMBE.
Remember me to all my friends, and excuse my not writing; distractions would
not permit me.


I have a conceit, and am almost confident, That a great reason of those
rebels running into corners is, That they have some intelligence that their
good friends and great pillars, of whom they boasted, either have, or must
leave them to themselves.



FINIS.

