A DEMONSTRATION THAT THE Church of Rome, AND HER COUNCILS HAVE ERRED: BY
SHOWING, That the COUNCILS of Constance, Basil, and Trent, have, in all their
Decrees touching Communion in one Kind, contradicted the Received Doctrine of
the Church of Christ.

WITH AN APPENDIX, In ANSWER to The XXI. Chapter of the Author of A Papist
Misrepresented, and Represented.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Awnsham Churchill, at the Black-Swan in
Ave-Mary-Lane, MDCLXXXVIII.

IMPRIMATUR.

Apr. 11. 1688. Guil. Needham.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
The Contents of the Preface.
This Discourse plainly overthrows all the Foundations of the Romish Faith,
showing 1. That the Romish Councils and the Church of Rome, cannot be the sole
authentic Interpreters of Scripture, or the true Judges of Tradition,. 1. 2ly.
That they were not assisted by the Holy Ghost in making this Decree touching
Communion in one King,. 2. 3ly. That the Councils of Constance, Basil, and
Trent were not true General Councils, or that such Councils must be subject
unto Error,. 3. 4ly. That there is no Certainty of the Romish Faith by oral
Tradition,. 4. 5ly. That these Councils ridiculously do assert, That they made
their Decrees touching Communion in one King consulting the Advantage and
Salvation of Christian People,. 5. 6ly. That the Decrees of the Councils of
Pisa, Constance, and Basil concerning the Superiority of a Genral Council over
the Pope, and their Authority to decree matters of Faith without him, must be
allowed to be valid, or we can have no Assurance of the Validity and
Infallibility of any of their Councils,. 6.

BY way of Preface to this Discourse I shall endeavor briefly, and plainly to
demonstrate,

1. That it plainly overthrows all the Certainty of the Romish Faith, and
that if they have made these Definitions and Decrees in opposition to the plain
Sense of Scripture, and the Interpretations of it by the Holy Fathers, and to
the full Tradition of the Church in former Ages, these their received Councils
cannot be by Gods Appointment, the Judges of our Controversies, the authentic
Interpreters of Scripture, or assisted by the Holy Ghost in making these
Decisions, nor can they be Assertors of, or Adherers to primitive Tradition,
but rather plain Desertors of it. And,

First, Whereas they challenge as their undoubted Right, Authority to be the
sole authentic Interpreters of the Sense of Scripture, and the true Judges of
the Tradition of the Church of Christ. Hence we may learn what excellent
Interpreters they are of Scripture and Tradition; For, whereas the Trent
Council has in General defined that it belongs to the Church alone, Sess. 4.
Judicare de vero sensu, and interpretatione Sanctarum Scripturarum, To judge
of the true sense and meaning of the Holy Scriptures: And particularly, That
being taught by the Holy Spirit, Sess. 21. c. 1.
Atque ipsius Ecclesiae judicium and consuetudinem secuta, And following the
Judgment and Custom of the Church, she made the forementioned Decrees touching
Communion in one Kind.

Secondly. Whereas the Council of Constance says, That they made their Decrees
concerning the same Matter, Sess. 13.
Plurium doctorum tam divini quam humani juris deliberatione praehabita, After
mature Deliberation had with many Doctors, skilful both in divine and humane
Laws. And lastly, whereas the Council of Basil has declared, That they
determined the same Matter, Sess. 30.
Post diligentem perscrutationem divinarum Scripturarum sacrorumque Canonum,
and doctrinarum a Sanctis patribus, and Doctoribus traditarum, in hac Synodo,
longis temporibus habitam; After a diligent Search made, in this Synod, for a
long time, of holy Scriptures, of the sacred Canons, and of the Doctrines
delivered by the holy Fathers. I say, Whereas they do expressly, and confidently
pretend these things; I think it will be evident from this Discourse, That in
those Matters they plainly have decreed against the clear and formerly received
Sense of Scriptures, against the Doctrines delivered by the Holy Fathers, and
by the sacred Canons, and against the Judgment and Custom of the Church of God
in former Ages. So that if it belong unto the Church alone to judge of the true
Sense and Meaning of the Holy Scriptures, these Councils, and those Churches
which have embraced their Interpretations of the Scriptures concerned in this
Dispute, could not be the Church Representative or Catholic, but falsely did,
and do pretend to these Titles. If it belong unto the Church to teach us what
is Tradition, they who assert these things as suitable to the Doctrines
delivered by the Holy Fathers, and to the Judgment of the Church, cannot
deserve that Title.

Again, Thirdly, Whereas the Trent Council says, That in making these Decrees
she was Ipsa Synodus a Spiritu Sancto, qui est Spiritus sapientiae and
intellectus, Spiritus consilii and pietatis, edocta. Sess. 21. c. 1. Ibid.
Instructed by the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of Wisdom and of
Understanding, of Counsel and of Pieyt, whereas the Council of Constance and of
Basil, in making their Decrees touching this Article; Declare they were a Holy
General Synod, in Spiritu Sancto legitime congregata, Met rightly together in
the holy Ghost: Hence it is evident that, 1. They falsely pretended to the
Assistance of the Holy Spirit, who being the spirit of Truth, the Inditer of
the Sacred Scripture, would not assist them to determine contrary to the Truth
delivered there; and being also the Spirit promised to assist his Church, and
guide her true and living Members into all saving Truth, could not assist them
to Decree against the Practice, and the Judgment of the Church of Christ for a
Thousand years.

2. Hence also it must follow that these Councils, tho, as to these
Definitions, they are owned as truly General, by the whole Church of Rome, were
not true General Councils, or that true General Councils confirmed by the Pope,
and owned by the whole Church of Rome, may err in Matters of Faith, in the
Interpretation of the Holy Scriptures, and in their Judgment of Tradition.

3. And whereas our late Roman Disputants have laid the whole Certainty of
their Faith upon the Infallibility of oral Tradition,. 4. Mr. G. and Mr. M.
delivering to them the same Doctrine to day which was delivered yesterday, and
so up to the time of our Savior, it must be as evident they have no Certainty
of Roman Faith, as it is evident from this, and other late Treatises, That they
have varied from the Tradition of the Church in the Practice of latin Service,
the Veneration of Images, and the Substraction of the Cup, and we desire
nothing more of the most wavering Persons, than that they would not go over to
that Church till they see greater Evidence that they have never varied from
what was once taught and delivered in the Church of Christ, than these
Discourses offer to evince that they have actually done it.

Moreover hence we may learn how excellently these Councils have consulted for
the Advantage, and the Salvation of Christian People. The Fathers of the
Council of Constance pretend to have made their Decrees in reference to this
Matter, Sess. 13.
Saluti fidelium providere satagentes, Endeavoring to provide for the
Salvation of the Faithful, The Council of Basil preface their Decree against
Communion in both Kinds, with a Pretense that they had honestly consulted Sess.
30.
Quid circa perceptionem S. Eucharistiae tenendum sit and agendum pro utilitate
and salute populi Christiani, What was to be held or done about the receiving
of the Eucharist for the Advantage and Salvation of Christian People. The
Council of Trent insinuates that she has established this Custom, because it
was only such a Change in Dispensation of this Sacrament as the Church Sess.
21. c. 2.
Utilitati suscipientium magis expedire judicaret, Judged most expedient for
the Benefit of the Receivers.

It therefore seems our Lord, and his Apostles, and the whole primitive Church
for a Thousand Years, says their Consult. Art. 22. p. 981.
Cassander, for a Thousand and two hundred Years, says Rerum liturg. l. 2. c.
18. p. 862.
Cardinal Bona, were wickedly unmindful of the Advantage and Salvation of
Christian People, for our Lord instituted, and in compliance with his
Institution, his Apostles and the whole Christian Church, for the forementioned
Centuries, did minister the Sacrament in both Kinds, till those good Souls,
filled with true Zeal for the Salvation of all christian People, Et spiritu
pietatis edocti, And taught by the Spirit of true Piety, forbad them to receive
the Cup of Life; the Apostles, and all the ancient Fathers and Councils of the
Church were either so ignorant, or heedless, as that they never thought of
making any Laws against Christ's Institution, till the Councils of Basil,
Constance and Trent, assisted with the Spirit of Wisdom, Understanding and
Counsel, found it expedient so to do, and for the Benefit and Salvation of the
Laity, to decree peremptorily that they hereafter never should receive the Cup
of Blessing and Salvation, That they should never drink of the Blood of the New
Covenant, the Blood of their Redemption, the Blood shed for the Remission of
their Sins. They were so ignorant, or so regardless of the Reverence due to the
Holy Eucharist, That neither the Perils which might happen to it from the long
Beards of the Communicants, or by growing acid, or by being shed, could make
them think it fit to alter the Institution of our Lord, or the Practice of the
Church. They thought so little of the Scarcity of Wine in some Countries, and
of the Aversation that some others had unto the taste or the smell of it, that
none of all these weighty Reasons, though they were the same in the First Ages
of the Church, as in the Thirteenth and the Fourteenth Centuries, could move
them, out of Reverence to our Lord 's Institution, to forbid the Practice of
it, till these Catech. Trid. Part. 2. c. 4. Sect. 66.
Gravissimae Rations, Most weighty Reasons, being deliberately considered by
the Roman Catholic Church, She, to prevent those dreadful Perils, and these
Scandals, introduced this new Custom, and confirmed it for a Law in Opposition
both to our Savior's Institution, and to the Practice of the Church in which
she had continued for a Thousand Years to the great Damage, and the Hindrance
of the Salvation of her People, till these Councils so happily bestir'd
themselves for their Advantage and Salvation.

And Thirdly, Whereas these Councils, in framing these Decrees style the
Practice of Communicating under one Kind Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
Romanae and Universalis Ecclesiae consuetuod approbata, The approved Custom of
the Roman and Universal Church, and of the Consi. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 2.
Holy Catholic Church, and the Declaration made concerning it at Basil, is
called Declaratio Catholicae veritatis, Sess. 30.
The Declaration of the Catholic Truth: Not to observe at present how horribly
Uncharitable these Councils are, in excluding out of the Catholic Church, and
consequently from Salvation, all who had not consented to the Violation of our
Lord's Institution, and to the Alteration of the Practice of the Church of
Christ, for a whole Thousand Years; That is, not only all who in the West
refused to make so bold with our Lord's Institution, but all the Greek and
Eastern Churches; I say, not to insist on this, hence it is evident, That the
present Practice and Judgment of what they call the Catholic and Universal
Church, can be no certain or sufficient Proof of Tradition Apostolical, since
in this Matter, she has both practiced and decreed in Opposition to the plain
Judgment and Tradition of the Church of Christ for Ten whole Centuries.

To these Considerations, which concern the Definitions of these Councils
touching Communion in one Kind, I add these following Remarks touching these
Councils, and the Decrees which they confirmed in their Assemblies.

1. Therefore, touching the Councils of Constance and of Basil, let it be
considered, that they constantly declare, That they were Holy Synods, assembled
in the Holy Ghost, and representing the Church Catholic. The General Council
of Sess. 8.14.
Pisa which agreed with them in their Sentiments, and met about the same
Affairs ascribes unto it self the same great Titles.

2. Note that there were present at the Council of Pisa, says Council. To. 7.
p. 994.
binius, Three Patriarchs, Twenty three Cardinals, Thirty Archbishops, Two
hundred and eighty Governors of Monasteries, the Divines, and Legates of the
Princes of Europe. There were present at that Council, says Hist. Consil.
General. l. 2. c. 1. p. 35.
Richerius, an Hundred and eighty Archbishops and Bishops, Three hundred
Governors of Monasteries, an Hundred and twenty Masters in Theology, Three
hundred Doctors of the canon and the civil Law, the Legates of Christian
Princes, and the Legates and Procurators of all the Universities of Europe.

At the Council of Constance, says To. 7. p. 1134.
Binius, there were Four Patriarchs, Twenty nine Cardinals, Forty seven
Archbishops, an Hundred and sixty Bishops, and of Abbots, Provosts, and
Priors, and of all sorts of Clerks a very great Number.

To the Council of Basil, says the same To. 8. p. 525.
Binius, came a very great Multitude of Prelates from the whole Latin World.

Having premised these things, I ask whether these Councils knew themselves
full and entire Representatives of the Church Catholic, and Councils assisted
by the Holy Ghost, or they did not? If they did know themselves to be true
General Councils, representing the Church Catholic, etc. then they undoubtedly
were so. And then why were they represented by the Fifth Lateran Council as
schismatical seditious Councils, Concilium Constantiense ubi definit Concilium
esse supra Papam, reprobatum est in Concilio Florentino and Lateranensi ultimo.
Bellar. de Council. l. 1. c 7. de Council. partim Reprobatis.
and of no Authority; Why are they styled Concilia Reprobata, Reprobated
Councils, by the greatest Part of Roman Catholics, in reference to some of
these things which they profess to have decided under this Majestic Character?
Why is it yet left free for any Romanist to reject their Authority, and Decrees
in many Matters? Moreover, if they were true General Councils representing the
whole Church, and assisted by the Holy Ghost, either such Councils must have
erred in what they have decreed as matter of Faith, and therefore cannot be
Infallible, and then the whole Church Representative, and Councils assisted by
the Holy Ghost may err in matters of Faith, or if they did not err, it must
be matter of Faith, That a General Council is superior to the Pope. Secondly,
That General Councils may infallibly determine matters of Faith without him,
yea, against him. Thirdly, That the pertiancious Resisters of this Doctrine
were Heretics, and therefore that Eugenius the 4th. Julius the 2d. Leo the
10th. and the 5th. Lateran Council were Heretical.

If they did not know the Truth of what they thus assert, how shall private
Persons be able to discern what such Assemblies, and so many Universities and
Churches throughout the World consenting with them, and owning them as such,
could not discern? That is, how shall they know when Councils are truly
General, when they truly represent the Church Catholic, and they are assisted
by the Holy Ghost? Was not this one of their Decrees, That for the future,
Quilibet in R. Pontificem eligendus, Every one that was to be chosen Pope
should in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost with Heart and Mouth
Profess to God Almighty, and to blessed Peter, firmy to believe, and hold, as
long as he lived, the holy Catholic Faith, according to the Traditions of the
Apostles, the general Councils, and in particular, of the general Councils of
Lateran, Lions, Vienna, Constance and Basil, and to keep that Faith to a tittle
unchanged, Consil. Constable. Sess. 39. Basil. Sess. 23.37.
Et usque ad animam and sanguinem confirmare, defensare and praedicare, And to
preach, confirm and defend it with their Life and Blood? Did not the following
Popes, till after the Time of Eugenius the 4th. make this Profession? Yea, were
not the Inquisitors of Heretics obliged by the Council of Constance to enquire
of any who lay under Suspicion of Heresy, Vtrum credaet, teneat, and asserat,
quod quodlibet Concilium Generale, and etiam Constantinense Vniversalem
Ecclesiam repraesentet. Item utrum credat, quod illud quod Sacrum Concilium
Constantienense Vniversalem Ecclesiam Repraesentans, approbavit and approbat in
favorem fidei, and salutem animarum, quod hoc est abuniversis Christi fidelibus
approbandum, and tenendum: Et quod condemnavit and condemnat esse fidei, and
bonis moribus contrarium, hoc ab eisdem esse tenendum pro condemnato,
credendum, and asserendum. Sess. 45. apud Binium Tom. 7. p. 1124.
Whether he believed, held, and asserted, That every general Council, and
particularly that of Constance represents the Universal Church, and whether he
believed that what that Council, representing the whole Church, approved in
favor of Faith, and the welfare of Souls, was to be approved by all the
Faithful, and what it condemned as contrary to Faith and good Manners, was as
such to be condemned? And after this Profession of these Popes, this
Inquisition made by all concerned to find out, and prosecute Persons suspected
of Heresy, could they be doubtful whether these Councils were truly General, or
no? Would they condemn Men of Heresy for not believing these Articles, if they
themselves did not believe them? What Hppes can private Persons have, that they
shall surely know when Councils represent the Church, and are accepted by it,
if the Agreement of so many Nations, so many Universities, so many Cardinals,
Archbishops, Bishops, Divines and Doctors, the Profession of so many Popes,
the Practice of so many Inquisitors, do not prove that these Councils were once
accepted by the Church.

Again, Was there any Scripture, or Tradition of the Church which plainly
taught the contrary; if not, there can be none now, and so no Man can hve just
Cause, from Scripture or Tradition, to doubt the Infallibility of these
Councils, That they represented the whole Church, and were assisted by the Holy
Ghost, That they were above the Pope, and Representatives of the Church
Catholic without Dependence on him. If either plain Scripture, or Tradition
contradicted these their Assertions and Determinations, then must these great
Assemblies, and all the Universities, Nations, and Churches which owned them as
true general Councils, be accounted ignorant of what plain Scripture or
Tradition delivered touching a Matter of Faith of so great Import to the Union,
the Peace and Reformation of the Church, and why then may not others be
ignorant of other Matters plain in Scripture, or Tradition, without Peril? why
may we not suppose, or at the least, suspect, That other Councils, less
numerous, have been so?

Again, These Councils of Constance, and Basil have declared and decreed, That
Council. Basil. Sess. 2. apud Bin. To. 8. p. 22. Sess. 18. p. 55.
general Councils have Authority immediately from Christ, which every one, of
whatsoever State or Dignity, though it be Papal, is obliged to obey in things
pertaining to Faith, the Extirpation of the said Schism, and the general
Reformation of the Church in its Head and Members. That the Pope himself is
bound to stand to the Declaration and Definition of these Councils. Whatsoever
Christian, says the Sess. 45.
Council of Constance, refuses to profess, That he believes, asserts and holds
this, he shall be proceeded against, as one suspected of Heresy. This, says
the Council of Basil, is Sess. 33. p. 95.
Veritas fidei Catholicae, A Truth belonging to the Catholic Faith, and
whosoever pertinaciously resists it, censendus est Haereticus, Is to be deemed
an Heretic. It is an Article of Faith which cannot be neglected, say they,
Sine interitu saluts, Without the Loss of Salvation. They also decreed, That it
was not in the Power of the Pope to dissolve, prorogue, or transfer a general
Council to another place, without the Consent of the said Council. And this
Decree is also styled Ibid. Sess. 33. p. 59. and Sess. 38. p. 101.
An Article of Faith, which he who pertinaciously does resist is to be deemed
an Heretic. They also urge in Confirmation of these Decrees,

1. That they were established by Martin the Fifth, confirming the Decrees of
the Council of Constance, and by Eugenius the Fourth, confirming that of Basil,
and particularly that of the Eighth Session, That P. 33.
during that Council, there could be no general Council assembled elsewhere,
and that if any one presumed to make or erect another Assembly under the Name
of a general Council assembled elsewhere, and that if any one presumed to make
or erect another Assembly under the Name of a general Council, he would not
erect a Council of the Church Catholic, but a Coventicle of Schismatics.

Secondly. That by Virtue of these Decrees Sess. 29. p. 83. p. 101.
Martin the Fifth was chosen Pope, and John the Twenty third, and Benedict the
Thirteenth were deposed, and that after the Death of Martin the Fifth, Eugenius
the Fourth was chosen Pope by virtue of the same Decrees. So that if they were
not valid, these neither could be true Popes, nor the Cardinals, Archbishops,
or other Clerks promoted by them could have good Titles to these Promotions.

Thirdly. That Sess. 30. p. 84. v. p. 138, 139, 178.
if the Pope had the Authority over general Councils, which these Decrees
denied to belong to him, the Pope might without Resistance, at his Pleasure,
corrupt all Christianity, and being accused by a Council of Heresy, or any
other Crime, might presently dissolve the Council to escape being judged by
them.

Fourthly. That Decret. 5. Concl. p. 117.
no skilful Person ever doubted of this Article, That the Pope was subject to
the Judgment of Universal Councils in things which concern the Faith. That P.
153, 155, 180.
the Universal Church, and Christian Religion acquiesced in this Article of
Faith, Firmiter credens non posse fieri dissolutionem Synodi sine consensu
ejus, Firmly believing, that a Dissolution of the Council could not be made
without its Consent. P. 149.
That it was by all confessed.

Fifthly. That P. 136, 139.
if these Decrees were not to be admitted, it must follow, that all these
Councils had actually erred, and that they who were Members of them, were
schismatics, and that the Church which judged that they could not be dissolved
without their own Consent, has also erred.

Now, I say, were these truly Articles of Faith, or not? If they were, why are
they not received by the Church of Rome? Yea why are they rejected by the
greatest part of Concilii Basiliensis nihil est ratum and probatum nisi quaedam
dispositiones. Bell. de Council. l. 1. c. 7.
Romish Doctors? Why were they practically condemned by the Council of Florence
assembling in opposition to one of these Articles? And why is not that Council
held by the Church of Rome Schismatical, as it must have been, if the
forementioned Decrees be true? Why were they dogmatically Condemned in the
Fifth Council of Lateran?

If they were not Articles of Faith, why were they owned as such by so many
Councils, so many Nations, so many Universities? Why does the General Council
of Basil so frequently insist upon this plea in defense of them, P. 89.
that they were determinations, Vniversae Ecclesiae, of the Universal Church,
that they had been declared in many Councils, P. 153.
atque per Vniversalem Ecclesiam approhatae, and approved by the Universal
Church? That, tota Ecclesia, P. 155.
and populus Christianus, the whole Church, and all Christian People had
acquiesced in them. That they were Declarations of the Catholic Faith, P. 180.
quas universa tenuit Ecclesia, which the Universal Church held. May we not
here turn allt he Arguments of the Romanists upon them, by which they do
endeavor to show that it is in us unreasonable, absurd, and insolent to condemn
the Decrees of their supposed General Councils, and of these two in particular,
decreeing for the Substraction of the Cup? May we not complain of them in the
words of the Council of Basil, that refusing to follow, P. 117.
as an infallible Rule, the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in things
respecting Faith, judicium proprium in adversum obduratis animis sequi volunt,
they choose on the contrary with obdurate minds to follow their Private
Judgment? May we not ask them in the words of the same Council, Whether they
dare condemn all the Cardinals, Patriarchs, Bishops, the Emperor, the Kings,
the Princes and others, who by themselves or others were present in this
Council; and denique Ecclesiam per orbem dispersam hoc Concilium approbantem,
P. 149.
and lastly the Church dispersed throughout the World approving this Council?
May we not argue thus with them, If those Declarations of Faith and Divine
Right, which have so often and solemnly been made by the Universal Church, and by
General Councils declared consistorially to be lawful by the Popes themselves,
P. 179.
even at the very time that they made them: Si post haec omnia; If, I say,
after all these things, these Declarations may be rejected and trampled upon,
as being erroneous, must not the whole Church be accused of Error, and the
Declarations of General Councils touching matters of Faith be henceforth
disbelieved? Yea lastly may we not conclude with R. H. in a like case, Rat.
account Disc. 1. chapter 6.. 59. p. 58.
That if the Decrees of so many Synods, ( viz. at Pisa, Constance, Sens, Basil,
Bourges) so often weighing the Adversaries Reasons and Evidneces, was not
sufficient for settling such a point, at least as to the obedience of future
silence and non-contradiction, and as to suffering the Church to enjoy her
Peace; what can hereafter be sufficient, or can we ever hope that any
Controversy shall be finally determined, or ended by a future Council, if this
( of the Superiority of a General Council above a Pope, etc.) is not by these
forepast? Can there be any Ground here to question the integrity or lawful
proceedings of so many Councils all concurring in the same Judgment in this
matter? or could there be any new Light in this Point attainable by private
Doctors, or by following Councils of the Church of Rome, of which those
Councils were not capable or had no notice of, whatsoever R. H. elsewhere
speaks of, Disc. 1. c. 3.. 37, 38. p. 26.
A moral certainty, that so many and such persons as meet in their supposed
General Councils, could not conspire to falsify the Truth, That Disc. 3.. 44.
p. 28.
none can be supposed fit to judge of them, That P. 143, 179.
Men vainly pretend to be certain of what such Councils, and a major part of
the Church, having the same means of certainty, judge false, or that their
private Judgments can have clear Scripture or Tradition, which they could not
discern, I say, All these things in this instance do so visibly recoil upon
them, that it is needless to insist upon it.

Lastly, Two things I desire may be considered and attended to in perusing this
Discourse.

The First, is, That though the Ancients alleged here, directly oppose the
Doctrines and Determinations of these Councils, and the Practice of the Church
of Rome established by them; yet do I not for that Reason only conclude her
guilty of Sin and Error in denying the Cup to the Laity, for I am far from
holding every thing taught or practiced by the Ancients, as certainly true and
necessary, and therefore fear not any Retortions of this Nature, from our
Adversaries: Had I designed any thing of that Nature, I would more cpiously
have insisted on those Arguments from Scripture, whence that conclusion can
alone be made, and which I therefore have so briefly touched upon, because I
was so happily prevented in that matter by the unanswerable Treatise on this
Subject against the Bishop of Meaux, with which I was unwilling to interfere;
but finding that the forementioned Bishop had with great confidence appealed
for this matter, to the constant practice and to the Principles of the
Primitive Church, P. 160, 161.
and told us, That the constant Practices of the Primitive Church received with
universal approbation from the Origin of Christianity, till the time of the
Council of Constance, do invincibly demonstrate, that the Council did but
follow the Tradition of All Ages when it defined, That the Communion under one
kind was as good and sufficient as under both, with many other things of a like
nature, in which he is also followed by the late Writers of the same Communion:
And finding also that the once exploded Blackloists were again admitted to
plead the infallibility of the Roman Church from practical Tradition, and that
this was done upon the strength of these two Propositions:

1. J. S.
That the Church of Rome has always held close to Tradition, and received
still her Doctrine by Tradition from the Father to the Son, from the first to
the second, and so to the present Age.

2. That she could not mistake the sense of Tradition in particular points. In
contradiction to these confident Assertions I have here showed, by confronting
the Doctrines and Sayings of the Fathers, to the express Determinations of
their Councils.

1. That the present Church of Rome has varied in this matter from Antiquity,
both in Doctrine and Practice, and that Tradition plainly contradicts all their
Assertions and Decrees relating to it: And therefore that all her late
Defenders are much mistaken, or, which is worse, would lead others into a known
Error, when they undertake to persuade them that the practice of their Church,
in denying the Cup to the Laity and to Priests non-conficient, is warranted by
Tradition and Primitive Practice, and by the Principles on which they builded
that pretended Practice.

2. That in this particular Point she has either actually mistaken the Sense
of Tradition, or actually devidated from Tradition. And seeing whether she does
not differ from or agree with the Primitive Belief, and Practice in this
Article, is a matter of Fact, and so may be determined by the Testimony of good
Witnesses of what was practiced and believed in their Times, and by plain
Allegations of matter of Fact, without Infallibility: In plain reason, and from
her own avowed Principles it follows, that her Authority in saying she does not
differ from the Tradition of the Ancients, and much more in asserting, That she
has always held to it, and therefore could not mistake the Sense of it, can be
of no force against plain evidence of Fact to the contrary. If then the
difference betwixt the Belief and Practice of the Ancients, and of the present
Church of Rome in this matter be evident, as I think I have made it, it must be
owned that the present received Tradition of that Church can be no certain Rule
of Truth, and no sure Argument that such was the Tradition of the Primitive
Church, since in this Controversy she has actually varied from the Tradition
of the Ancients.

And thus far, 1. and no farther, would I be thought to drive the Argument
drawn from the Citations of the Ancients. The Right or Authority claimed by
that Church, will be best judged of by other Intrinsic Arguments, which ought
to have the greater force when it appears that Prescription is against our
Adversaries. Only I cannot but admire why the Trent Council should found their
Power of making such a Change in our Lord 's Institution, on those words of the
Aposlte, 1 Cor. iv. 1 Id autem Apostolus non obscure visus est innuisse cum
ait, sic nos existimet, etc. Sess. 21. c. 2.
But let a Man account of us, (...), and dispensatores mysteriorum Dei, as
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Since in that very
place it is immediately added, That of a Steward it is required that he be
found Faithful, that is, says (...). In Locum.
Chrysostom, that he do not usurp Authority over the things of his Lord, but
administer them as a Steward, (...), for it belongs to a Steward to
administer, or distribute, well to the Family the things committed to his
hands. And St. Basil (...). Haec ipsis integra custodiat, Tom. 2. de vera ac
pia fide p. 385. b.
says, It is the property of a faithful Minister, whatsoever things are
committed to him by his Lord, to distribute them to his fellow Servants, and to
preserve them for him, without Adulteration or Deceit, or purely and entirely,
says the Latin.

2. The Second thing which I desire may be considered, is, That nothing in the
following Citations, can be urged against the Church of England, as Erroneous
in this Matter. Art. 6.
For since she professes to admit nothing as necessary to be believed, but
what is either expressed in, or fairly deducible from Scripture, and that it is
not necessary that Traditions and Ceremonies be in all places one, or utterly
alike: Art. 34.
How can in reflect upon her, that S. Cyprian, for Example, held it necessary
to mix the Wine with Water, or that others have held it necessary to use
Unleavened Bread, etc. All that her Sons are in this Case obliged to, is only
to give fair and satisfactory Reasons, why these things are not necessary,
which they are both able and willing to do; whereas if a disagreement between
the present Church of Rome, and the Primitive Christians be once proved against
them in any of their Articles, all their fine Pleas for the certainty of their
Traditions, Mr. M. Quest. of Quest. p. 395, 396, 397.
the Infallibility of their Councils, as proceeding upon Tradition, and meeting
only to consult about the Tradition of the Church diffused, and all the
Prejudices they advance against the Protestants from the present Tradition of
their Church, must be confessedly vain and Sophistical. And the attending to
this difference of Principles in each Church, will show how much the
Testimonies of the Ancients do affect the one, and how little they concern the
other, and so will prevent the Objections of an Unwary, and the Cavils of a
captious Reader.

THE INTRODUCTION. Showing what the Councils of Constance, Basil, and Trent
have determined, touching Communion in one kind.
THOUGH in many other Doctrines, and Practices of the Church of Rome, she
contradicts the plainest Evidence of Scripture and Tradition, as in the
bowing down to Images, the Celebration of the Mass in Latin, where it is a
Tongue unknown to the Generality of them that hear it; yet in none of them has
she so openly affronted, and defied both the Institutions of the H. Scripture,
and the continual Practice, and declaration of the Church of Christ, as in her
practice of the Substraction of the Cup from Lay Communicants; and in the
Propositions, Assertions, and Decrees, she has established to excuse that
practice.

In that of Honorary Worship of the Images of Saints, her second Nicene Council
does very frequently, though, say the Fathers met at Frankford Praefat. p. 10.
, very impudently, pretend to Apostolical Tradition. The Trent Council usher in
their Decree concerning the Honor and Veneration to be imparted to them, with
an insinuation, that it is made juxta Catholicae, and Apostolicae Ecclesiae
usum, a primaevis Christianae Religionis temporibus receptum Sess. 25.
: According to the use of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from
the first Ages of Christianity. But when they come to settle as a Law this
Defalcation of the Cup, they do it without any of these colors, or pretenses,
yea with confessed deviation both from our Savior's Institution and Tradition,
and from the constant practice of the first, and purest Ages of his Church,
Declaring, and defining, as the Trent Council does, That Sess. 21. c. 1, 2.
although our Redeemer, and our Lord, in his Last Supper did institute this
venerable Sacrament, and deliver it to the Apostles in both species, yet Ibid.
Can. 2.
if any person say the Holy Catholic Church was not by just causes and reasons
moved to give it to the Laity, and Priests not consecrating, in one species
only, let him be accursed. And as the Council of Constance does, That Quod
licet in primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus sub
utraque specie, tamen haec consuetudo, viz. communicandi Laicos, tantummodo sub
specie panis habenda est pro lege quam non licet reprobare. Council. Constant.
Sess. 13.
although in the Primitive Church the Sacrament was received by the Faithful
under both species, yet is the Custom of receiving it by Laymen, and by
Priests not consecrating, to be received as a Law.

That these Decrees are evidently repugnant to the institution of our Lord and
Savior, and to the practice of the whole Church of Christ, for above a
Thousand Years, has been proved beyond all possibility of contradiction, in a
late excellent Treatise, in Answer to a Discourse of Mr. Condom on this
Subject. That the same Decrees, and almost every proposition, declaration, and
assertion, which have been advanced, and invented by the General Councils of
Constance, Basil, and of Trent, in favor of them, are manifestly opposite and
repugnant to the received Traditions of the Church of Christ, and to the Sense
and the Expressions of the Fathers of the Christian Church, I undertake, by
God's Assistance, in the ensuing Pages to demonstrate, by showing,

First, What these Councils have determined in this matter. And,

Secondly, What has, in contradiction to them, been asserted, and declared by
the Fathers which flourished in the Church of God.

Now the Church of Rome has by the Councils of Constance, Basil and Trent,
declared and defined as follows.

1. First, Sancta Synodus declarat, and docet nullo divino praecepto Laicos and
Clericos, non conficientes obligari ad Eucharistiae Sacramentum sub utraque
specie sumendum. Syn. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 1.
That the Laics and Priests, who do not consecrate, are not obliged by divine
Precept to receive the Sacrament in both kinds. That Et cap. 3.
though Christ, in his Last Supper, instituted this veverable Sacrament under
the species of Bread and Wine, yeet do not that institution and delivery, bind
all the Faithful, by the Law of Christ, to receive both species; and that they
who assert the contrary, speak rashly and presumptuously.

2. That Neque nullo pacto dubitari posse, salva fide, quin illis alterius
speciei communio ad salutem sufficiat. Ibid. Et Sess. 13. Can. 3.
it cannot be doubted, without prejudice to the Christian Faith, but that
Communion in one kind only is sufficient to Salvation. Whosoever does affirm
the contrary to either of these Declarations, says the Trent Council, let him
be Anathema.

3. That Sancta matter Ecclesia -- gravibus and justis causis adducta, hanc
consuetudinem sub altera specie communicandi approbavit, and pro lege habendum
decrevit, quam reprobare, aut sine Ecclesiae authoritate pro libito mutare non
licet. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. c. 2.
the Church of Christ, for just and weighty reasons, has approved the
Communion of Laics and Priests not consecrating, under one kind only, and has
defined it for a Law, That Concilium S. Generale Constantiense in Spirit
Sancto legitime congregatum, declarat, decernit and definit, quod licet
Christus post coenam instituerit, and suis Discipulis administraverit sub
untraque specie panis and vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum -- and similiter,
quod licet in primitiva Ecclesia hujusmodi Sacramentum reciperetur a fidelibus
sub utraque specie, tamen haec consuetudo ad evitandum aliqua pericula etc
scandalaest rationabiliter introducta quod a conficientibus sub utraque specie,
and a Laicis tantummodo sub specie panis suscipiatur, unde cum hujusmodi
consuetudo ab Ecclesia, and Sanctis Patribus rationabiliter introducta, and
diutissime observata sit, habenda est pro lege quam non licet reprobare, aut
sine Ecclesiae authoritate pro libitu mutare. Council. Constant. Sess. 13.
although Christ himself did minister this venerable Sacrament to his Disciples
in both kinds, the species of Bread and Wine; and though it was so received by
the Faithful in the Primitive Church, yet the contrary Custom that the Priests,
who do consecrate, should receive in both kinds, and the Laity should receive
only the species of Bread, was rationally introduced, and is to be received as
a Law, which none must change or reject at his pleasure, without the Authority
of the Church.

4. That to say that it is Quapropter dicere hanc consuetudinem aut legem
observare sit sacrilegum aut illicitum, censeri debet erroneum, and
pertinaciter asserentes oppositum praemissorum tanquam Haeretici arcendi sunt,
and graviter puniendi. Ibid.
Sacrilegious, or unlawful to observe this Law or Custo, is to be deemed
Erroneous, and they who pertinaciously do so assert, are to be punished, and
driven from the Church as Heretics, they acting damnably who endeavor to
reprove this custom as Sacrilegious. That Quod nullus Presbyter sub poena
excommunicationis, communicet populum sub utraque specie panis and vini. Item
ipsa Sancta Synodus decernit and declarat super ista materia, ut effectualiter
puniant eos contra hoc decretum excedentes, qui communicando populum sub
utraque specie panis and vini exhortati fuerint, and sic faciendum esse
docuerint, and si ad poenitentiam redire non curaverint, animo indurato, per
censuras Ecclesiasticas per eos ut Haeretici sunt coercendi. Ibid.
if any Priest communicates the People under both kinds, he is to be
excommunicated, and process is to be directed by the Authority of the General
Council of Constance to all Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, and
their Vicars in Spirituals, commanding them under the penalty of
Excommunication, that they effectually punish those, who, contrary to this
Decree, exhort the People to Communicate in both kinds of Bread and Wine, and
take upon them so to minister the Sacrament unto them, and to deal with them as
Heretics, if they continue obstinately without Repentance in so doing. Yea the
Trent Council has pronounced an Anathema upon all those Si quis dixerit
Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam non justis causis and rationibus adductam fuisse
ut Laicos, atque etiam Clericos non conficientes, sub panis tantummodo specie
communicaret, aut in eo errasse, Anathema sit. Council. Trid. Sess. 21. Can. 2.
who shall say she was not moved by just Causes and Reasons to make this Law,
that non-conficient Priests and Laics should communicate in Bread alone, or in
that species only, or that she erred in making of that Law.

5. That Insuper declarat, Quamvis Redemptor noster in suprema illa coena hoc
Sacramentum in duabus speciebus instituerit, and A postolis tradiderit, tamen
fatendum effe etiam sub altera tantum specie totum atque integrum Christum,
verumque Sacramentum sumi, ac propterea, quod ad fructum attinet, nulla gratia
necessaria ad salutem eos defraudari, qui unam speciem solam accipiunt. Council.
Trid. Sess. 21. Cap. 3. Si quis negaverit in venerabili Sacramento Eucharistiae
sub unaquaque specie and sub singulis cujusque speciei partibus, separatione
facta, totum Christum contineri, Anathema sit. Sess. 13. Can. 3.
though Christ instituted this Sacrament in both kinds, and so delivered it to
his Apostles, yet must it be confessed, that whole, and entire Christ, and a
true Sacrament is received under one kind only, and that therefore, as to the
benefit of the Sacrament, they are not deprived of any Grace necessary to
Salvation, who receive one kind only; yea, that it is most true, that as much
is contained under either species, as under both, for whole Christ is under the
species of Bread, and under every part of it; under the species of Wine, and
every particle of it.

6. That Nullatenus ambigendum est, quod non sub specie panis caro tantum, nec
sub specie vini sanguis tantum, sed sub qualibet specie est integer totus
Christus. Council. Bas. Sess. 30. Council. Constant. Sess. 13. Vinaturalis illius
connexionis and concomitantiae, qua parts Christi Domini -- inter se
copulantur. Council. Trid. Sess. 13. Cap. 3.
by force of the natural Connection and Concomitance, which is betwixt the parts
of Christ's raised Body, Christ's Body is under the species of Wine, and his
Blood under the species of Bread; and so whole Christ under each species, and
every particle of them, it being firmly to be believed, and in no wise doubted,
that the whole Body and Blood of Christ is contained as well under the species
of Bread, as under that of Wine, and not the Flesh only under the species of
Bread, nor the Blood only under the species of Wine; and Si quis negaverit in
Sanctiffimae Eucharistiae Sacramento contineri vere, realiter and
substantialiter corpus, and sanguinem, una cum anima and divinitate Domini
nostri Jesu Christi, ac proinde totum Christum -- Anathema sit. Ibid. Can. 1.
this whosoever shall deny, says the Trent Council, let him be Anathema.

7. That no man must dare hereafter Cunctis Christi fidelibus interdicit, ne
posthac de iis aliter vel credere, vel docere, vel praedicare audeant, quam ex
his decretis explicatum atque definitum. Conc. Trid. Sess. 21. Cap. 1. Sess.
13. praefat.
to preach, teach or believe otherwise than is by these Decrees explained and
defined. These are the Doctrines, Decrees, and Definitions of these Councils,
and how extremely opposite they are unto the formerly received Doctrines of the
Church of Christ, and to the plain Assertions of the Ancient Fathers, shall be
my business in the ensuing Sections to demonstrate.

CHAP. I. The Contents.
Showing in opposition to the decrees of the Councils of Constance, Basil and
Trent, that the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, till the 12th. Century,
tanght, that the Laity by divine precept were obliged to receive both species,
which is proved from the Testimonies of Justin Martyr, Cent. 2. 1. Of Cyprian,
Gent. 3. 2. Of Basil, Ambrose, and the Apostolical Constitutions, Cent. 4. 3.
Of Chrysostom and St. Austin, Cent. 5. 4. Of Caesarius Arelatensis, and
Procopius Gazaeus, Cent. 6. 5. Of Isidore Hispalensis, and the Council of
Braga, Cent. 7. 6. Of venerable Bede, Cent. 8. 7. Of Hincmarus Remensis and
Paschasius, Cent. 9. 8. Of Lanfrank and Anselme, Cent. 11. 9. Of Paschal, Hugo
de Sancto Victore, Arnoldus Carnotensis, St. Bernard, and Rupertus Taitiensis,
Cent. 12. 10. Of Albertus Magnus, Cent. 13. 11. Five Corollaries from the
Doctrine of the Fathers in this Point, 12.
FIRST then whereas the Councils of Constance, 1.
Basil and Sancta Synodus declarat and docet nullo divino praecepto Laicos and
Clericos non conficientes obligari ad Eucharistiae Sacramentum sub utraque
specie sumendum. Sess. 21. Cap. 1. Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
Trent have declared, defined and determined, That the Faithful Laity and the
Clergy that do not consecrate, are not obliged by divine precept to receive the
Sacrament of the Eucharist in both the species of Bread and Wine. The Fathers
do, in opposition to this Doctrine, either expressly, or by plain consequence
assert that the Laity, as well as Priests, by divine precept, are obliged to
receive the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper in both kinds, and that the precept,
drink ye all of this, was by our Lord directed, as well to Laymen us to
Priests. Justin Martyr, in his Second Apology, relates the practice of the
Christians thus, After the President has given thanks, and all the People said
Amen, (...) page 97.
the Deacons give to every person present to participate of the Bread, Wine and
Water, which are blessed, and this food me call the Eucharist, which none but
he that believes our Doctrine, and is Baptized can receive. And to show us
that he did not look upon this practice as an arbitrary thing, he adds, That
(...) p. 98.
the Blessed Apostles in their Gospels had delivered that Christ commanded them
to do so; for, be having taken Bread, and given thanks, is by them declared to
have said, Do this in remembrance of me, this is my Body; and also when he had
taken the Cup, and given thanks, to have said This is my Blood, and to have
given it to them alone. Where note first, that Justin Martyr speaks here of a
command of Christ, which cannot possibly relate unto the consecration, but to
the participation of the Elements, the command being, Do this, Take, eat, Drink
ye all of this. Secondly, he had said before that, only (...) p. 98.
Believers did communicate; this he now proves, because Christ delivered the
Elements to them alone, commanding them to partake of them. He therefore
clearly speaks of delivering the Bread and Wine to the Communicants: Moreover
speaking of the service performed by Christians on the Lord's Day, he says,
Prayers being finished, we offer Bread, P. 98.
Wine and Water, and the President gives thanks and Praise, and the People say
Amen; and there is made a Distribution of those things which have been
consecrated, and every one partakes of them; and then he thus concludes, that
(...) p 99. B.
Christ rising upon this day, appeared, and taught those things which we have
now laid before your Eyes, He therefore must have taught, according to Justin
Martyr, the distribution of the Bread and Wine to every Communicant. Here then
observe to the confusion of the Trent Council, First, That it was the Tradition
of the Apostles that Christ commanded, that the Eucharist under both kinds,
should be given to every one present at the Sacrament, and that the
distribution of those things which were consecrated, so that every one should
partake of them, is that which Christ taught. Secondly, That they declared that
Christ gave this commandment in his Gospels, whence it is evident, that the
Apostles, and all the Christians of their times, and of the times of Justin
Martyr, did interpret the Institution of the Sacrament by Christ, as a command,
that every faithful Person present should partake both of the consecrated Bread
and Cup, and that both should be distributed to them.

St. Cyprian in his Epistle to Cacilian complains of some, 2.
who out of Ignorance, or Simplicity, in sanctifying of the Cup of the Lord,
and In calice Domini sanctificando and plebi ministrando. Ep. 63. ed. Oxon. p.
148.
in the Ministration of it to the People, did not that which Jesus Christ, our
Lord and God, the Author and Teacher of that Sacrifice, did and taught, because
they used only Water, and mixed not Wine with it in the Cup they consecrated,
and distributed among the People. Where note that this they did not out of any
profane Opinion of the Wickedness of drinking Wine, as the Aquarii, and
Encratitae, and the Tatiani did, but only out of Ignorance and Simplicity, and
therefore he informs us, That they did this only in their morning Sacrifice,
that the Heathens might not conclude that they were Christians, and so hale
them away to Martyrdom, because they smelled of Wine: And that Cum ad coenandum
venimus mixtum calicem offerimus. p. 155, 156.
in their evening Sacrifice they offered a Cup mixed, according to Custom. Now
against this humane and novel Custom he argues,

First, From the Custom of Quanquam sciam Episcopos plurimos Ecclesiis
Dominicis in toto mundo divina dignatione praepositos vangelicae ritatis ac
minicae traditionis tenere rationem, nec ab eo quod Christus magifter and
praecepit and gessit, humana and novella institutione decedere. Ibid. p. 148.
most Bishops in the Church of Christ; Who, says he, keep to the evangelical
Truth, and the Tradition of our Lord, and do not, by any new and humane
Institution, recede from that which Christ our Master has commanded and
performed. Whence it is evident, that in the Judgment of St. Cyprian, Christ
both commanded, That the Cup mixed with Water should be administered to the
People, and did so administer it.

Secondly. From the Necessity of obeying Christ's Institution, and Command; for
says he, Religiosum pariter and necessarium duxi has ad vos literas facere, ut
siquis in isto errore adhuc teneatur, veritatis luce perspecta ad radicem atque
originem traditionis dominicae revertatur -- Quando aliquid Deo inspirante and
mandante praecipitur, necesse est domino servus fidelis obtemperet, excusatus a
pud omnes quod nihil sibi arroganter assumat qui offensam domini timere
compellitur nisi faciat quod jubetur. ib.
I thought it both Religious and Necessary to write these Letters to you, That,
if any be yet held under this Error, seeing the Light of the Truth, they may
return to the Root and Original of the Tradition of our Lord. -- For when any
thing is injoined by the Inspiration and Command of God, it is necessary that
the Faithful Servant should obey his Lord, and he will be excused of all Men,
That he arrogantly assumeth nothing to himself, who is compelled to fear the
Anger of the Lord, if he do not what he has commanded. St. Cyprian therefore
did believe that Christ required, That the Cup, offered in Remembrance of him,
should be mixed with Wine and Water; and being thus offered, should be
distributed to the People; and that he who did not so Administer, did
arrogantly assume unto himself, and had just Cause to fear the Indignation of
his Lord.

Thirdly, This he proves also from the Exhortation and Command of Wisdom; Prove.
ix. 5.
Come, eat of my Bread, and drink of the Wine that I have mingled: Where by
mixed Wine, the Cup of the Lord mixed with Wine and Water, is, says he,
prophetically spoken of; adding, That we could not drink the Blood of Christ,
had not He first been pressed, and trampled upon; and, Nisi Christus calicem
prior biberet in quo credentibus propinaret. p. 150.
had not be first drunk the Cup in which he drunk to Believers. Moreover, as
Christ, says he, commanded the Water of eternal Life to be given to Believers
in Baptism; so also by the Example of his Mastership, he taught the Cup was to
be mingled with Wine and Water: For about the Day of his Passion taking the
Cup, He blessed it, and gave to his Disciples; saying, Drink ye all of this,
for this is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the
Remission of Sins. -- And the Apostle Paul says, the Lord Jesus, the same
Night in which he was betrayed took Bread, and giving Thanks, he brake it, and
said, This is my Body which shall be delivered for you, do this in Remembrance
of me; likewise, after Supper, he took the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood; this do, as often as you drink it, in Remembrance of me;
for as often as you eat this Bread and drink this Cup, you show th Lords Death
till he come. Now, says he, Quod si a Domino praecipitur N. B. and ab Apostolo
ejus hoc idem confirmatur and traditur, ut quotiescunque biberimus in
Commemorationem Domini haec saciamus quod fecit and Dominus, invenimus non
observari a nobis quod mandatum est, nisi eadem quae dominus secit, nos quoque
saciamus. p. 152.
if it be commanded by our Lord, and the same thing be confirmed, and delivered
by his Apostle, That as often as we drink in Commemoration of our Lord, we should
do that which our Lord did; we find that is not observed by us which is
commanded, unless we do the same things which our Lord did, and mingling the
Cup of the Lord after the same manner we recede not from the divine Institution.

Lastly. If any of our Predecessors, says he, out of Ignorance, or Simplicity,
did not hold, and observe that -- Quod nos dominus facere exemplo and
Magisterio suo docuit, etc. p. 156, 157.
which the Lord taught us to do by his Example, and command; Gods Mercy may
show Pardon to him, whereas no Pardon will be showed to us, being instructed
and admonished to offer, as our Lord did, his Cup mixed with Wine, if we do not
so. Wherefore we have directed Letters to all our Colleagues, That the
evangelical Command, and the Tradition of our Lord, should be every where
observed, and that there should be no receding from that which Christ both
taught and did.

Here then is all that Protestants assert against the Definitions of the
Councils of Constance, Basil and Trent, viz.

1. That our Lord taught both by Example, and command the Ministration of the
Cup, or that this was enjoined by Inspiration and Command of God.

2. That Christ in ministering the Cup drank to Believers, and, That he
commanded them to drink it, by saying, Drink ye all of this; and that the same
thing is confirmed by the Apostle, saying, This do, as often as you drink it, in
Remembrance of me.

3. That this evangelical Command, and Tradition of Christ is to be every where
observed, and that none should recede from what he did both teach and do, none
should recede from the divine Instruction; that it is necessary that the
Faithful Servant should obey his Lord, and that he may justly fear his Anger if
he do not what he has commanded.

Now that St. Cyprian in this Epistle speaks not only of the Consecrution, or
Oblation of the Cup, but also of the Distribution of it, and the Participation
of it by the People, is evident beyond all Contradiction. For,

1. He expressly speaks of sanctifying the Lords Cup, and vtinistring it to the
People. N. B. and of the Blood of the Lord Epoto Sanguine Domint p. 153.
drank off by them; and of the Cup which in the Psalmist? Phrase, inebriates
the Drinkers of it.

2. He adds, that some perhaps might plead in favor of that Practice, he
condemns, That they used only Water, least their Persecutors, perceiving that
they smelled of Wine in the Morning, might hence conclude, they had received
the Sacrament, and gather thence that they were Christians; which could by no
means be objected, if he argued only for the Consecration of Wine, and not for
the Participation of it by Believers also, seeing they could not smell of that
which they did not partake of.

3. P. 155.
He says, That if the fear of smelling of Wine should keep Men from doing what
Christ did, and commanded to be done in commemoration of himself, the Brother
hood would be withdrawn from the Passion of Christ in the times of Persecution,
whilst they thus learned to be ashamed of his Blood in the Oblations: Whereas,
if it belonged not to them to drink of the Blood of the Oblation, jure
communications, by right of participation, as St. Cyorian says it did, if they
were not obliged to drink of it in remembrance of him, this consequence must be
infirm.

4. Whereas they who did celebrate this Sacrifice with Bread and Water
consecrated in the Morning Sacrifice, thought this a good excuse, that in the
Evening Sacrifice they used Wine mixed with Water. St. Cyprian says, P. 136.
That this excuse is not sufficient; partly, because the People could not be
all invited to the Evening Sacrifice; partly, because in every Sacrifice me
make mention of Christ's Passion, and so must do no other thing in any
Sacrifice than what Christ did; which Reasons can carry no weight in them, but
upon supposition of an obligation on the People to communicate of the
consecrated Wine and Water.

Lastly, He adds, That if the blush to drink the Blood of Christ, Ibid.
we cannot be prepared to pour out our Blood for Christ; which not the Priest
alone, but all the People must be prepared to do; it therefore is extremely
evident, that here St. Cyprian discourses not only of the Priest's obligation
to consecrate Wine mixed with Water, but also of the Peoples obligation to
partake of the Cup so consecrated.

In the Apostolical Constitutions the Apostles are introduced, 3.
giving this order, (...) 1. 2. c. 57.
When the Sacrifice is offered, let every order of Believers receive by
themselves of the Lord's Body, and of his precious Blood. The Title of which
Constitution is. What every one of the Clergy and Laity ought to do in the
Assembly. In the Sacramental Thanksgiving they speak thus, We give thee thanks
O Father for Christ's precious Blood shed for our sakes, and for his precious
Body, (...) l. 7. c. 25.
the Antitypes of which me now celebrate, be having commanded us to show forth
his Death. This Prayer all the Faithful make, and all that are Baptized are the
persons who are thus to show forth his Death. In the Prayer after the divine
Oblation, they say thus, Lib. 2. cap. 13.
Let the Bishop Communicate, then the Priests, Deacons, etc. Amongst the Women,
the Deaconnesses, Virgins and Windows, then the Children, then all the People
in their Order; and the Priest, let him tender the Oblation, saying, The Body
of Christ, and let the Receiver say, Amen; the Deason, let him hold the Cup,
and giving it, say, The Blood of Christ, the Cup of Life, and he that drinks
it let him say, Amen. And in the close of these Prescriptions are these words,
(...) etc. c. 15.
These things we the Apostles have commanded you Bishops, Priests, and Deacons
to observe, touching the Mystical Service.

St. Basil is an express assertor of the same Doctrine; for he spends a whole
Chapter to prove that he who is regenerated by Baptism, (...) Tom. 1. l. 1. de
Bapt. c. 3.
ought afterward to be nourished by the participation of the divine Mysteries
in the plural, not by one of them only, and (...) P. 580.
how this should be done, Christ, says he, has taught us, saying, unless you
eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, you have no Life in you.
He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life, etc. And at
the close of the Gospels it is written, that Jesus taking Bread, and giving
thanks, brake, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my
Body broken for you, this do in remembrance of me; and taking the Cup, and
giving thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of this, etc. The
Apostle also does attest these things, saying, I received from the Lord that
which I delivered unto you, that the Lord Jesus, in the Night in which he was
betrayed, took Bread, and giving thanks, brake it, and said, This is my Body
broken for you, do this in remembrance of me: Likewise after Supper, he took
the Cup, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, do this in
remembrance of me; for as of: as you shall not this Bread, and drink this Cup,
you show forth the Lord's Death till he come. (...) p. 581.
What therefore do these words profit us? That eating and drinking we might be
always mindful of him who died for us, and rose again. Which words are as full
a confutation of the Roman Doctrine, as can be desired by any Protestant.

For they expressly teach, that every Baptized person (...) Moral. Reg. 21. Tom.
2. p. 431.
is bound to partake of both the Mysteries, of the Bread and of the Cup, that
our Lord has taught him how he should be nourished by these mysteries, even by
eating Sacramentally of his Flesh, and drinking Sacramentally his Blood.

That the words of the Institution of this Supper mentioned in the Gospels, and
in particular those words, Drink ye all of this, belong to all Believers, even
as much as the forementioned words, He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood,
has eternal Life, etc. they being here introduced to prove, that all Believers
ought to be nourished by the holy Mysteries; that therefore,

3. Do this; in both these Places is not a Command directed to the Apostles to
Sacrifice Christ's Body and his Blood; but to Believers to eat and drink them.
And,

4. That we are to remember and show forth Christ's Death, not only by eating,
but by drinking also.

St. Ambrose speaking of these Sacraments, as he, and many of the Ancients call
the consecrated Bread and Wine, informs us, that Christ speaks of them in the
Song of Songs, saying, Edite inquit fratres mei and inebrianimi. De Sacram l.
5. c. 3. quoties enim bibis, remissionem accipis peccatorum and inebriaris in
Spiritu. ibid.
Eat my Brethren, and be inebriated; for as often as thou drinkest, thou
receivest Remission of Sins, and art inebriated with the Spirit. And the same
Ambrose elsewhere says, If as often as this Blood is poured out, it is poured
out for the Remission of Sins, Debeo illum semper accipere, ut semper mihi
peccata dimittantur. l. 4. c. 6.
I ought always to receive it, that my Sins may always be remitted. In which
Words he not only asserts, That Christ's Blood poured out, ought to be
received; which cannot be done, by receiving it only by Concomitance with the
Body, but also that our Lord commands his Brethren not to eat only of these
Mysteries, but to be inebriated, and says, That we are thus inebriated by
drinking.

St. Chrysostom is copious on this Subject; for, says he, 4.
many things conduce to christian Love, (...) in Matt. Hom. 32. p 223.
one Table is offered to all; the same Drink is given to all, and not only so,
but it is given out of one Cup: For the Father being willing to induce us to
love one another, ordered this, making us to drink out of one Cup, which is an
Instance of intense Love: So that the Sacrament of the Cup, according to St.
Chrysostom, was of the Institution of the Father; and he thus ordered Matters
for the Advancement of his great Commandment of Christian Love. In his Twenty
seventh Homily upon the First Epistle to the Corinthians, he says, That as
Christ said over the Bread, and over the Cup, do this in Remembrance of me;
(...). p. 421.
revealing to us the Cause of giving us this Mystery: So does St. Paul here
say, As often as you eat this Bread and drink this Cup, you show the Lord's
Death. Christ therefore did command the drinking of this Cup, and did it for a
Cause which will remain to the Worlds End, and equally concern all Christians,
viz. The Remembrance and Annunciation of his Death. And in his Fifteenth Homily
upon the First of Timothy he brings in Christ thus speaking to the Laity, as
well as Clergy, I have united, I have joined you to my slf; (...). p. 316.
I have said eat me, drink me: And whether Christ, or the Trent Council should
be obeyed in this Matter, it is not hard to judge, especially if we consider,
That in the Judgment of St. Chrysostom, Christ did not only institute, but
command these things to be done. His Words are these: As chiefly we remember
those Words which we last hear from our departing Friends, and are wont to say,
by way of Admonition to their Heirs, if they dare to transgress their Commands,
consider this is the last Voice which your Father uttered, and till his last
Breath he required these things. Even so Paul being willing hence to render his
Discourse formidable: Remember, says he, that he gave this his last Mystery,
and in that very Night in which he was to be slain for us, In Cor. 1. Hom. 27.
page 421.
(...), he commanded these things.

St. Austin does sufficiently inform us of the same thing by asking of this
Question; When our Lord says, Exceept ye ear my Flesh and drink my Blood, you
shall have no Life in you; how is it that the People are so much reslrained
from the Blood of the Sacrifices which were offered for Sins? If by those
Sacrifices this one Sacrifice was signified, Ab hujus Sacrificii sanguine
sumendo in alimentum, non solum nemo prohibetur, sed ad bibendum omnes
exhortantur, qui volunt habere vitam. qu. 57. in Levit.
from taking of the Blood of which Sacrifice, not only no Man is restrained,
but All Men are exhorted to drink it, who will have Life, for surely such an
Exhortation must be equivalent to a Command.

It is worth the Enquiry, says In Levit. p. 327.
Procopius Gazaeus, how it comes to pass, That when in the Law the eating of
Blood is forbidden. Now Christ commands us to eat his Blood.

Isidore Hispalensis, says, in Allusion to the Words of Wisdom, That Christ,
the Wisdom of God, has built him an House, the Church, in which he has slain
the Sacrifices of his Body, in which he has mingled the Wine of his Blood in
the Cup of the divine Sacrament; and prepared his Table, that is, the Altar of
the Lord, when sending forth his Servants the Apostles, and Teachers to the
Foolish, that is, to all Nations that knew not the true God, he says unto
them, Dixit, eis venite, comedite panem meum and bibite vinum quod miscui
vobis, id est Sancti corporis escam sumite, and poculum sanguinis sacri
percipite. De Gent. vocat. cap. 26.
Come, eat my Bread, and drink my Wine which I have mingled, that is, take ye
the Meat of my sacred Body, and receive the Cup of my sacred Blood. His Command
therefore, according to Isidore, was by his Apostles sent to all Nations, and
to the Foolish among them to drink the Cup of his sacred Blood.

The Council held at Braga in the same Century, speaking of those who delivered
to the People a piece of Bread dipped in the Wine for the whole Communion,
confutes this Practice, by recurring, not only to the Custom of the Church, but
also to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Command of Christ; for, say they,
Quidam in Sacrificiis Domini -- Eucharistam vino madidam pro complemento
communionis credunt populis porrigendam -- Quod quam sit Evangelicae and
Apostolicae Doctrinae contrarium non difficile ab ipso font veritatis
probabitur a quo ordinata ipsa Sacramentorum Mysteria processerunt. -- Seorsim
enim panis, seorsim and calicis commemoratio memoratur. Council. To. 6. p. 563.
how Repugnant this Practice is to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and Custom of
the Church, may easily be proved from the Fountain of Truth, who gave the Cup
by it self, saying, Drink ye all of this, as he took the Bread by it self,
saying, Take, eat, etc. Hence then we learn, That the Fountain of Truth
commanded, and the Doctrine of the Gospel requires; That all the People should
receive the Cup; and that they should receive it ordinarily apart from the
Bread.

Regino quotes from venerable Bede these Words, Postquam infirmus sacra
Unctione fuerit delibutus, statim corpore and sanguine Domini recreandus est,
ut de cujus vita temporali desperatur, vivificari in anima vita aeterna
mereatur, ait enim Dominus, qui manducat, etc. Proinde Sancti Canones
praecipiunt ut nulli fideli in extremis posito Communio denegetur. De Eccles.
Disc. l. 1. c. 119. p. 77.
When the infirm Person has been anointed, he presently is to be refreshed
with the Body and Blood of our Lord, that he may deserve to be quickened with
Life Eternal in his Soul, when his corporal Life is despaired of; for our Lord
says, He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life; and
unless you eat -- you shall have no Life in you: And hence the sacred Canons
command that the Communion should be denied to none of the Faithful in the
Close of this Life. Where we learn, 1. What was then understood by the Word
Communion, viz. the receiving of both Species, the Body and the Blood, and how
these Species were to be received, viz. The Flesh was to be eaten, and the
Blood to be drunk. 2. Why they were to be both received, viz. Because of our
Lords Sayings, John vi. And 3ly. We also learn, for Confutation of Mr. Condom's
first pretended Practice of the Church, That the Sick were to receive the Body
and the Blood, and that the Canons of the Church required that they should not
be withheld from them.

Zacharias Chrysopolitanus, cites from the same Bid these Words, Hinc est quod
ait, Bibite ex hoc omnes and ore and cord, ut sitis participes passionis meae.
Monotess. p. 306.
Hence it is that he says, Drink ye all of this, both with the Heart and with
the Mouth, that ye may be Partakers of my Passion.

Paschasius Rathertus says, It is Christ alone who breaks this Bread, and
distributeth it to Believers by the Hands of his Ministers, Similiter and
calicem porrigit eis dicens, accipite and hibite ex hoc omnes tam ministri quam
reliqui credentes. cap. 15.
saying, Take ye, and drink ye all of this, as well Ministers as the rest of
the Faithful: This is the Blood of the new and everlasting Testament. Cassander
informs us, That the Gloss called expositio quadruplicis Missae, expounds the
Words thus, Ex hoc scilicet Calice sanguinis omnes scilicet sine personarum
acceptione. De Com. sub utraque specie, p. 1043.
Drink ye of this Cup of Blood, All without exception of Persons. Hincmarus
Remensis, having cited the same Words, adds Tom. 2. p. 90.
Haec dixit and dicit, This he said then, and this he says now. All plainly
contradicting the R. Gloss (and Mr. Condom's Exposition) That these Words,
Drink ye all of this, were only spoken to, and concerned only the Apostles.

Lanfranck, 9.
Archbishop of Canterbury, speaks thus to Berengarius; If thou could with
Christian Caution understand these things which ought to be understood
literally, and spiritually, Proculdubio crederes quod universalis Ecclesia
credit, praedicares quod Apostolica Doctrina in tota mandi latitudine
praedicandum instituit, carnem scilicet and sanguinem Domini nostri Jesu
Christi and ore, and corpore, and ore cordis, hoc est, corporaliter, and
spiritualiter manducari and bibi. -- De Sacr. Euch. f. 131, 132.
thou would without doubt believe that which the universal Church believes;
thou would-est publish what the Doctrine of the Apostles has appointed to be
published through the World, viz. That the Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ is to be eaten and drunken, both by the Mouth and Body, and by the Mouth
of the Heart; that is, both bodily and spiritually. And Anselm his Successor in
the same See, says, We ought to eat and drink this Sacrament two ways, Ore
cordis and ore Corporis. Com. in 1 Cor. 11.
with the Mouth of the Heart, and of the Body. The doing both these things, the
drinking of the Blood of Jesus with our Mouths, is that which ought to be done,
that which the Doctrine of the Apostles has appointed to be published.

Pope Paschal writes to Pontius, Abbot of Clun,. 10.
thus; Scribens ad Caecilium B. Cyprianus ait, quando aliquid Deo inspirante,
and mandante praecipitur, necesse est domino servus fidelis obtemperet,
excusatus apud omnes quod nihil sibi arroganter assumat, ne aliud fiat a nobis
quam quod pro nobis Dominus prior fecit, igitur in sumendo corpore and sanguine
Domini, juxta eundem Cyprianum, Dominicatraditio servetur, necab eo quod
Christus Magister and praecepit, and gessit humana, and novella institutione,
discedatur; novimus enim per se panem, per se vinum ab ipso Domino traditum,
quem morem sic semper in Sancta Ecclesia conservandum docemus atque
praecipimus, praeterquam in parvulis, and omnino infirmis qui panem absorbere
non possunt. Ep. 32. De non porrigenda Communione intincta. Council. Tom. 10. p.
656.
Cyprian writing to Caecilius says, When any thing is required by the
Inspiration, and command of God, it is necessary that the faithful Servant
should obey his Lord. -- Therefore in taking the Body and Blood of our Lord,
according to the same Cyprian, let the Tradition of the Lord be observed, nor
let that be departed from by any humane and novel Institution which Christ our
Master commanded and did. He therefore owned the taking of the Cup apart from
the Bread, to be a Command of Christ, which no new Institution of Men could
alter. Our Lord Jesus, says Lib. 2 de Sacram. Part. 8. Fol. 395.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, instituted the Sacrament of the Body and the Blood of
Christ, and commanded that they should afterward do the same thing in
remembrance of himself. In Johan. Cap. 6.
Rupertus Tuitiensis informs us, That our Lord prescribing the whole manner of
eating his Flesh, and drinking his Blood, says, Vid Theoph. (...) Matthew. c.
26. p. 162.
Do this in remembrance of me.

Arnoldus Carnotensis delivers the same Doctrine most expressly: For, faith he,
Scholae Evangelicae hoc primum magisterium protulerunt.

Lex quippe esum sanguinis prohibet, Evangelium praecipit ut bibatur.


the Doctrine of the Sacrament is new, and the evangelical Schools first
brought forth this Command. This Discipline was first made known unto the World
by Christ our Teacher, That Christians should drink Blood, the Use of which the
old Law did forbid; for the old Law forbids the eating Blood, the Gospel
commands it should be drunk: In which Commands the Christian Religion ought
chiefly to discern this, That the Blood of Beasts, in all things differing from
the Blood of Christ, has only the Effect of temporal Vivification, and cannot
profit to eternal Life; Bibimus autem de sanguine, Christo ipso jubente. Inter
opera Cypr. adscript. p. 41.
but we drink of the Blood by his Command, being made Partakers of eternal Life
with him, and by him. Christ himself is the Butler, who has reached forth this
Cup, and taught that we should not only outwardly be dashed with this Blood,
but inwardly, by the powerful Aspersion of it, should be fortified in our
Souls. Petrus Cluniacensis, in the same Age speaks thus, Cum Christus imperet
N. B. dicens, Hoc facite, hoc plane, non aliud, hoc idem quod accipitis ad
comedendum, quod sumitis ad bibendum, corpus scilicet meum and fanguinem, hoc
inquam facite in meam commemorationem, quid ultra certe quaeritis? -- Quia quod
fecit eos facere praecepit, quod eis distribuit hoc eos aliis distribuere
voluit. Ed. Erasm. f. 209.
Christ commands, do this, not another thing; this which you have received to
eat, which you take to drink, viz. My Body and Blood; this, say I, do in memory
of me. -- That which he did, he commanded them to do; That which he distributed
to them, he would have them distribute to others. Christ, says St. Bernard,
the Day before his Passion, prescribed to his Disciples the Form of this
Sacrament. He gave Efficacy to it, i. e. Hujus Sacramenti formam praescripsit,
efficaciam exhibuit, i. e. fieri praecepit. De Caena Dom. c. qui incipit, Panem
Angel. f. 320. b.
He commanded it to be done. The Prescription of the Form was under Bread and
Wine; note the Order: First he washes his Disciples Feet, then, going back to
the Table, He ordains the Sacrifice of his Body and Blood; giving the Bread
apart, and the Wine apart, saying thus of the Bread, Take and eat, this is my
Body; and of the Wine thus, Drink ye all of this. And again, De Sacramento
quidem Corporis and fanguinis sui nemo est qui nesciat hanc quoque tantam and
tam singularem alimoniam ea primum die exhibitam, ea die commendatam, and
mandatam deinceps frequentari. Sermon. 3. in ramis Palm. fol. 30. b.
Concerning the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, there is no Man who
knows not, that upon that Day, That great and singular Nourishment was first
exhibited, on that Day commended, and commanded henceforth to be frequented.

Hoc dicimus, Quod postquam Christus exhibuit corpus suum sub specie panis,
tunc etiam postea exhibuit sanguinem suum sub specie vini, and utrumque
Sacramentaliter esse celebrandum praecepit in Ecclesia per statuta Apostolica,
and ideo Ecclesia instructa action Christi, utrumque celebrat, divisim
conficiendo corpus sub specie panis, and divisim conficiendo sanguinem sub
specie vini, quod autem duo haec exhibuerit and celebranda instituerit Christus
patet, Matthew. 27. -- Ex omnibus iftis accipitur quod Christ us sub una specie
panis corpus suum tradidit, sub altera specie vini tradidit sanguinem, and fic
servandum instituit, and cum Christi actio sit nostra instructio, pro certo
haec duo nobis servanda esse praecepit, and ideo sub una specie corpus, and sub
alia tradimus sanguinem, Sum. de Sacr. Euch. Did. 3. tr. 2. c. 5.
Albertus Magnus teaches,. 11.
That after Christ had exhibited his Body under the Species of Bread, he
afterward exhibited his Blood under the Species of Wine, and by the
Apostolical Statutes commanded both to be sacramentally celebrated in the
Church; and having proved from the Evangelists St. Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
That Christ celebrated both apart. -- From all these things, says he, it is
known or understood, that Christ, under one Species of Bread, delivered his
Body, and under the other Species of Wine, his Blood, and so appointed it to be
observed; and since Christ's Action is our Instruction, Pro certo haec duo
nobis servanda esse praecepit, He commanded these Two things most certainly to
be observed, and therefore under One Species we deliver the Body, and under the
other the Blood. Where we see the Practice of the Church was then to deliver
both Species, and that the Command of Christ was then conceived to be their
Motive so to do, according to that saying of Durantus, In primitiva Ecclesia
omnes qui celebrationi Missarum intererant singulis diebus communicare
solebant, eo quod Apostoli omnes de calice bibebant, Domino dicente, Bibite ex
hoc omnes, Rat. l. 4. c. 53.
In the primitive Church all that heard Mass, used to communicate, because the
Apostles all drank of the Cup, the Lord saying, Drink ye all of this.

Here then,. 12.
besides what has already been observed from these Passages, we farther learn;

1. That every Order of Believers ought to receive of the Lords Body, and of
his precious Blood apart; That they ought to drink this Cup with the Mouth of
the Body.

2. That the Tradition of our Lord is to be observed, and not departed from, by
reason of any humane and novel Institution.

3. That the Apostles commanded these things to be observed, that the Doctrine
of the Gospel, and the Custom of the Church require the Cup should be received
apart, Interim autem dum ab eo in hoc mundo peregrinamur, Corpore and sanguine
ejus in via pascimur, sicut Apostolis suis hoc Mysterium in coena ultima ante
mortem suam tradidit, and nobis sequentibus frequentandum per eos mandavit.
Guitm. de. Sacram. lib. 3. fol. 91. b.
that this the universal Church believes, and the Doctrine of the Apostles has
appointed this to be published throughout the world, that the Blood of our Lord
Jesus is to be drunk by the mouth of the Body, that the Gospel commands it
should be drunk, that the Apostolical Statutes commanded both to be celebrated
in the Church, that God himself ordered that we should all drink out of one
Cup, and that this is required by the inspiration and command of God; that
Christ said, Eat me, Drink me, that he exhorted all Men to drink of his Blood;
that he sent forth his Apostles and Teachers, to invite them to drink of the
Wine that he had mingled, and to receive the Cup of his sacred Blood; that he
commanded these things, that he so appointed it to be observed, and that we
drink of the blood of Christ by his command.

4. That the command, Drink ye all of this, was by Christ directed as well unto
the People as the Ministers, to all without exception, that what Christ did he
commanded his followers to do, what he distributed to them, he would have them
distribute to others, and that in the Primitive Church all communicated,
because Christ said to his Apostles, Drink ye all of this.

5. That by receiving of both kinds, they showed forth Christ's Death, and this
is as much as any Protestant has said, or needs to say.

CHAP. II.
The Contents. Whereas these Councils take upon them to Decree this Sacrament
shall be celebrated otherwise, than by their own confession it was instituted
by Christ, The Fathers in the general assert, That this Mystery ought not to be
celebrated otherwise than it was delivered by Christ and his Apostles,. 1. When
some delivered the Bread dipped in the consecrated Cup as a complete Communion,
they condemned this practice as varying from the Institution and from the
practice of the Church,. 2. They condemned the offering on the Altar, other
things besides Bread, Wine and Water for the same Reasons,. 3. They condemned
the using Wine not mixed with Water on the same account,. 4. They condemned the
celebration of this Mystery in consecrated Bread and Water only from the same
grounds,. 5. Inferences against Communion in one kind from the premises,. 6.
SEcondly, Sess. 13. Sess. 21. c. 3.
whereas the Councils of Constance and of Trent confess, That Christ instituted
this venerable Sacrament under both species, and so delivered it to his
Apostles, and that the Primitive Church did practice suitably unto this
Institution, and yet deny that there lies any Obligation on Christians from
this Institution, or this practice to administer it, or to receive it in both
kinds, Sess. 21. cap. 2.
asserting they have power as dispensatores Mysteriorum Dei, Dispensers of the
Mysteries of God, to make this change in the Administration of this Sacrament,
whereas, I say, these are the bold Assertions of the forementioned Councils; in
opposition to them the Sayings of the Fathers are very clear and pregnant, in
which they plainly show they thought themselves, and all that bare the Name of
Christians, obliged to observe the Institution of the Sacrament, which by the
Confessions of the Councils of Trent and Constance, was in both kinds, and in
the distribution of it, to do as Christ the Author of it did, viz. to give both
species apart to the Communicants, which came to be partakers of this Holy
Sacrament. And,

Ambrose, in his Comment on these words, He that eats this Bread, or drinks
this Cup unworthily, etc. says thus, Indignum dicit esse domino qui aliter
mysterium celebrat quam ab eo traditum est, non enim potest devotus esse qui
aliter praesumit quam datum est ab Authore. In locum.
He pronounces him unworthy of the Lord, who otherwise does celebrate this
Mystery than it was delivered by him; for he cannot be devout who presumes to
do it otherwise, then it was given by the Author. And this good Rule in
after-Ages was approved of, and even transcribed by the Ritualists, and by the
Commentators on the same place, Indigne dicit, i.e, ordine non observato, viz.
qui aliter Mysterium illud celebrat vel sumit quam traditum est a sanctis
patribus. Haym. in locum, p. 130.
He eats unworthily, says Haymo, that is, not observing order, who either
celebrates, or takes that Mystery otherwise than it was delivered by the Holy
Fathers. St. Anselm in his Comment on the same Chapter says, That "St. Paul
reproved the Corinthians because they did not well observe what he had
delivered, touching this matter, he having delivered to them what the Lord
delivered to him, and therefore that which they ought to retain reverently and
inviolably; adding, That Qui aliter mysterium celebrat quam a Christo traditum
est. Ibid.
he eats and drinks unworthily, who either celebrates or receives that Mystery
otherwise than it was delivered by our Lord. The Gloss cites the same words
from Ambrose, Aquinas from the Gloss. He is unworthy, says Hugo, who
celebrates the Mystery otherwise than by Christ it was delivered. And he, says
Lyra, is unworthy, Qui non observat ritum a Christo institutum. Ibid.
who observes not the Custom instituted by Christ. Gregory the Third condemns
the placing Two or Three Cups upon the Altar at once, as being not agreeable to
the practice of our Lord. For, says he In missarum solenniis observandum est
quod dominus noster Jesus Christus Sanctis suis distribuit discipulis, accepit
enim calicem and dedit eis, dicens, Hic est calix Novi Testamenti in meo
sanguine, hoc facite quotiescunque sumitis. Ep. ad Bonifacium.
In the Solemnities of the Mass that is to be observed which our Lord Jesus
gave to his Disciples, for he took the Cup, and gave it to them saying, This is
the Cup of the New Testament in my Blood, this do as often as you take it. And
De Inftit. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.
Rabanus Maurus says, It is not lawful to offer any other thing in the
Sacraments, than that which our Lord himself appointed, and by his Example
taught us to do.

2dly. Some in the Church did frequently attempt the alteration of Christ's
Institution by giving to the People the Bread dipped in the sacred Blood for a
Complete Communion, but against these Innovators in the Fourth Century, Pope
Julius opposed himself, laying down this for his Rule, That it was by no means
lawful for any to recede from our Lord's Institution, Practice and Example. His
Words are these, Audivimus enim quosdam Schismatica ambitione detentos, contra
divinos ordines and Apostolicas institutiones, -- intinctam Eucharistiam
populis pro complemento Communionis porrigere. -- Quod quam fit Evangelicae and
Apostolicae doctrinae contrarium, and consuetudini Ecclesiasticae adversum, non
difficile ab ipso font veritatis probatur, a quo ordinata ipsa Sacramentorum
mysteria processerunt. -- Ubi Apostolis corpus suum commendavit and sanguinem,
seorsum enim panis, and seorsum calicis commendatio memoratur. Council. Tom. 2.
p. 525, 526.
We have heard that some persons, being guilty of Schismatical Ambition, do,
against the divine Orders, and Apostolical Institution, deliver to the People
the Eucharist dipped in the Blood for an entire Communion. How contrary these
things are to the Evangelical and Apostolical Doctrine, and opposite to the
Ecclesiastical Custom, it is not hard to prove from the Fountain of Truth, from
whom the Institution of these Sacramental Mysteries proceeded, for they have no
Testimony from the Gospel for this, where Christ commended his Body and Blood
to his Disciples, for there is recorded the commendation of his Body and Blood
apart. The Council of Eadem habet Council. Bracarense. Tom. 6. p. 562, 563.
Braga in the Seventh Centary in the very same words condemns this Practice,
blaming them, who, for the whole Communion delivered to the People a piece of
Bread dipped in the Consecrated Wine, Which Custom how contrary, say they, it
is to the Doctrine of the Gospel, and the Practice of the Church, we may learn
from the Fountain of Truth, who gave the Cup by it self, saying, Drink ye all
of this; as he took the Bread by it self, saying, Take, eat, etc. Ut populus
plene possit communicare. cap. 19.
Micrologus says, It is not Authentic that some dip the Body of Christ, and
distribute it so dipped for a full Communion, for the Roman Order contradicts
it, for in the day of Preparation it commands, that the Wine not consecrated,
should be consecrated by the Lord's Prayer, and the mixture of the Lord's Body
with the Blood, that the People may fully Communicate, which would be a
superfluous Command, if the Lord's Body dipped in the Cup the day before, and
preserved, would suffice to Communicate the People with: And therefore Pope
Julius Julius quoque Papa seorsim panem and seorsim calicem, juxta dominicam
Institutionem sumenda docet. Idem ibid.
writing to the Bishops of Egypt, does wholly forbid this Intinction, and
teaches, that the Bread and the Cup should be both taken apart, according to
our Lord's Institution. Humbertus in his Disputation against the Greeks, says
thus, That you are wont to take the Holy Bread of life eternal in a Spoon
dipped in the Cup, what can you offer for it? Neque enim ipse Dominus panem in
Caiice vini intrivit, and sic Apostolis dedit, sed sicut Sancta Romana Ecclesia
usque nunc observat, panem integrum benedixit, and fractum fingulis
particulatim distribuit, dicens, Accipite and comedite, hoc est corpus meum;
quibus, postquam coenatus est, calicem porrexit, dicens, Bibite ex eo omnes.
Quam Reverendam Angelis and hominibus institutionem prima scilicet Ecclefia
usque ad haec moderna tempora, sicut ab Apostolis recepit, fideliter retinuit.
-- Apud Baron. Tom. 11. p. 971.
for our Lord did not thus dip Bread in the Cup of Wine, and so give it to his
Apostles, saying, Take and eat this in a Spoon, This is my Body; but as the
Roman Church even to this day observes, he blessed the whole Bread, and
distributed it, being broken, to every one apart, saying, Take and eat, This is
my Body, to whom he also after Supper reached forth the Cup, saying, Drink ye
all of this, which Institution to be revered by Men and Angels, Holy Zion, the
first Church, even to this Day, as it received from the Apostles, so does it
faithfully retain it. And then having cited a long passage from the Church of
Jerusalem, he adds, Hence is it clearer than the light, that the holy Church of
Jerusalem did of old observe the same Rite of the divine Sacrifice which the
holy Roman Church cease not hitherto to observe; for we lay upon the Holy
Altars thin Cakes of Flour prepared, whole and sound, and Communicate with the
People of them, being after consecration broken, and then we are made to drink
of the Cup of Wine, and liquid Blood, for we find Bread sopp'd was delivered by
Christ to none but the Traitor Judas, to signify that he was to betray him.
Again, he having said, That Christ delivered the Bread and Wine apart, and that
the Church of Christ religiously observed his Institution, adds, That Nec
potest fieri ut quilibet convenientius aut verius commendare praevaluisset
Sacrosanctum Mysterium fidei, quam ipse qui tradidit seipsum pro nobis
oblationem. -- Ibid. p. 974.
it could not be that any one should prevail to commend this Holy Mystery of
Faith more conveniently, or truly, than he who delivered himself an Oblation,
and a Sacrifice of a Sweet Odor to God for us, the immaculate Lamb of God, who
takes away the Sins of the World, to whom the most perfect knowledge of any
Man being compared, is the highest Ignorance. In the Year of our Lord 1118.
Pope Paschal the Second, writes an Epistle to Pontius, Abbot of Clun, after
this wise: Ep. 32. de non porrigenda. Communione intincta. Council. Tom. 10. p.
656.
Blessed Cyprian writing to Caecilian says, That when any thing is required by
God's Inspiration and Command, it is necessary that the faithful Servant should
obey his Lord, and he will be excused of all Men, that he assumeth nothing
arrogantly to himself, nor may any other thing be done by us, than what our
Lord first did for us. Therefore in taking the Body and the Blood of Christ,
according to the same St. Cyprian, Let the tradition of our Lord be kept, nor
let us recede by any humane and novel Institution from that which our Lord both
commanded and did; for we know that the Bread was delivered by our Lord apart,
and the Wine apart, which Custom we teach, and require to be observed
perpetually in the Church, excepting only in the Case of Infants and Infirm
Persons, who cannot receive the Bread. Hildebert, Bishop of Man's, does
vehemently reprove the Custom of giving the Bread sopped, used in this or some
other Monastery; for, writing to the Abbot of some Monastery, he says, It is
judicial obstinacy to prefer Custom before Truth: And having proved this from
the words of St. Cyprian and St. Austin, he proceeds thus; This, Brother, I
have therefore spoken, that being rouzed up, thou may awake, and see that
Traditioni Sacramentorum Altaris quae in vestro celebris est Monasterio nec
Evangelia consonant nec decreta concordant: In eo enim consuetudinis est
Eucharistiam nulli nisi intinctam dari, quod nec ex Dominica Institutione, nec
ex Sanctionibus Authenticis reperiatur assumptum. -- Epist. 64.
neither the Gospels nor Decrees agree with that distribution of the Sacrament
of the Altar, which is practiced in your Monastery; for there the Custom is to
give the Sacrament to none, but in Bread steeped in the Wine, which is neither
found to be taken from our Lord's Institution, nor from Authentic Sanctions:
If you consult St. Matthew, Mark and Luke, you will find the Bread to have been
delivered apart, and the Wine apart, for we read not that Christ gave Bread
sopped to any but that Disciple, whom he thereby showed to be the betrayer of
his Master. Eucharistia intincta non debet dari populo pro supplemento
Communionis. Sent. l. 4. Did. 11. Lit. f.
The Eucharist, says Lombard, ought not to be given to any Body sopped for a
Supplement of the Communion, for we read of no sopped Bread given to any one,
but Judas. Lastly, a Council held at London, A. D. 1175. Inhibemus ne quis
quasi pro complemento Communionis intinctam alicui tradat Eucharistiam, nam
intinctum panem aliis Christum praebuisse non legimus, excepto illo tantum
Discipulo quem intincta buccella Magistri proditorem ostenderit. Apud Binium,
Tom. 7. Part 2. p. 642.
forbids any person to deliver the Eucharistical Bread dipped in Wine for a
complete Communion, for, say they, we read not that our Lord gave the Bread
sopped to any, but to that Disciple whom he thereby declared to be the Disciple
that was to betray him.

Now hence, says De utraque specie, p. 1027.
Cassander, it appears, That they who received the Custom of dipping the Bread
into the consecrated Cup, did believe that both kinds were by all means to be
used for an entire and full Communion: For, wherefore did they dip the Bread in
the Mystical Cup of our Lord's Blood, if one species by it self would have
sufficed for a full and lawful Communion? And seeing they who administered the
Bread dipped in the consecrated Cup, did this because they conceived it
necessary that both kinds should be received at least together; and they who
reprehended this Custom, did therefore reprehend it, because they held that
both kinds were to be received apart, according to our Lord's Institution, and
the constant Custom of the Church: It is evident, hat all did then agree, that
both kinds were to be received, and that it was not lawful to receive under the
species of Bread alone.

3ly. 3.
Others attempted to vary from the Institution of our Lord, and from the
practice of the Apostles, and the succeeding Ages of the Church, by offering on
the Altar or Communion Table not only Bread and Wine, but also Milk and Honey,
etc. which thing the Ancient Fathers and Councils do with one voice condemn, as
being contrary to the Institution of our Lord. The Title of the Third Canon of
the Apostles runs thus That nothing is to be offered in the Sacrifice, besides
that which our Lord appointed; and in the body of the Canon, the offering Milk
or Honey is condemned, as being (...), besides the Constitution of our Lord
touching the Sacrifice, and the Bishop or Presbyter who does this is to be
deposed, (...), as doing besides the Constitution of the Lord. Our Lord, says
Zonaras upon this Canon, delivering to his Apostles the celebration of this
unbloody Sacrifice to be performed in Bread and Wine, (...). For this cause the
Apostles forbad any other thing to be brought to the Sacrifice. The Church of
Can. 37.
Africa made a Canon to the same effect, viz. That it is not lawful to offer
any thing in the Sacraments, besides Bread and Wine, mixed with Water, and the
reason there assigned is, That nothing else is to be offered, quem quod ipse
Dominus tradidit, than that which our Lord himself delivered. This Canon is
cited and confirmed in the Fifth General Council held in Can. 32.
Trullo, for the same Reason, That, in this Sacrament things ought to be
performed, (...), according as our Lord himself delivered. Pope Julius in the
Fourth, and the Council of Braga in the Seventh Century, say not as the Canons
of the Eastern Church, that some offered Milk besides Bread and Wine, but that
they offered, lac pro vino, Milk for Wine; this practice they condemn in these
words; Cum enim Magister veritatis verum salutis nostrae Sacrificium suis
commendaret discipulis, nulli lac, sed panem tantum and Calicem sub hoc
Sacramento cognoscimus dedisse, legitur enim in Evangelica veritate, accepit
Jesus panem and Calicem, etc. cesset ergo lac sacrificando offerri, quia
manifestum and evidens exemplum veritatis Evangelicae illuxit, quod praeter
panem and vinum, aliud offerri non liceat, Council. To. 2. p. 525, 526. Council.
Brac. To. 6. p. 564.
When the Master of Truth would commend to his Disciples the true Sacrifice of
our Salvation, he gave to none Milk, but only Bread and Wine in the Sacrament;
let therefore Milk cease to be offered, because the manifest and evident
example of Evangelical Truth has shined forth, that, besides Bread and Wine,
nothing else may be offered. And again, Henceforth it shall be lawful to none
to offer any thing else in the divine Sacrifices, but according to the Sentence
of the Ancient Councils, Bread and Wine only mixed with Water. Lib. de rebus
Eccles. cap. 18.
Strabo informs us, That though the use of the Sacraments was delivered by
Christ, and from the Apostles and Apostolical Men, was diffused throughout the
whole Catholic Church, yet we. understand from the Apostolical Canons, that,
in the first Ages, some were wont to offer other Oblations, who therefore by
the third of their Canons are to be deposed, as doing contra Constitutionem
Domini, against the Constitution of our Lord. And these Decrees we find in
Decret. part 2. c. 18.
Ivo, and in Decret. part 3. de consecr. did. 2. c. 4, 5.
Gratian, and do thence learn, that they continued to be Authentic in their
Days.

Now here let it be noted, that all these Fathers, and Councils who condemn
intinction, and the oblation of other things upon the Altar besides Bread, Wine
and Water, give this as a sufficient reason for so doing, That these things
were not agreeable unto that institution which was to be revered by Men and
Angels, from which it was by no means lawful to depart, and to which
Christians were obliged to adhere; and surely they who so Religiously
condemned, and strenuously opposed themselves against the Custom of iminction,
and of offering Milk and Honey, because of the Repugnancy which these things
bore unto the manner of, and the Rule observed in our Lord's Institution of
this Sacrament, would have been filled with holy indignation, had they known of
any who wholly did withold from, or deny the Cup unto the People. Sure they
who taught that to do these things against the Divine Orders and Apostolical
Constitution, was to be guilty of a manifest Error, and of Schismatical
Ambition, could not have passed a milder Censure on the substraction of the Cup
from all the Laity. They who declared, that to do these things was to act
contrary to the Evangelical Doctrine, and Ecclesiastical Custom or the Practice
of the Church, would have declared with a greater zeal against the defalcation
of that Cup, of which our Lord said in the Institution, Drink ye all of this,
of which all the Apostles drank, and which was, in compliance with this
Institution and this Example, confessedly received by all Christians in the
first Ages of the Church. They who would not allow intinction to be sufficient
for a complete and full Communion of the People, or for a Supplement of the
Communion, would much less have allowed that the Communion was entire and full,
when nothing but the Bread was given to them. They who declared that nothing
could be offered to justify this variation from our Lord's Institution, could
much less think that any thing would justify this greater variation from it.
They who affirm it could not be that any one should commend this Mystery of
Faith more conveniently, or truly, than that Jesus, to whom the most perfect
knowledge of any Man being compared, is the highest ignorance; and that the
Tradition of our Lord is to be kept, and not receded from on the account of any
humane, or novel Institution, could not imagine the Councils either of Trent or
Constance could have any power given by the Author of that Institution, to make
a Law for the omitting one part of it, with a Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
non obstante to our Lord's Institution, and to the practice of the Church.
They, lastly, who assert, It is judicial obstinacy to prefer Custom before
Truth, must have abhorred that plea for half Communion used by the Council of
Constance, that it was a Custom reasonably introduced by the Church, and by the
Holy Fathers, and had been long observed, and therefore was to be retained as a
Law.

Again, They who condemn the offering Milk and Honey on the Altar, as being
besides the Institution of our Lord, and for this reason do forbid and punish
it, would more assuredly have condemned and punished that defalcation of the
Cup, which is confessedly contrary to the Institution. They who took care that
in this matter things should be done, (...), as the lord delivered them, would
never have allowed that this Sacrament should be administered otherwise than he
had Instituted it to be received. And lastly, they who argued, That nothing
else was to be offered, because nothing else was mentioned in the Gospel, would
never have endured that what was mentioned in the Gospel, as offered and
distributed to all, should not only be omitted, but forbidden, under the
severest Penalties.

4ly. Some varied from the practice of the Church from the beginning, used with
respect to the Cup, and that Two Ways.

1. By using in this Sacrament Wine not mixed with Water; this neglect the
Ancient Fathers and Councils do with one voice condemn, as varying from the
Institution of our Lord, and from the practice of the Church, and solemnly
decree that in conformity to both, the Wine they offered and distributed,
should be continually mixed with Water. The Constitutions of St. clemens say,
That L. 8. c. 12. P. 351.
our Lord mixed the Cup with Wine and Water, and sanctifying it, he gave it to
them, saying, Drink ye all of it, and that therefore (...), according to his
Order or Institution, they offered to him this Bread and this Cup. And this
they did, says Cotelerius, against Two Heresies, that of the Monophysites and
the Armenians, who used only Wine in the Mysteries. The Can. 37.
African Council says, that nothing is to be offered in the Sacraments but
Bread, and merum aqua mixtum, and Wine mixed with Water, as our Lord delivered.
Pope Julius says, That Calix dominicus juxta Canonum praecepta vino and aqua
permixtus debet offerri -- non enim potest Calix domini esse aqua sola, aut
vinum solum, nisi utrumque misceatur. Apud Ivon. Decret. part. 2. c. xi.
the Cup of our Lord, according to the commands of the Canons, ought to be
offered with Wine mixed with Water, and that the Cup of the Lord cannot be Wine
or Water alone, but that both must be mixed. The Councils of Council. Wormatense
apud eundem, Cap. 12. and Council. To. 2. p. 526.
Worms and Calix dominicus juxta quod quidam Doctor edisserit, vino and aqua
permixtus debet offerri. Council. Brac. 4. Council. To. 6. p. 563.
Braga, condemn the neglect of mixing Water, in the very words of Pope Julius.
The General Council held in Trullo says the same thing, condemning the
Armenians who celebrated the Eucharist with Wine not mixed with Water, as
acting against the Tradition of the Apostles, and Decreeing, That the Bishop or
the Priest who did thus celebrate the Mysteries should be deposed, (...). Can.
32.
as imperfectly showing forth the Mystery, and innovating in things delivered.
Isidore says, That Wine alone cannot be offered in the Sacrifice of the Cup,
and that Quando autem miscetur utrumque, tunc spirituale Sacrificium
perficitur. Lib. 1. c. 18.
the spiritual Sacrifice is then perfected when they are both mixed. This
mixture some of them held necessary, because our Savior's side being pierced
with a Lance, not only Blood, but Water also issued thence, for which cause,
says In Can. 32. Council. Trull.
Zonarus, (...), it was necessarily determined by the Church, that in the holy
Mysteries Wine should be mixed with Water. That Wine and Water ought thus to be
mixed, says -- Quia utrumque ex latere ejus in sua passione profluxisse
legitur. Apud Ivon. decret. Part. 2. c. 15.
Pope Alexander, We have received from the Fathers, and even reason teaches,
because both flowed from our Savior's Side in his Passion. 1 Cap. de celebr.
Miss. p. 88. c. 10. 2 L. 1. c. 10. 3 C. 10.
Cap. de celebr. Miss. p. 88. c. 10.
Alcuin, L. 1. c. 19.
Rabanus Maurus, and C. 10.
Micrologus, assign the same reason; others following St. Cyprian give this
mystical Reason of this mixture, That in Videmus populum in aqua intelligi, in
vino vero ostendi sanguinem Christi, ergo -- si vinum tantum quis offerat,
sanguis Christi incipit esse sine nobis, si vero aqua sit sola, plebs incipit
esse sine Christo. Julius Council. Tom. 2. p. 526.
Scripture Water signifies the People, the Wine shows the Blood of Christ, and
therefore, if Wine alone be offered, the Blood of Christ will be without the
People, if only Water, the People will be without Christ: So Pope Julius, the
Councils of Council. Brac. Council. tom. 6. p. 563.
Braga and Worms; but, others say, this must be done in compliance with our
Lord's Institution, and the Practice of the Church, that we may do the same
thing which our Lord did Amalar. de Eccles. Offic. l. 3. c. 24.
and a Magisterio divino non recedamus, and may not recede from his Command.

Aquarii, the Encratites and the Manichaeans did refuse to drink it in the
Sacrament,) for in the Evening-Sacrifice they freely drank it, but to avoid
being discovered to be Christians by smelling of it in the Morning. Now against
these persons St. Cyprian argues from the institution of the Sacrament by
Christ, and from his practice in the Oblation and the distribution of it.
Admonitos autem nos scias, ut in calice offerenda dominica traditio servetur,
neque aliud fiat a nobis, quam quod pro nobis dominus prior fecerit. Cyp. Ep.
63. p. 48.
For know, says he, that we are admonished to observe the Tradition of the
Lord, in offering the Cup, and that nothing else may be done by us, than that
which our Lord did first for us. Now Cyprian before had said, That in offering
the Cup, and ministering it to the People, our Lord had used Water mixed with
Wine. Again he adds, if Jesus Christ be the High Priest of God the Father, and
first offered himself a Sacrifice to the Father, and commanded this to be done
in commemoration of himself; Utique ille Sacerdos vice Christi vere fungitur,
qui id quod Christus fecit imitatur. -- p. 155.
surely that Priest truly officiates in Christ's stead, who imitates that which
Christ did, and offers a full and true Sacrifice to God the Father, if so he
does begin to offer as he saw Christ did offer. -- And again, Exponere enim
justificationes and Testamentum Domini, and non hoc idem facere quod fecerit
Dominus, quid aliud est quam sermones ejus abjicere, and disciplinam Dominicam
contemnere. p. 157.
To declare the Statutes, and take the Testaments of the Lord into our Mouths,
and not to do the same thing which our Lord did, what other thing is it than to
reject his Words, and to contemn the Lord's Discipline? And whereas some
pleaded a Custom for offering only Water, he says, -- Si in Sacrificio quod
Christus obtulerit, non nisi Christus sequendus est, utique id nos obaudire,
and sacere oportet quod Christus fecit, and quod faciendum esse mandavit! --
Neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi oportet, sed Dei veritatem. p. 154, 155.
We must enquire whom the Authors of this Custom followed, for if in the
Sacrifice which Christ offered, Christ alone is to be followed, surely that we
ought to obey, and do which Christ did and commanded to be done; for we must
not follow the Custom of Man, but the Truth of God. Lastly, Because we make
mention of his Passion in all our Sacrifices, we ought to do nothing but what
he did, for the Scripture says, As often as you cat this Bread, and drink this
Cup, you show the Lord's Death till he come; -- Quotiescunque ergo calicem in
commemorationem passionis ejus offerimus, id quod constat Dominum fecisse
faciamus. p. 156.
wherefore as often as we offer up the Cup in commemoration of our Lord, and of
his Passion, we ought to do that which it is manifest he did. Now here let it
be noted.

That from the Third to the Twelfth Century, this Discourse of Cyprian is
cited, and approved by all the Doctors of the Western Church, by Pope Julius,
Ubi supra.
by the Councils of Braga and Worms, by Isidore, by Alcuin, Rabanus Maurus,
Walafridus Strabo, by Micrologus, Amalarius, by Ivo and Gratian; and
particularly that Amalarius having cited these Words, "We find that it is not
observed by us which is commanded, unless we do the same things which Christ
did, and mixing the Cup after the same manner recede not from the divine
Institution.) He adds, That Quamvis hoc ille de comixtione vini and aquae
conclusisset, tamen de tota Institutione Dominica intelligere possumus
adimplendum, in quo suum mandatum est, and Apostolorum observatio. De
Ecclesiast. Offic. l. 3. c. 24.
though Cyprian concluded this only of the mixture of Wine and Water, yet may
we understand it as a thing to be fulfilled in the whole Institution of the
Lord, in which is his command, and the Apostles observation of it.

according to our Savior's Institution, and doing of this Action as our Lord
delivered it, and was according to the Canons and Practice of the Church, must
also think themselves obliged for the very same reasons to Minister the Cup
unto the People present at their Sacraments, and say unto them as our Savior
did, Drink ye all of this.

They who believed they were by no means to recede from our Lord's Institution
in this matter, could never think it fit to recede from it in the delivery of
the Cup.

They who decreed the Deposition of those Bishops or Priests, who did neglect
this mixture, as imperfectly showing forth this Mystery, would more assuredly
have for that reason, deposed those who robbed the People of the Cup; for
since, according to St. Paul, 1 Cor. xi. 26.
we show forth the Lord's Death, by eating of this Bread, and drinking of this
Cup: It clearly follows, that if he who gives Wine without Water does but
imperfectly show forth the Mystery to them who do receive it, he that neither
gives consecrated Wine nor Water, must do it more imperfectly.

They who declared against the offering of Water only as a thing unlawful,
because all Christians were obliged to observe the Tradition of the Lord,
offering the Cup, and ministering it to the People; and to imitate what Christ
did, unless they would be thought contemners of Christ's discipline, must also
think themselves obliged to observe the same Tradition and Example, in
ministering the Cup, and Censure in like manner those who do it not.

They who teach, that not the Custom of Man, but the Truth of God was to be
followed, could never have approved of the plea from Custom, used by the Church
of Rome, for defalcation of the Cup.

And lastly, they who looked upon the Institution as a Command, and all these
sayings of St. Cyprian, as Rules to be fulfilled, and followed in the whole
institution of our Lord, must also think it a Command to minister the Cup unto
the People; and that those Rules of Cyprian did bind them so to do. I therefore
shall conclude this Chapter with that saying of Algerus Quis audet excipere,
quod ipse non excepit, aut quis audit prohibere quod ipse in Sacramento suo non
prohibuit; sed ipse faciens, nos hoc ipsum facere praecepit, cum dicit, Hoc
facite, convenienter subaudiatur, quod Ego; quis aeque competenter subaudire
audeat, sed non de hoc unde ego, item si mutandum est fermentato azymum,
mutetur etiam quolibet alio liquore vinum, si enim vinum recipitur, cur azymum
refutetur, cum sicut ex azymo, sic ex vino Christus vetus pascha finierit, and
novum inchoaverit, and utrumque nobis in Sacramento suo aeque celebrandum
tradiderit? Algerus de Sacram. Euch. lib. 2. c. 10. fol. 84. b. 85. a.
, In the case of unleavened Bread. Who dares except what Christ excepted not,
or forbid what he in his Sacraments did not forbid, but doing it himself,
commanded us to do the same thing, when he says, do this, we are conveniently
to understand this which I do, but who dares also to understand this, but do it
not of that which I do it? Moreover, if Unleavened Bread be to be changed for
Leavened, let the Wine also be changed for any other liquor; for as our Lord
Christ finished the Old Passover, and began the New with Unleavened Bread so
did he also do it with Wine, and delivered both to us to be equally celebrated
in this Sacrament.

CHAP. III. The Contents.
In opposition to the Decree of the Trent Council, asserting that they who
receive in one kind only are not deprived of any Grace necessary to Salvation:
The Fathers declare, 1. That it is necessary to partake of the Cup, in order to
our Union to Christ,. 1. For the Remission of Sins,. 2. For the obtainment of
Eternal Life,. 3. An inference from this last Particular, to show the falsehood
of one Anathema pronounced by the Trent Council,. 4.
IT is sure some prejudice against this Novel Doctrine, and Practice of the
Church of Rome, some ground to scruple and suspect the lawfulness of the
substraction of the Cup, that it bears such a manifest repugnance to our Lord's
institution, and to that Repetition of it which St. Paul delivered as a thing
carefully to be observed; a Tradition to be retained by the Church of Corinth;
and by attendance to which all their miscarriages, in reference to the
Celebration of that Mystery, were to be corrected: That all the Fathers of the
Church above a Thousand Years conceived themselves obliged, by virtue of this
Institution, to Minister both species to the People. That they on all occasions
rose up with such an holy Zeal against those persons who in lesser matters
presumed to vary from this Institution, condemned all humane Institutions which
receded from it, and punished all Offenders in this kind. But such has been
the Providence of God in reference to this Affair, such the discourses of the
Ancients, with respect unto this subject, that there is scarcely any other
Position advanced by these Councils in favor of this Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of Rome, which they do not directly overthrow, or in plain words
condemn, almost as fully as any Protestant can do. For,

Thirdly, Sess. 21. cap. 3. Sess. 13. Can. 3.
Whereas it is defined by the Trent Council, that they are not deprived of any
Grace necessary to Salvation, who receive one kind only; and that it cannot be
doubted, without prejudice to the Christian Faith, but that Communion in one
kind only is sufficient to Salvation. The Fathers do, in opposition to these.
Assertions, plainly and frequently declare, That it is necessary to Salvation
for Christians in the general, to drink Christi's Blood in the Sacrament. This
will be evident,

1. From these Expressions, in which the Fathers do declare it necessary, not
only to partake of the Bread, but also of the Cup, in order to that Union with
Christ which sure is necessary to Salvation; and this they generally gather
from those words of Christ, Joh. vi. 56.
He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood dwells in me, and I in him.
The Doctrine of blessed Paul, says Cyril of Jerusalem, is sufficient to aford
us full satisfaction touching the Holy Mysteries, of which being made
partakers, we become of the same body and blood with Christ; for so he says,
that our Lord Jesus, taking Bread, and giving Thanks, he brake, and gave it to
his Disciples, saying, Take, eat, this is my Body; and taking the Cup, and
giving Thanks, he said, Take, and drink, for this is my Blood; for in the type
of Bread, the Body, and in the type of Wine, the Blood is given to thee: (...).
Catech. Mist. 4. p. 237.
That partaking of the Body and Blood of Christ, thou may be of one Body and
Blood with him, for so we are made (...), bearers of Christ; his Body and Blood
being received into our members. Haecaccepta and hausta, id efficient, ut and
nos in Christo, and Christus in nobis sit. De Trin. l. 8. p. 166.
Those things being taken and drank, says Hilary, produce this effect, that
Christ is in us, and we in Christ; and how natural this Unity is, he himself
te^acheth, saying, He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood, dwells in me,
and I in him. Cyril of Alexandria on these words says, That In Joh 6.56.
our Lord here shows the great profitableness of this work; for, as if one join
Wax to Wax, he will see one part within the other; so, he that receives the
Flesh of our Savior Christ, and drinks his Blood, is, as he says, found one
with him. So mixed with and in him, that he is found in Christ, and Christ
again in him. Oecumenius upon these words, The Cup of Blessing, is it not the
Communion of the Blood of Christ? says thus, You know what I say, (...). Ed.
Gr. p. 444.
for his Blood knits us to Christ as Members to the Head, by the participation
of it. This Meat and Drink, says Rabanus Maurus, signifies the eternal society
of the Head and Members: He that drinks, says he, my Blood, and eats my
Flesh, dwells in me, etc. Necesse habemus sumere corpus and sanguinem ejus,
ut in ipso maneamus and ejus corporis membra simus. De inst. cler. l. 1. cap.
31.
wherefore it is necessary that we should take the Body and Blood of Christ,
that we may dwell in him, and be his Members. Whosoever worthily eats the
Body and the Blood of Christ, shows that he is in God, and God in him. And we,
says Lib. 2. f. 55. b.
Guitmund, who take the Communion of this Holy Bread and Cup, are made one Body
with Christ. Theophylact upon the Tenth to the Corinthians, adds, That which he
says is this, That which is in the Cup is that which flowed from his side, and
(...). Ad v. 16.
by participation of it we communicate with, that is, we are united to Christ:
That Men might not only learn by words, says Ed. Erasm. p. 217.
Petrus Cluniacensis, that they cannot live unless they be joined and united to
Christ after the manner of carnal Food and Life, they receive the Body of
Christ, and drink the Blood of Christ. We, says Et nos Jesa Christo and Jesus
Christus nobis unitate foederatur inenarrabili, etc. De coena Domini, f. 320. b.
St. Bernard, by the Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, are joined in
an ineffable Unity to Christ, and Christ to us, as he said, He that eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood, abidethin me, and I in him.

Remission of Sins, for without this Remission there is no Salvation. When thou
receivest, says St. Ambrose, What says the Apostle to thee? As often as we
eat this Bread and drink this Cup, we show forth the Lord's Death; if we show
forth his Death, we show forth the Remission of Sins; and Si quotiescunque
effunditur sanguis in remissionem peccatorum funditur, debeo illum semper
accipere, ut semper mihi peccata dimittantur, qui semper pecco, semper debeo
habere medicinam. De Sacr. l. 4. c. 6. l. 5. cap. 3.
if as often as this Blood is poured forth, it is done for the Remission of
Sins, I ought always to receive it, that my Sins may always be forgiven, for as
often as thou drinkest thou receivest Remission of Sins. Now this Passage being
cited, and approved by many others in the following Ages, and extant in the
Did. 2. c. 14. Can. de consecrat.
Canon Law, it will be needless to cite more Authors to this purpose, only let
it be noted, that to receive the Blood shed for the Remission of our Sins, is
to drink of it, says. St. Ambrose, and well he might, no other way of
receiving the Blood, shed for the Remission of Sins, being then known, than
that of drinking the Sacramental Cup.

(...). Orat. 42.
Without any doubting or shamefaced fear, eat Christ's Body, and drink his
Blood, says Nazianzen, if thou desire Life. Gregory Nyssen condemns Eunomius
for asserting, That the Mystical Symbols did not confirm our Piety; But we,
says he, who have learned from the Holy Scriptures, That unless a Man be born
again of Water, etc. and that he who eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood shall
live for ever: (...). Tom. 2. contr. Eunom. p. 704.
We believe that our Salvation is corroborated by the Mystical Rites and
Symbols. In Levit. qu. 47.
This Blood all Men are exhorted to drink who would have Life, says St.
Austin. Charles the Great confuting the vain Imaginations of the Second Nicene
Council, and comparing the sacred Blood with Images, speaks thus, L. de Imag.
2. c. 27.
Seeing without the participation of this Blood no Man can be saved, whereas
all Orthodox Persons may be saved without the observation of Images, It is
manifest, that they are by no Man of a sound Mind, to be compared or equalled
to so great a Mystery. Alcuin, the Master of Charles the Great says, We must
know that it is not lawful to offer the Cup of the Lord's Blood unmixed with
Water; for Wine was in the Mystery of our Redemption, when Christ said, I will
not drink henceforth of the fruit of the Vine; and the Water with Blood,
flowing from his side, showed the Wine pressed out of the true Vine of his
Flesh with Water; Haec enim sunt Sacramenta Ecclesiae sine quibus ad vitam non
intratur. De Celeb. Miss. p. 88.
for these are the Sacraments of the Church, without which we cannot enter into
Life. De Officiis Eccles. l. 3. c. 26.
Amalarius says the same. And our Lord, says De Instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.
Rabanus Maurus, having pronounced concerning his Body and Blood, that his
Flesh is Meat indeed, and his Blood Drink indeed; and that he that eats my
flesh, and drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life; he therefore has not that
Life who eats not that Bread, and drinks not that Blood; for although Men,
who are not in his Body by Faith, may have that Life in this World which is
Temporal, they can never have that Eternal Life which is promised to the Saints.

Christ, says Fol. 216. b.
Petrus Cluniacensis, gives his Flesh and Blood to be eaten and drunken, that
as it is discerned that without carnal Meat and drink, none can pass through
this temporal Life; so it may be believed that without this spiritual Meat and
Drink, none can obtain eternal Life; for how could he better commend himself to
the World to be the Life of Men, than by Example of those things in which Man's
Life consists? and therefore the Wisdom of God decreed to give his Flesh to Men
to eat, and his Blood to drink in the species of those things; when he says, I
am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, etc. we learn by hearing, that he is
Eternal Life; but when he says, except you eat my Flesh, etc. we learn by
eating, that he is the Eternal Life of Men. That Men therefore might not only
learn by Words, but more familiarly by Deeds, that they cannot Live, except
they be united to him, they take the Body, they drink the Blood, in the
likeness of Food, not given by, or taken from any other but Christ; to show
this, he signified that he would give to all Men his Flesh to eat, and his
Blood to drink.

And, truly, if any Doctrine can deserve to be suspected, as new, strange, and
incongruous to the Analogy of Faith, it must be this, That the Cup of Life, the
Cup of Blessing which we bless, the Cup of Salvation, which we take according
to our Lord's own Institution, and which we drink of Worthily, is not needful
to conferr Life, Salvation, or spiritual Blessing on the worthy Receiver of it.
That in all the Liturgies of the Ancient Church, they should pray constantly,
that they who worthily Received this Cup, might be filled thereby with all
spiritual Benediction, and heavenly Grace; that in their Discourses on this
Subject, they should exhort the People, after they had received the Bread, to
drink this Cup for their Sanctification, for the remission of Sins, for the
obtaining Life; and tell them it was necessary to be drunk of, for all the ends
here mentioned, and yet believe it was not needful to conferr Grace, and
spiritualy Blessings on them.

And 4ly, This they do generally prove from the Fifth Century, by that known
passage of our Lord, Except you eat the Flesh and drink the Blood of the Son of
Man, you have no Life in you. Tom. 1. p. 580. Tom. 2. p. 431.
St. Basil is express unto this purpose, saying, That the Baptized person ought
to be nourished with the food of Eternal Life; and that the communication of
the Body and Blood of Christ is necessary to Eternal Life: And proving both
from these words, Verily I say unto you, except you eat, etc. He that eats my
Flesh and drinks my Blood has Eternal Life. St. Chrysostom upon this Text,
speaks thus, Because they had said before, it was impossible to eat his Flesh,
and drink his Blood. (...). Tom. 2. p. 748.
He here shows, not only that it is not impossible, but that it is very
necessary; and therefore introduces these words, He that eats my flesh, etc.
He continually speaks of the Mysteries, showing the necessity of the thing, and
that it always ought to be done. Against the Pelagians, says P. Gelasius,
Dominus Jesus (contra Pelagianos) coelefti voce pronunciat, Qui non
manducaverit, etc. Ubi utique neminem videmus exemptum, nec ausus est aliquis
dicere parvulum sine hoc Sacramento salutari ad aeternam vitam posse produci --
Ep. vniv. Episc. per Nicaenum. Council. Tom. 4. p. 1177, 1178.
our Lord pronounces that he who eats not the Flesh of the Son of Man, and
drinks his Blood, has no Life in him; where we see none exempt, nor dares any
say, that an Infant can obtain Eternal Life without this Sacrament -- It is not
only said, Except a Man be born again of Water, etc. but unelss, He eat -- and
drink, etc. and that this is spoken of Eternal Life none can doubt; because
many who receive not this Sacrament, have this present Life. St. Austin Asserts
above Twenty times, the absolute necessity that Infants should partake of
Christ's Body, and drink his Blood, by reason of these words Omnino and
parvulorum salvator est Christus, omnino nisi ab illo redimantur peribunt, quum
sine carne ejus and sanguine vitam habere non possunt, hoc sensit, hoc
credidit, hoc didicit, hoc docuit Joannes. Tom. 7. l. 1. contra Jul. Pelag. ed.
Frob. p. 949.
Christ, says he, is altogether the Savior of Infants, and unless they be
redeemed by him, they will utterly perish, seeing without his Flesh and Blood
they cannot have Life. This St. John thought and believed, learned and taught.
And again, An dicente Christo, Si non manducaveritis, etc. dicturus fueram
parvulum habiturum vitam qui sine isto Sacramento finiisset hanc vitam. Ibid.
l. 3. c. 1. p 991. d. 992. a.
when Christ says, Unless you eat his Flesh and drink his Blood you have no
life in you, can I say the Child can have Life, who ends his Life without that
Sacrament? And a third time, He having said, Unless you eat, etc. and he that
eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood has eternal Life: Quo igitur vitam regni
coelorum promittitis parvulis non renatis ex aqua and spiritu Sancto, non
cibatis carne neque potatis sanguine Christi? Where the Marginal Note is,
Eucharistia parvulis sub utraque specie. Tom. 7. contr. Pelag. Hypognost. c. 5.
p. 1405. b. c.
How is it that you (Pelagians) promise the Kingdom of Heaven to Children not
born of Water and the Spirit, not fed with the Flesh of Christ, nor having
drunk of his Blood which was shed for the Remission of their Sins? Behold, he
that is not Baptized, and he that is deprived of the Vital Cup and Bread, is
divided from the Kingdom of Heaven. And of what Sacrament he conceives our
Savior to have spoken in these words, he more expressly tells us, saying,
Dominum audiamus non quidem hoc de Sacramento sancti lavacri dicentem, sed de
Sacra mento sacrae mensae suae, quo nemo nisi rite baptizatus accedit, Nisi
manducaveritis, etc. Tom. 7. l. de peccat. Meritis and Remiss. c. 19. p. 666.
Let us hear our Lord speaking, not of the Sacrament of Baptism, N. B. but of
the Sacrament of his Holy Table, to which none comes who is not rightly
Baptized, Except you eat -- and drink, etc. What do we farther seek for? Dares
any Body say, this Sentence belongs not to Children, or that they can have
Life in themselves, without the Participation of the Body and the Blood of
Christ? But he that says this, does not attend, that if that Sentence
comprehends not all, so that they cannot have Life without the Body and the
Blood of Christ, those of Riper Years are not obliged to regard it: And to
refer you to the Vide Dallaeum de Cult. Latin. l. 5. cap. 3.
Margin for the rest, his Conclusion is this, Siergo, ut tot, and tanta divina
testimonia concinant, nec salus, nec vita aeterna fine baptismo and corpore and
sanguine Domini cuiquam speranda est, frustra fine his promittitur parvulis.
Lib. 1. de peccat. Meritis and Remiss. c. 24. p. 670.
If then so many divine Testimonies accord in saying, That neither Salvation
nor Life eternal is by any to be hoped for, without Baptism, and the Body and
the Blood of our Lord, they art in vain promised to Children without them. Now
here it is to be admired, that Men of Sense and of Integrity, should say, St.
Austin speaks all this of such a participation of the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, as may be had in Baptism, when he not only speaks in diverse of these
places first of the Sacrament of Baptism, and after of the Supper of the Lord,
but sometimes of this Sacrament by way of distinction from that of Baptism,
sometimes of the Sacrament of the Lord's Table, and of that eating and drinking
of Christ's Body and Blood, quod per corpus geritur, which is done by the Body.
And when this Text from the Fifth to the Twelfth Century, was by the Fathers
still interpreted of the Lord's Supper, and Children were admitted to that
Sacrament, and to the drinking of the Cup on that account. Isidore Peleusiota
in the same Age extolling the Sacerdotal Order, says, That by their means we
are regenerated, (...). l. 2. Ep. 52.
and made partakers of the divine Mysteries, without which no Man can attain
the Heavenly rewards, as is apparent from the Heavenly Oracles, now saying,
That unless a Man be born again, etc. and anon, Unless we eat, etc. we have no
life in us: Which Argument he seems to have borrowed from St. Chrysostom, who
says, Hom. 3. de Sacerd. tom. 6. p. 16. l. 38.
If none can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven who is not born again of Water,
etc. If he that does not eat the Flesh of the Lord, and drink his Blood, is
deprived of Eternal Life, and all these things are not otherwise communicated,
but by the Hands of the Priest, who can, without these Men avoid the Fire of
Hell, or enjoy the Crowns laid up in Heaven? Amphilochius says, (...). In Vit.
Basil. c. 17. p. 221.
It is impossible that any one should be saved, unless he be regenerated by
Baptism, and made partaker of the Life-giving Antitypes of the Body and Blood
of Christ. De Ecclesiast. Officiis, l. 1. de Sacrificio, c. 18.
Isidore Hispalensis cites, and approves that passage of Timendum est ne dum
qui abstentus seperatur a Christi corpore procul remaneat a salute, comminante
ipso vel dicente, Nisi ederitis carnem filii hominis and biberitis sanguinem
ejus, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Cypr. de Orat. Dom. p. 147. Et Raban. Maur.
de institut. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.
St. Cyprian, in his Treatise on the Lord's Prayer, It is to be feared, least
any one, being long separated from the Body of Christ, should be far from
Salvation; Christ having said, Unless you eat, etc. Hincmarus Remensis says,
That Christ spoke those words of his Body and Blood inviting his Servants to
his Table, that Locutus est nobis de corpore and sanguine suo, commendans talem
escam, and talem potum, Nisi manducaveritis, etc. haec sunt Sacramenta
Ecclesiae sine quibus ad vitam quae vera vita est non intratur. Tom. 2. p. 92.
this, and Baptism are the Sacraments of the Church, without which we cannot
enter into true Life. Habet vitam aeternam; hanc ergo non habet qui istum panem
non manducat, nec istum sanguinem bibit, nam temporalem vitam sine illo habere
homines possunt, aeternam vero omnino non possunt. August. Tract. 26. in Joh.
p. 229. Sinc isto cibo and potu. Raban. M. de instit. Cler. l. 1.31.
Rabanus speaks thus, The Truth says, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is
Drink indeed. -- Men may have temporal Life without this Meat and Drink,
eternal they can never have. Which Words he borrowed from St. Austin's Comment
on the Sixth of John. Regino cites this passage from the Capitulars of Charles
the Great, That De Eccl. discipl. l. 1. can. 195.
great discretion is to be used as to the Receiving of the Body and Blood of
Christ, for care is to be taken, least being deferred too long, it tend to the
Destruction of the Soul, our Lord having said, Unless you eat, etc. Quasi
quodam jurejurando protestatur dicens, Amen. Amen, etc. Apud Baron. Tom. 11. p.
1007.
Humbert in his Disputation against the Greeks, says, That Christ restified
with an Oath, that without this refection, that Life which is Christ cannot be
had, saying, Verily I say unto you, except, etc. The Flesh is taken by it self,
says Lanfranck, and the Blood by it self, not without a certain Mystery,
though in another Sense whole Christ is said to be eaten, viz. By spiritual
desire of eternal Life, and Meditation of his Passion; Utraque comestio
necessaria, utraque fructuosa, altera indiget alterius, ut boni aliquid
operetur -- hinc in Evangelio legitur nisi manducaveritis, etc. De Sacr. Euch.
p. 126, 127.
both these Comestions are necessary -- for hence it is read in the Gospel,
that unless we eat, etc. Comment. in 6. Joh.
Rupertus Tuitiensis says, That least any Man should think he has recovered
by Faith alone, the Life of his Body and Soul, without the visible meat and
drink of the Body and Blood of Christ, and consequently needs not the
Sacrament, Christ repeats the same thing again touching the eating his Flesh
and drinking his Blood; by this undoubtedly testifying that he does not truly
believe, whosoever despises to eat and to drink; for although thou be a
Faithful Man, and profess thy self to be a Catholic, if thou refusest to eat
of this visible Meat and Drink, even by this, that thou presumest that this
Meat and Drink is not necessary to thee, thou cuttest thy self off from the
Society of the Members of Christ, which is the Church.

Fathers has put upon these words, from the Fifth to the Twelfth Century be
owned by Romanists, the consequence is unavoidable, that it is necessary to
Salvation to receive the Sacrament under both kinds, for they who do receive
the Body only, may be said well to eat the Flesh of Christ, because they take
something by way of Meat, but they cannot be said to drink his Blood, as here
our Lord requires them to do, since they take nothing by way of drink. The
privation of Life is here connected with the neglect of Drinking, as much as
with the neglect of Eating; since therefore eating the drinking are distinct
Actions, he cannot properly be said to drink, who only eats, and therefore must
neglect what, by the Fathers descants on these Words, is necessary to life
eternal. Moreover, since on this sole account they constantly did minister the
Cup to little Children, as Roman Catholics confess, they ministered both the
Bread and Cup to Children capable of receiving both, as the Church History
attests; it follows that they held it necessary to Salvation in conformity to
these Sayings of our Lord recorded by St. John, that both should be received by
all Christians capable of taking both Species. And therefore in condemning this
Doctrine, Sess. 21. can. 4.
and that with an Anathema, the Fathers of the Trent Council must have
virtually Anathematized the whole Church of Christ for Nine whole Centuries,
and by renouncing of this Interpretation so generally received, the Doctors of
the Roman Church must at least seem to us to violate that Oath, Jaramentum
professionis fidei a Pio 4. editum.
which they have taken, never to interpret or own any sense of Scripture, Nisi
juxta unanimem consensum Patrum, but according to the unanimous consent of the
Fathers.

CHAP. IV. The Contents.
In opposition to that Determination of the Trent Council, That a true or an
entire Sacrament is taken under either Species. The Fathers and the Schoolmen
do expressly say the contrary, viz. Epiphanius,. 1. The Council held in Trullo,
P. Julius, P. Gelasius, the Council of Braga,. 2. Paschasius Corbeiensis,
Algerus and St. Bernard,. 3. Alexander Halensis, Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure,
Albertus Magnus, Durantus, Petrus de Palude, Gulielmus de monte Laudano, Lyra,
Carthusianns, Andreas Frisius,. 4. The Inferences from these Sayings, 5.
WHereas the Trent Council asserts, Sess. 21. cap. 3. l. 4. de Sacr. Ench. c.
22. s. utraque.
That a true Sacrament is taken under either Species, that is, as Bellarmine
Interprets it, An entire Sacrament; nothing is more repugnant to the plain
Judgment of Antiquity than these Assertions. And though the silence of all
Antiquity in this matter is a full demonstration that they held no such
Doctrine, seeing no reason can be given why they, had they embraced this
Doctrine, which is frequently inculcated by all the Roman Doctors, who write
upon this Subject, should never say with the like plainness, as they so often
do, That an entire Sacrament is given under one Species only, or any thing to
that effect; or give themselves the trouble to Answer that Enquiry which so
disturbs the Roman Doctors, and which they see themselves so much concerned to
Answer; viz. Why then did our dear Lord himself distribute and institute this
Sacrament to be received under both kinds? I say, though this be a sufficient
prejudice against that Assertion of the Council of Trent; and though it will
more fully be confuted by an impartial Reflection on what we have Discoursed,
of the constant Declaration of the Church, that to give the consecrated Bread
dipped in the Cup was not to give a complete Sacrament, with many things of the
like nature; yet shall I wave all these Advantages at present, and show from
the plain Sayings, both of the Ancients, the Writers of the middle, and chiefly
of the latter Ages, or the Doctrine of the Schools, that they conceived the
Reception of both Species by persons capable, was requisite to the integrity of
this Sacrament.

Epiphanius speaking of the Encratites, says, That in this Mystery they use
only Water, and wholly do abstain from Wine; the censure which he passes on
them for so doing, is this, That having the Form, they deny the Power of
Godliness; (...), etc. Haer. 47.. 3. Page 401.
for whosoever, says he, does omit one part of a work, by the omission of that
one part, does really omit the whole. The Inference he makes from that Rule is
this, That the Mysteries they celebrate by Water only, are really no Mysteries,
but only false Mysteries in imitation of the true, in which they are convinced
by the Right words of our Savior, saying, I will not henceforth drink of the
Fruit of the Vine.

General Council held in Truillo being informed that the Armenians did
celebrate the Mysteries in pure Wine not mixed with Water, declares that the
did Can. 32.
(...), imperfectly show forth the Mystery. Now let it be observed from St.
Paul, that it is not by offering only, but by partaking of this Bread, and
drinking of this Cup, that we do (...), show forth the Lord's Death, and then
it clearly follows, that if he who distributes Wine without Water, imperfectly
shows forth the Mystery, he that gives neither Wine nor Water must do it more
imperfectly. When some in the Diocese of Squillaci out of some unknown
Superstition, would have taken the Bread without the Cup, Apud Ivon. decret.
part 2. c. 89.
Gelasius decrees, that they should either take the entire Sacrament, or be
entirely driven from it; he therefore evidently determined, that taking of one
Species only was not taking an entire Sacrament. In the Fourth Century, See
cap. 2.
Pope Julius, in the Seventh Council of Braga, in the Eleventh Micrologus, in
the Twelfth Peter Lombard, do with one voice deny that the Bread dipped in the
consecrated Wine can be administered, pro complemento Communionis, for an entire
or complete Communion, and therefore much less could they think that the
Communion was entire when ministered only in dry Bread.

The great Sticklers for Transubstantiation averr the same thing. Sect;. 3.
Paschasius Corbeiensis says, That De Corp. and Sang. Dom. c. 11.
therefore we are fed with, and made to drink of these two only in the way,
that our whole Man, which consists of two Substances, integre reparetur, may be
entirely repaired, both therefore were, in his judgment, needful to an entire
reparation of the whole Man. Algerus in Answer to this Question, Why the Body
and Blood of Christ is consecrated rather in Bread, Wine and Water, than in any
other kinds of Bodies? says, That because we so live by Bread and drink, that
we can want neither of them, Utrumque in Sacramento suo esse voluit. De Sacr.
Euch. l. 2. c. 5.
our Lord would have both be in his Sacrament, least if either of them should
be wanting, as by this imperfect sign of Life, he should seem to be represented
not as full, but as imperfect Life. And a little after he says, This is done
proptr commodiorem aptitudinem Sacrametalis perfectionis, for the more
commodious representation of the Sacramental perfection. The Species of Bread
and Wine is propounded, says De coena Domini f. 321. b.
St. Bernard, that it might be taught, that there is a full and perfect
refection in taking the Body and the Blood of Christ; a full refection of Meat
and Drink, the principal Substances of Meat and Drink being Bread and Wine.

Schoolmen do declare against this Doctrine of the Trent Council. In iv. sent.
q. 40. membr. 3. Art 2. and q. 53. membr. 1.
Alexander of Hales says, That whole Christ is not under either Species
Sacramentally, but the Flesh only under the Species of Bread, the Blood under
the Species of Wine only; for to the perfection of the Sacrament is required a
representation according to the Institution, but in one kind the matter of the
Sacrament is not entirely and perfectly; I say there is not a perfect
Sacrament, as to the Sacramental Perfection of it. Sum. part. 3. q. 76. Art. 2.
Adv. Gent. l. 4. c. 61. and in 1. Cor. c. 11.
Aquinas says, That though Christ is contained under both Species, yet is it
convenient to the use of this Sacrament, that the Body of Christ should be
delivered apart for Food to the Faithful, and his Blood for Drink; both, says
he, is of the perfection of this Sacrament, for the perfection of refection,
for the representation of Christ's Passion, and for the effecting of the
Salvation both of Soul and Body. 1. For its perfection; for it being a
Spiritual Refection, it ought to have spiritual Meat and spiritual Drink, for
corporal Refection is not perfected without both these: And as he elsewhere
says, because spiritual effects are done under the likeness of visible, it was
fit that this spiritual nourishment should be delivered to us under the Species
of those things which Men do ordinarily use for corporal nourishment; and
therefore this Sacrament is delivered to us under the Species of Bread and
Wine. 2. For the signification of it; for it is a memorial of the Lord's
Passion, whereby his Blood was separated from his Body; and therefore in this
Sacrament the Blood is offered by it self. And elsewhere, Because the
Completion of our Salvation was made by the Passion and Death of Christ, by
which is Blood was separated from his Flesh; separatim nobis traditur
Sacramentum corporis ejus sub specie panis, and sanguis sub specie vini; the
Sacrament of his Body is delivered N. B. to us apart under the Species of
Bread, and the Blood under the Species of Wine, that so in this Sacrament might
be the memory and representation of our Lord's Passion. 3. For the healthful
Effect of it; for the Body is offered to show that it is of force to save the
Body, and the Blood is offered to show that it is of force to save the Soul;
for the Soul is in the Blood. In 4. Sent. did. 8. q. 2. and did. 11. q. 2.
Bonaventure says, That, as to the signification, both Species are of the
integrity of this Sacrament, because the matter of the Sacrament is expressed
in neither of them by it self, but in both together, which appears thus; Here
Christ is signified as Meat, perfectly refreshing them that eat him
Sacramentally and Spiritually; but a perfect Refection is not in Bread alone or
Wine alone, but in both; he therefore is signified as perfectly refreshing not
in one Species only but in both. And again, This Sacrament, though it contains
two Signs, and two Words, yet because a perfect Sign ordained for one thing,
sc. the Union of the Body Mystical, results from them, therefore the Sacrament
is one; and the reason of this Integrity and Ordination comes from Nature, for
neither is Bread nor Wine apart fully Refectory, but both, and one full
Refection in nature comes from both, and so they are disposed to signify one
Refection; but this is completed by the Divine Institution, which by one
Institution has appointed these two Signs to signify one perfect Refection,
and so it is one Sacrament on the account of nature and of Divine Institution.

In 4. Sent. did. 8. Art. 13.
Albertus Magnus lays down this general Rule, The Sacrament of the Church
causes nothing in Grace which it does not signify in Similitude, and that the
Sacraments of the New Law are the cause of nothing of which they bear not a
sensible Image; and thence infers, That the Union of the Mystical Body is not
perfectly caused, and signified but by a double Sign; and therefore by virtue
of the Sacrament we ought to have both. And in his Comment upon the Sixth of
John, he says, That as in the Flesh is received what is vivifying, and
restorative of the spiritual and divine Life lost in us, so by the Blood is
received the Aspersion, and cleansing of our inward parts. And making the
enquiry, why, to that manducation Spiritual Drink was necessary to be added, he
answers, it is so, because Meat cannot be without Drink. In his Comment on c.
22. f. 321.
St. Luke; Some, says he, more curious than devout, enquire to what end was
the Sacrament of the Blood instituted after the Sacrament of the Body, since
the Body of Christ is not without the Blood, nor the Blood without the Body?
But to this we say, that though these are as to their nature undivided, yet
have they different Effects; for one by Christ is ordained to incorporate, the
Blood for the washing away of Sins: whence it is said, That without shedding of
Blood there is no Remission: And that which they say that the Body is not
without the Blood is true; but yet by virtue of the Sacrament, the Sacramental
Body is not in the Blood, nor the Sacramental Blood in the Body: That therefore
we might have a Supper Sacramentally perfect, it was necessary that it should
be instituted, that the Body and Blood should be Sacramentally had; this
therefore is the cause and manner of the Institution; so our King and Priest
saves us out of the Flour and out of the Wine Press. Rat. l. 4. c. 54. f. 126.
Durantus says, That the Church instituted the Sacrament to be taken after the
consecration of both Species, to show, that he who receives the Host only,
receives not the whole Sacrament Sacramentally: For although the Blood be in
the consecrated Host, yet is it not Sacramentally there, because the Bread
signifies the Body not the Blood, the Wine signifies the Blood, not the Body;
wherefore because the Sacrament under one kind is not complete according to the
Sign, the Sacrament ought to be complete before the Priest use it. And again,
Ibid. c. 4^. f. 106.
Although, under the Form of Bread, the Blood may be taken with the Body, and
under the Form of Wine, the Body may be taken with the Blood; yet, according to
Innocent the Third, neither the Blood under the Form of Bread, nor the Body
under te Form of Wine is drunk and eaten, because as neither Blood is eaten nor
the Body drunk, so neither under the Form of Bread is drunk, or eaten under the
Form of Wine.

Cassunder informs us of De com. sub utraque specie, p. 1034.
Petrus de Palude, that he asserted, That the matter of the Sacrament ought to
be double, viz. the matter of Bread and Drink; because the effect of the
Sacrament ought to be perfectly represented by the matter, in a way agreeable
to natural things, because the Sacraments effect what they do figure, but the
effect of the Sacrament is full Refection of the Soul, and therefore the matter
representing this, ought to do it by perfect Refection of the Body, which only
is by Meat and Drink. Lyturg. p. 77.
Guilielmus de monte Landano, as he there cites him, adds, That he who receives
the Body, receives the whole Truth, but not the whole Sacrament; and therefore
in many places they Communicate with Bread and Wine, that is, with a whole
Sacrament. The De commu. sub utraque specie, ibid.
Dean of Lovain, as he cites him, says, That with respect to the Sacrament,
and the perfection of it, it is more convenient that the Communion should be
made under both kinds, for this is more consonant to the Institution and
integrity of it, to corporal Refection, to the Example of Christ, and the
Primitive Church. And again, He freely confesses that the Laity communicating
under one kind only, receive not a full Sacrament, which consists of two Parts.
This Sacrament, says In 1 ad Cor. c. xi.
Lyra, is given under the double Species of Bread and Wine, that thereby
spiritual Refection may perfectly be showed forth, and because it is a memorial
of Christ's Passion, in which the Blood was separated from the Body. And again,
Utrumque est de perfectione huju Sacramenti, both is expressed perfectly the
Passion of Christ semblably, of which this Sacrament is the memorial. 2dly.
Because both signify nourishment perfectly. Though the Body and Blood of
Christ, says, In 1 ad Cor. c. xi.
Carthusian, are called Sacraments in the plural, yet speaking formally of
their perfect and integral Unity, they are but one Sacrament; for they are
ordained to one end and complete act, viz. to the spiritual Refection of the
Soul, in which spiritual Meat and spiritual Drink is required.

The eating, says L. 4. de emend. Christianae Reipub. cap. 19.
Andreas Frisius, is named separately and the drinking separately by his
Wisdom, to which all humane Wisdom concerning the inseparability of living
Blood from living Flesh ought to give place; for here we are are not to dispute
from humane reason, but to have respect to the will of Christ, which
instituted, convivium non mancum, not a maimed Banquet, but added drink to the
meat. If any of these Doctors do elsewhere contradict their own Assertions, for
that I am not much concerned, it being natural, and almost unavoidable, for Men
who maintain things contradictory to common reason, to say one thing when they
discourse according to the innate Notions of common reason, and another thing
when they serve the Hypothesis to which they are enslaved; it suffices me to
make these plain Inferences from what they have discoursed.

Christ, not as imperfect but as perfect Life, to teach us that there is a
perfect and full Refection in this Sacrament, to show that Christ redeemed the
whole Man, and that there may be in this Sacrament a representation according
to the Institution, then we who do thus represent, thus teach, thus act,
according to the Institution must be blameless, if the Institution has
appointed both these Species to signify one perfect Refection, they act not
suitably to their appointment who use but one. If the Bread signifies the Body,
not the Blood; the Wine the Blood, and not the Body; and if the Sacrament under
one kind be not complete according to the Sign, then, seeing every Sacrament is
Sacrae rei signum, a sign of something sacred, this Sacrament can never be
complete, when it is administered only in one of the appointed signs, because a
sacred thing appointed to be signified must then be wanting: If whole Christ be
no under either Species Sacramental, if the Sacramental Body be not in the
Blood, nor the Sacramental Blood in the Body; If he who receives the Body only,
receive not the whole Sacrament Sacramentally, then they who administer the
Body only, do not administer the whole Sacrament Sacramentally, nor, as is
requisite to the Sacramental Perfection of the Ordinance. If both Species were
given for an entire reparation of the whole Man, to be Food to the Faithful,
and to avail to the Safety and Salvation both of Soul and Body; then must they
deprive the Laity of their Food, and their entire reparation, and hinder the
Safety and Salvation of their Souls and Bodies, who deprive them of one
Species: If the Species of Wine is to be received for the remembrance of that
Redemption which was made by the Effusion of blood, for the memory and
representation of Christ's Passion, that by it we may receive the Aspersion and
cleansing of our inward Parts; then must they hinder the showing forth of our
Lord's Death, and the purification of the Laity, who rob them of the Cup: If by
virtue of the Sacrament we ought to have both Species, to have spiritual Meat
and spiritual Drink, if the matter of the Sacrament ought to be double, and it
is necessary to a Supper Sacramentally perfect, that the Body and Blood should
both Sacramentally be had; then they who do not permit the People to have both,
do not what they ought. And Lastly, If this be more consonant to the
institution, to the integrity of the Sacrament, to the Example of Christ, and
of the Primitive Church; sure they must act more consonantly to the
Institution, and the Example of their Lord, the Practice of the Primitive
Church, and the Integrity of the Sacrament, who give both Species, than they
who do deprive the Laity of one, though, at the same time, they do act less
consonantly to the Decrees and Constitutions of the Church of Rome.

CHAP. V.
The Contents. In opposition to the Council of Constance, condemning them as
Heretics who pertinaciously assert, That it is Sacrilegious to observe the Law
of Communion in one kind; this Practice is declared to be Sacrilegious by P.
Leo,. 1. by P. Gelasius,. 2. The Evasions of the Roman Catholics fully
refuted. Ibid. This is farther proved from the Sayings of the Fathers, compared
with the Descriptions which the Schoolmen give of Sacrilege,. 3. And from the
Schoolmen,. 4.
WHereas the Council of Constance, Sess. 13.
approved by the Church of Rome, declares it Erroneous to assert, That it is
Sacrilegious to observe the Law or Custom of Communicating the Priests that do
not consecrate, and the Laity, in one kind only, and commands that they who
pertinaciously so assert, shall be driven away from the Communion of
Christians, as Heretics, and be grievously punished by the Diocesans of the
place, or their Officials, or the Inquisitors of Heretical pravity; this
mutilation of the Sacrament, has by the Doctors of the Ancient Church been
adjudged Sacrilege, and they who only did receive the Bread, but did not
partake of the Cup, have been pronounced Sacrilegious, and as such, are
commanded to be expelled from the Society of Christians.

Leo, speaking of the Manichees, says, Comque ad tegendam infidelitatem suam
nostris audent interesse Mysteriis, ita in Sacramentorum Communione fe
temperant, ut interdum, quo tutius lateant, ore indigno Christi Corpus
accipiunt, sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae haurite omnino declinant, quod
ideo vestram volumus scire sanctitatem, ut vobis hujusmodi homines and his
manisestentur indiciis, and quorum deprehensa fuerit sacrilega simulatio,
notati, and proditi, a sanctorum societate sacerdotali authoritate pelantur.
Sermon. 4. in quadrag. c. 5. Ed. Quesnel. p. 271.
They avoid the Sacrament of humane Salvation, and believe not that our Lord
Christ was truly born, truly suffered, was buried, and raised again in true
Flesh of our Nature; and when, to conceal their Infidelity, they dare to be
present at our Mysteries, they so behave themselves in the Communion of the
Sacrament, that sometimes, least they should not possibly lie hid, they take
Christ's Body with their unworthy Mouths, but they wholly decline drinking the
Blood of our Redemption, which therefore we make known to your Holiness, that
such Men may be known to you by these Tokens, and that, by the Sacerdotal
Authority, they may be expelled from the Communion of Saints, whose
Sacrilegious Simulation is thus found out; for blessed Paul has well
admonished the Church of God of such Men, saying, We beseech you Brethren, that
you mark them who cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which
you have received, and avoid them.

Where evident it is that the Practice of the Manichees in Receiving of the
Body of the Lord in the Christian Mysteries, that so they might dissemble their
Infidelity, is called Simulation, and their declining to drink the Blood of our
Redemption, is that which made this Simulation to be Sacrilegious. 2dly. Here
it is also evident, that in St. Leo's days, to eat the Body of our Lord, or to
receive it, and to drink his Blood, were looked upon as two distinct things,
one of which might be done without the other, the Body being taken when the
Blood of our Redemption was not, which wholly overthrows the Doctrine of
Concomitance, on which this Sacrilege is founded. 3ly. Observe that Leo would
have such persons expelled from the Communion of Saints for this Sacrilegious
Simulation. That 4ly. He makes the declining of the Cup at any time, a mark
sufficient to discern these Sacrilegious Persons, and a cause sufficient for
their Exclusion from the Communion of Saints; whereas had others at any time
been permitted in the Church Assemblies to Communicate in Bread alone, for any
other Reason, this mark had been no certain indication of a Manichee to Priest
or People, since being caught, they might pretend that they had formerly
received the Cup, but now abstained for some special cause approved by the
Church. The Faithful therefore must have then generally Communicated at all
times, or else the Manichee could not be certainly discovered by one Dry
Communion.

Moreover Pope Gelasius did by a Law condemn this half Communion, as a great
Sacrilege. Non esse sumendum Corpus Domini sine Calice. Gelasius Majorico and
Johanni Episcopis, apud Ivon. decret. part. 2. cap. 8, 9. Comperimus quod
quidam in eadem Regione sumpta tantum Corporis Sacri portione, a Calice Sacri
cruoris abstineant, qui proculdubio (quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur
obstringi) aut integra Sacramenta accipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, quia
divisio unius and ejusdem Mysteril sine grandi Sacrilegio non potest provenire.
We have found, says he, that some in the same Country having taken only a
portion of the Holy Body, abstain from the Cup of the Holy Blood, who (because
I know not by what Superstition they are said to be bound) ought, without
doubt, to receive the entire Mysteries, or to be driven from both; for the
division of one and the self same Mystery, cannot happen without great
Sacrilege. Where note, 1. That this Law respects not Priests only; for as Ad
A. D. 496. Sect. 20.
Baronius observes, This is no mention in the Law of the Priest Sacrificing, or
of any other of that Order; whence, says he, it is evident that what is
generally spoken here, ought not to be restrained to them. Moreover, Cassander
does assure us, That in his Old Manuscript, this was the Title of this Decree,
That Quod nulli liceat absque sanguinis participatione solius carnis
Communionem percipere. P. 19. p. 1106.
it was not lawful for any one N. B. to Receive the Communion of the Flesh,
without partaking of the Blood. In Ivo the Title of it runs thus, That the Body
of our Lords is not to be taken without the Cup. Excommunicari illos praecipit
quicunque sumpto corpore dominico a calicis participatione se abstinerent. Nam
(ut ipse in eodem decreto asserit) hujusmodi Sacramentorum divisio sine grandi
Sacrilegio provenire non poterit. Microl. Cap. 19.
Micrologus says, That P. Gelasius commanded that they should be
Excommunicated, quicunque, whosoever they were, that having taken the Body of
our Lord, abstained from the Cup. Prop. 23. p. 579.
Radulphus de Rivo transcribes the very words of Micrologus, and both of them
give the same reason of this precept, viz. For as he in the same Decree
asserts, such a division of the Sacraments cannot come to pass without great
Sacrilege. Now from these Testimonies it is evident, 1. That from the Tenth to
the Fourteenth Century, it was esteemed an unlawful and Sacrilegious thing, for
any that were capable of both, to receive the Bread without partaking of the
Cup. Yea Sacrilege is by them declared to be inseparable from such a divisio of
this Mystery: It therefore must according to the judgment of Pope Gelasius, and
of the following Ages who approved of his Decree, be inseparable from the
constant practice of the Church of Rome, since te times of the Council of
Constance. 2. Whereas the R. Doctors say this Decree was made against the
Manichees, who held Wine in abomination, and therefore did refuse the Cup; and
so concerns them only who refuse upon a like account, to drink of it: It is
observable, that neither Gelasius himself, nor any who have since that time
took notice of this Law, have told us that it was peculiarly made against the
Manichees, who abstained from drinking of the Cup for the formantioned reason;
but they without Exception declare that by this Law it was not lawful for any
one to receive the Flesh without the Cup, and that whosoever did so, was by
virtue of it to be Excommunicated. And hence L. 2. c. 8.
Algerus in the Twelfth Century cites this Decree to prove that the Bread is
separately to be consecrated into the Flesh, and the Wine into the Blood of
Christ, and that both are to be received by the Faithful. And they had reason
to speak thus generally of it, for that this Law of P. Gelasius was not
directed against the Manichean Heresy, may be made evident from numerous
considerations: For (1.) had this Pope made this Law against the Manichees,
there can be no reason imagined why he, as well as Leo, should not mention
them. 2ly. That Expression in the body of this Law, that he knew not by what
Superstition they were bound up, cannot filty be applied to the Manichees, for
it was, doubtless, a matter well known to Gelasius, why the Manichees refused
the Cup, and not unto Gelasius only, but to all the People. For Leo, who
preceded him, had taken care that not only Omnia quae tam in Scripturis, quam
in occultis traditionibus suis habent profana vel turpia, ut nosset populus
quid refugeret aut vitaret, oculis Christianae plebis certa manifestatione
probavimus. Decret. Leonis P. c. 6. Collect. a Dionysio exiguo, apud Justel. p.
224.
All the profane and filthy things which were in their Writings, but also that
the things contained in their secret Traditions, should be manifested to the
Eyes of Christians, that the People might know what they are to avoid, and fly
from. 3ly. The very word Superstition shows that Gelasius did not intend the
Manichees; for superstition intimates a design of Reverence and Veneration of
the Sacrament, although misplaced, and not well designed, whereas the Manichees
in their refusal of the Cup, were acted by the grosest Heresy; they refused
Wine as being unclean, and the Gall of the Devil; and as P. Leo says,
condemned the Creature, in Creatoris injuriam, to the reproach of the Creator.
4ly. Gelasius speaks only of those persons who were then within the Country of
Squillaci, and in the Diocese committed by him to Majoricus and John, whereas
it is uncertain whether one Manichee was ever there, and is most certain they
did abound elsewhere. Nor, 5ly. can these words, Let them receive the entire
Sacraments, or be excluded from them, be reasonably applied to the Manichees;
for none, who know the Vide Council. Laod. can. 6. and 33.
Discipline of Ancient times, can think that the Abettors of so gross an
Heresy as that of Manes, which held, Aug. ad quod vult Deus, c. 46.
That there were two first Causes, one Good, the other Evil; which denied the
Worship of the God of the Old Testament, denied the Resurrection, and the
Virgin birth of our dear Lord, and worshipped the Sun as God, could be admitted
to the participation of the Holy Sacraments, without a previous condemnation of
those prodigious Errors, and a public Penance; much less that they could be
admitted with such freedom by that Gelasius who declares, That Cum nullo
prorsus eorum participare debetis, mensae dominicae puritatem, quam majores
nostri semper ab haeretica magnopere servarunt pollutione discretam. Cause. 24.
qu. 2. c. nec quisquam.
Christians might not partake of the purity of the Lord's Table with an
Heretic; which Table our Ancestors have always abundantly kept severed from
all Heretical Pollution; and who succeeded that Leo who compelled the
Manichees, before they were admitted to the Communion of Christians, to do
public Penance; and by a public Profession, and Subscription in the Church,
to condemn the Manichean Heresy.

Now the Confutation of this pretense, that Pope Gelasius made this Decree
against the Manichees, is a full confutation of all that Romanists do offer to
elude the force of it against them; for then it follows, that this Decree
cannot reasonably be restrained to them who regarded the species of Wine as an
object of aversion, or who abstained from the Cup out of an horror of Wine, or
of the blood of our Lord: For all these descants evidently do relate unto the
Doctrine of the Manichees, and therefore they are all confuted by the
refutation of that vain pretense, That P. Gelasius made this Law against the
Manichees.

And whereas others tell us, that these were laws then made to restrain the
liberty the Church before had granted to receive in public in one kind; this,
as it is said without any shadow of proof, so it is fully confuted by the very
words of the Decrees of these Two Popes. Leo objects against the Manichees,
that by avoiding of the Cup, they declined the drinking of the Blood of their
Redemption. Now can it be supposed that he knew then of any liberty the Church
had granted to the Faithful to decline the drinking the Blood of their
Redemption; that is, of doing the very thing for which he so severely does
condemn the Manichees. Gelasius decrees touching them of Squillaci, That they
shall either take the Sacraments entire, or be entirely driven from them;
plainly insinuating, that they who received not the Cup, received not an entire
Sacrament; and could the Faithful in those times receive the Sacrament so, that
in the judgment of so great a Pope it was imperfectly received by them?

Moreover, that this practice must in the judgment of the Holy Fathers be
Sacrilegious, will farther be made evident from the comparing of their
Sentiments, touching the distribution, and receiving of the Cup by all the
Faithful, with those descriptions which the Schoolmen given of Sacrilege. For,

1. Sacrilege, says Medul. Theol. l. 3. Tr. 1. de primo praecepto Dec. c. 2.
Dub. 2.
Busenbaum, is the violation of a thing holy, that is dedicated to divine
Worship; and to violate what is holy, is (says In 22. Disp. 6. q. 15. punct. 1.
Gregorius de Valentia) nothing else, but to do something repugnant to that
Worship to which a thing is designed: Wherefore if the reception of the Cup by
the Laity was designed for their showing forth the Lord's Death, and the
remembrance of his Passion, it must be Sacrilege to rob them of it; because it
is the violation of a thing dedicated to Divine Worship, and the doing that
which is repugnant to that Worship to which the Cup was designed. Now the
Fathers frequently tell us, after St. Paul, That we are to eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup to show forth the Lord's Death. (...). Moral. c. 3. p. 432.
We ought, says Basil, to eat the Body, and drink the Blood of Christ, in
remembrance of our Lord's Obedience to the Death; and this he proves from our
Lord's institution, Luke xxij. and from St. Paul's rehearsal of it, 1 Cor. xi.
Quoniam morte domini liberati sumus, hujus rei memores in edendo and potando
carnem and sanguinem quae pro nobis oblata sunt significamus. In 1 Cor. xi. p.
170.
Because we are delivered by the death of the Lord, being mindful of this
thing, says St. Ambrose we signify it by eating and drinking of the things
that are offered. Glaphyr. l. 2.
The Communicating of his holy Plesh, and the Cup of his holy Blood, has in it
a Confession of Christ's Death, by the participating of these things in this
world, we commemorate Christ's Death, says Cyril of Alexandria. When the Host
is broken, says Apud Great. did. 2. c. de consecr. Lanfranc. de Sacr. Ench. p.
124.
St. Austin, whilst the Blood is poured out of the Cup into the Mouth of the
Faithful, what other thing is showed forth, but the offering of our Lord's Body
on the Cross, and the Effusion of his Blood out of his Side? Christ in this
Mystery, says P. Gregory, is offered again for us, Ibi Christi Corpus sumitur
ejus caro in populi salutem partitur, ejus sanguis non jam in manus infidelium,
sed in os fidelium funditur. Dial. l. 4. cap. 58.
for his Body is there taken, hsi Flesh is parcell'd out for the Salvation of
the People, his Blood is not given into the hands of Infidels, but poured into
the Mouths of the Faithful. Quem cum bibimus, quid aliud quam mortem domini
annunciamus. De Corp. and sang. Dom. cap. 21.
When we drink out of this Cup, says Paschasius, what do we else but declare
the Lord's Death? This do, says In 1 Cor. xi.
Anselm, that is, drink this Cup in remembrance of me, as often as you drink it,
that you may never drink it without the Memory of my Passion, but may have in
mind that I suffered Death for you. Therefore, says the Apostle, our Lord
said, This should be done in commemoration of him, for as often as you shall eat
this Bread of Life, and shall-drink this Cup of eternal Salvation, you shall
show forth, that is, shall represent, the Death Christ suffered for us till he
comes to Judgment. (...). In 1 Cor. xi. v. 25.
By the Cup thou do celebrate the commemoration of our Lord's Death, says
Theophylact. L. 2. cap. 8.
Algerus in answer to this Question, Why the Bread is consecrated into the
Flesh, and the Wine into the Blood apart? says, This was done because the
Custom prevailed in the Church from Christ himself, who consecrated, and gave
his Blood, not for division of the Substance, but for distinction of the
Figure, that whilst the Bread is grinded by the Teeth, it might signify
Christ's Body broken in his Passion; and whilst the Wine is poured into the
Mouth of the Faithful, it might signify Christ's Blood shed from his Side: nor
is the Body and Blood said to be apart, as if the Body were without the Blood,
or the blood divided from the Body; but it is so said in memory of his Passion,
because in the Sacrament we ought to show forth the Death of Christ. When the
Bread of the Lord, that is, the Body of the Lord is eaten, says De Sacra.
edit. Erasm. fol. 212.
Petrus Cluniacensis; when the Cup of the Lord, that is, the Blood of the Lord
is drunk, the Death of the Lord is showed forth, that is, it is then
represented. What he did, says Comment. in vi. Joh.
Rupertus, that we well know we do in Commemoration of his Death, viz. Eat his
Flesh and to drink his Blood.

And surely when two things are equally designed, and set apart by Christ for
the commemoration of his Passion, when they are equally apt, and proper to show
forth, and bring to our remembrance the thing they were designed to signify,
when Christ and his Apostles do command both should be done in prosecution of
that end, when the Fathers do, with one voice, declare, without the least
disparity, distinction or limitation, that both concur unto that end: And
lastly, when one naturally does import, and show the breaking of Christ's Body
on the Cross; the other does as naturally signify, show forth, and bring to
our remembrance his Blood shed, and separated from his Body, and in both these
consists the Passion of our Lord, to say, our Savior's Passion is wholly and
entirely represented by the Reception of one of the two Species only, is to
reflect unworthily upon the Wisdom of our Lord's Institution of them both, and
his command to do both in order to the showing forth his Death, and evidently
to contradict the plain Assertions, and the concurring Judgment of the Church
of Christ, that by drinking, and receiving into our Mouths this Cup, this
Blood, we do, and ought to declare, signify, represent, commemorate and show
forth Christ's Death.

Secondly, Christians, says L. 2. q. 99. Art. 1.
thomas Aquinas, are sanctified by the Sacraments of Christ, and therefore what
is done to the injury of Christian People, pertinet ad irreverentiam rei sacrae
unde rationabiliter Sacrilegium dicitur, is Sacrilege, because it appertains
to the irreverence of a sacred thing. To Sacrilege, says Q. 99. p. 1146.
Becamus, is referred, omnis injuria, omnisque abusio Sacramentorum, all
injury, and abuse of the Sacraments; and this is evident even from the drift of
the Commandment, Thou shall not steal, for that for bids, in reference to
temporal concerns; omne nocumentum quod homini injuste infertur in rebus
exterioribus; All hurt done to them in external Things: In reference to
spirituals it therefore must for bid all spiritual hurt, or injury Men suffer
by the detaining of things spiritual from them. Now surely if Christians can be
hurt orinjured, they must be so when they by others are deprived of the means
of Grace and of Sanctification, and spiritual Blessings: Now of these, say the
fathers, Christians are deprived as often as they are thus deprived of the Cup of
Blessing. For, they constantly affirm, That the eating of the Bread and
drinking of the Cup, did tend to the Sanctification both of Soul and Body.
(...). Paedag. l. 2. c. 2. p. 151.
The Temperature of both the drink and the word, says Clemens of Alexandria,
is called the Eucharist, of which they who by Faith are made partakers, are
sanctified in Body and Soul. In the New Covenant, says Cyril of Jerusalem,
there is the Heavenly Bread, and the Cup of Salvation sanctifying the Soul and
Body. Catech. Mystag. 5. p. 245.
Come to the Cup, and receiving of the Blood of Christ, (...), be thou
sanctified. Who can express, says Et Sacrosanctum vivifici corporis and
sanguinis sui Mysterium Membris suis tribuere, quibus corpus suum, quod est
Ecclesia, pascitur. In Psalm. vi. poenit.
Gregory, the greatness of that Mercy by which Mankind was redeemed with the
Effusion of Christ's precious Blood; and, The sacred Mystery of his Life-giving
Body and Blood, was given to his Members, by which the Church, his Body, is fed
and made to drink, is washed and sanctified. The super substantial Bread, and
the Cup consecrated by solemn Benediction, Ad totius hominis vitam salutemque
proficit. Apud Cypr. p. 39, 40.
does profit to the Life, and the Salvation of the whole Man, says Arnoldus
Carnotensis, the Bread is Meat, the Blood is Life, the Bread for fitness of
Nourishment, the Blood for efficacy of giving Life.

Moreover this is written with a Sunbeam in the Church's Liturgies in which
they call the Cup, received after the Body, Constable. Clem. l. 8. c. 13. Lit. S
Petri, p. 26. Lit. Greg. p. 22. Marc. p. 46.
(...), the Cup of Life; (...), the Cup of everlasting Salvation. In which they
declare that Christ Blessing the Cup, Lit. Chrysostom. p. 1001.
(...), and filling it with the Holy Ghost, said, Drink ye all of this, and
said it was (...), the fullness of the Holy Spirit; that it was the Blood of the
New Testament shed for many, Lit. St. Marc. p. 47.
(...), and distributed for the Remission of Sins; in which they order the
Deacon when he has received it, to say, This has touched my Lips, and will
take away mine iniquities, and purge away my Sin; and in which they lastly
pray, That Lit. Clem. Petri Marc. Chrysostom. Basil. Gregor.
they who received it might be filled with all spiritual Benediction, and
heavenly Grace, and might receive it for Sanctification, and Renovation of
Soul, of Spirit, and of Body, for the communication of eternal Life, for the
Remissionof Sins, that they might be confirmed in Piety, filled with the Holy
Ghost, made worthy of Christ, and obtain everlasting Life.

Schoolmen do confess, that it cannot, without immodesty be doubted, that
Christians do receive the increase of Grace, by the participation of this Cup.
It is not to be denied, says Apud Cassand. de utraque specie, p. 1032.
Armachanus, but firmly to be asserted, that the Sacramental Sumption of the
Body and Blood of our Savior much profits the Faithful to the increase of
Spiritual Life. The Ibid.
Dean of Lovain gives these Reasons why the Communion under both kinds should
be more Fruitful, and conferr more Grace; 1. That there is one effect of Meat,
and another of Drink; for Drink allays Thirst, and Meat Hunger. 2. That under
both Species the Eucharist is truly a Sacrament, nor is Christ less efficacious
by his Blood under the Species of Wine, than by his Body under the Species of
Bread; nor can the drinking of Christ's Blood be unprofitable, if it be
lawfully and worthily received. 3. Because the Species of Wine is a Sacrament,
and all Sacraments, according to the common rule, conferr Grace ex opere
operato. The draught of Blood has its proper spiritual effect, to allay
spiritual Thirst, or to confirm and augment the Grace received in the Communion
of the Body. And though Christ be under both Species, he operates only
according to their signification and uses, under one the Body, under the other
the Blood as his Instrument; and since the Sacraments conferr the Grace they
signify, when the signification is more complete, the Grace must be so. In 3.
D. Thom. disp. 215. cap. 2.
Vasquez says thus, The Opinion of them who say more Fruit of Grace is
received from both Species of this Sacrament than from one, probabilior mihil
semper visa est, seemed always more probable to me; and therefore that they who
take the Cup receive an increase of Grace. And Tom. 3. in 3. D. Thom. disp.
63.. 6.
Suarez informs us, That it was the Opinion of many Catholics, that more Grace
was given by both Species, than by one only, and that Grave Men said, That most
of the Fathers of the Trent Council held that Opinion, and that therefore the
Council said warily, That the Faithful, by Communicating under one Species,
were not defrauded of any Grace necessary to Salvation. And truly, whosoever
says, That no Grace is received by the due participation of the Cup, does
plainly make our Savior's Institution of it a thing indifferent, and the
receiving of the Cup, after the Body, to be the receiving of a thing of no
spiritual or good effect; which to affirm of the worthy receiving of the sacred
Blood of Christ is horrendum dictu, and somewhat like the counting of the Blood
of the Covenant an unholy thing.

CHAP. VI. The Contents.
In opposition to the Decrees of these Councils Damning and Excommunicating all
who say, That this Law of Communicating the Laity under one kind is Erroneous
and Unlawful. The Fathers have declared that it is Erroneous and Unlawful to
substract the Cup. This is proved from St. Cyprian, from the complaint of the
Prosbyters of Edessa, against Iba their Bishop,. 1. From the Council of Braga,
Paschasius, and Algerus, 2. In opposition to the Council of Constance,
decreeing them to be Excommunicated who exhort the People to Communicate under
both species: The Fathers do exhort all People so to do,. 3. Whereas the
Councils of Constance and Basil say, That the Custom of Communicating in one
kind was observed for a long time in the Church, the contrary is plainly showed
from History,. 4.
Church of Rome in her Councils of Constance, Constable. Sess. 13. Basil. -- 30.
Trid. Sess. 21. c. 2.
Basil and Trent, declares this practice of ministering the Communion in one
kind to the forementioned persons, is to be received as a Law, and Damns and
Excommunicates all those who say this Novel Constitution of theirs, is either
Erroneous or Unlawful; The Fathers have declared expressly, or by immediate and
clear Consequence, That it is Erroneous, Unlawful, and of evil consequence to
Religion to substract the Cup, or one part of the Sacrament from Believers. If
any Man be in that Error, says Ep. 63. p. 148.
St. Cyprian, ( viz. That it is not necessary to offer and distribute to the
People Wine mixed with Water) let him return to the Original of our Lord's
Tradition; adding, P. 157.
That to contemn his Admonition, and to persist in his old Error, would be to
incurr the displeasure of the Lord. And having said that Christ both by his
Practice, and his Precept, taught the oblation and distribution of Wine mixed
with Water to the People; he adds, Caeterum omnis Religionis and veritatis
disciplina subvertitur, nisi id quod spiritualiter praecipitur fideliter
observatur. P. 155.
That the whole discipline of Religion and Truth is subverted, unless that
which is spiritually commanded, be faithfully observed. The Presbyters of
Edessa accuse Iba their Bishop before the Council of Chalcedon on this wise;
That in his Church, whilst the memory of the Martyrs was Celebrated, there
wanted Wine for the Sacrifice of the Altar, to be sanctified, and distributed
to the people, there being but little, and that bad and muddy, just newly
pressed out of the Grape; so that they who were deputed to Minister were forced
to buy Six Quarts out of the Tavern, which also was bad, and not sufficient;
(...). Council. Chalced. Tom. 3. Council. apud Bin. p. 382.
so that they called to them who distributed the holy Body to desist, because
the Blood was wanting. Whence we learn,

1. That though it be now no fault in the Church of Rome to provide no
Consecrated Blood to be distributed to the people, it was then thought Crime
sufficient to accuse a Bishop of before a General Council.

2. That then it was not deemed lawful to Communicate the people under the
species of Bread alone; for if so, there would have been no need of running to
the Tavern to fetch Wine, and much less for desisting from distributing the
Consecrated Bread unto the People, because they had not Consecrated Wine to
minister to them afterward. This sure must manifestly show, that it was then
esteemed unlawful to minister to the people one species of the Eucharist
without the other.

Council of Braga says, Relatus est in concione nostrorum omnium Error
manifestus, quidam enim Eucharistiam vino madidam pro complemento Communionis
credunt populis porrigendam. Council. Tom. 6. p. 561.
It is a manifest Error to deliver to the people the Consecrated Bread dipped
in the Chalice for a Complement of the Communion, as being not agreeable to the
Institution; and surely for the same reason it must be a more manifest Error to
give them the Consecrated Bread alone, for a complete Communion; it being more
dissonant from the Institution to give only one part, than to give both only in
another manner than was appointed by the Institution. The Blood is well joined
to the Flesh, says Paschasius, because -- Nec caro sine sanguine, uti nec
sanguis sine carne jure communicatur, etc. Cap. 19. Bis.
neither the Flesh without the Blood, nor the Blood without the Flesh is
rightly communicated; for the whole Man, which consists of Two Substances is
redeemed, and therefore fed together both with Flesh and Blood. Algerus, in
answer to the Question, Why Bread by it self is Consecrated into the Flesh of
Christ, and the Wine into his Blood, says, That therefore the Blood, and Flesh
are seen apart in the Sacrament, that because Christ dyed for redeeming our
Body by his Body, and our Soul by his Soul, when we had perished both in Body
and Soul, it might be signified, that his Body and Soul were in Death divided.
-- Unde ut ait Augustinus, nec caro sine sanguine, nec sanguis sine carne jure
communicatur. De Sacr. Euch. l. 2. c. 8.
And therefore Austin says, That neither the Flesh without the Blood, nor the
Blood without the Flesh is rightly Communicated. In a word; this Constitution,
thus established for a Law, makes it a Sin to obey and comply with the
Institution of our Lord, by reason of the Laws of Men; and whether this be not
Erroneous, let any reasonable person judge from this Consideration:

Had our Lord instituted this Sacrament to be Received under the Species of
Bread alone, and had he so distributed the same to his Disciples, none, coming
after Christ could have thought it lawful to have added Consecrated Wine, and
to have distributed it after the Bread: Therefore by parity of Reason, Christ
having instituted the Eucharist, in both the Species of Bread and Wine, and so
distributed it, no man can rightly think it fawful to Give the Sacrament in
Bread alone to persons capable of both Species. For confirmation of this
Argument, let it be considered, that the Trent Council declares this power was
always in the Church, That in the dispensation of the Sacraments, Sess. 21. c.
2.
Salva illorum substantia, ea statueret, vel mutaret; That retaining their
substance, she may appoint or change those things which she does judge
expedient for the profit of the Receivers. If therefore when the Cup was
instituted by Christ to be Received, she may change so far the Institution as
to make a Law, it shall not be received by the Laity; if it had not been
Instituted, why might she not appoint it should have been received by them?

Church of Rome, by the Authority of her Councils Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
commands, That they be Excommunicated, Who, contrary to her Decree, Exhort the
People to Communicate under both Species of Bread and Wine, and who do take
upon them so to administer the Sacrament unto the People; and does require,
that they be treated as Heretics, if they persist without Repentance in so
doing. The Fathers did not only thus administer the Sacrament in public, for a
thousand Years together, but also did exhort all Christians so to do. (...).
Cat. Mist. 5. p. 245.
After the Communion of the Body of Christ, come to the Cup, says Cyril of
Jerusalem. The Priest, says Eccles. Hier. c. 3.
Dionysius the Areopagite, showing the Consecrated Gifts, comes himself to
partake of them, (...), and exhorts others so to do. The Gifts he showed them
were the Bread, and Cup apart, of these he therefore did exhort them to
Communicate, after the usual manner; that is, apart. From taking of the Blood
of this Sacrifice, says Q. 57. in Levit.
Austin, not only no Man is restrained, but All Men are exhorted to drink it,
who will have life. And again, They who have no eaten, and have no drunk, let
them, being invited, make haste to these Banquets: Accedite ad carnem domini,
accedite ad sanguinem domini. Sermon. 46. de verbo dom. cap. 4.
Come to the Flesh of the Lord, come to the Blood of the Lord. The Deacon,
says the Liturgy of St. Chrysostom, bowing, takes the Cup with reverence, and
lifting it up he shows it to the People, saying, Tom. 6. p. 1003.
(...), Come to it with the Fear and Love of God. In the Ancient Synodal form
of Admonition used in the West, we find one Admonition to the Omnes fideles ad
Communionem corporis and fanguinis domini accedere admonete. Apud Baluz. p.
605. Ad Communionem corporis domini nostri Jesu Christi invitate. 16. Not. in
Reg. p. 609, and p. 613.
Priest to call upon all the Faithful to come to the participation of the body
and the Blood of Christ. Whereas in the Two New Admonitions transcribed by
Baluzius from the R. Pontifical, the injunction is only to invite them to the
Communion of the Body of Christ; which alteration seems to be occasioned by the
change of the Custom of the Romish Church in this particular. The Jews drank of
the Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ: Et tu hibe ut te
Christus sequatur. De Sacr. l. 5. cap. 1.
Drink thou also, says the spurious Ambrose, that Christ may follow thee. The
Jews came to Crucify him, says Hincmarus of Remes, Tom. 2. p. 94.
Let us come to him, ut corpus and sanguinem ejus accipiamus, That we may
receive his Body and Blood. Sum vinum de torculari crucis expressum. De tribus
capitib.
Take the Wine pressed out of the Fat of the Cross, says Fulbertus of
Chartres. St. Paul does in the like manner say, Let a Man examine himself, and
so let him eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup. And a greater than St.
Paul says, Drink ye all of this (for whom this Blood was shed) for this is my
Blood of the New Testament, shed for many for the Remission of Sins.

Councils of Constance and Basil to give the better color to their absurd
Decrees, say, That this Custom of Communicating under one kind only, was, ab
Ecclesia diutissime observata, observed for a long time in the Church, before
they had assembled to make this Custom binding by their Laws and Sanctions, it
is matter of Surprise, that two such great and numerous Assemblies should with
such confidence assert these things, since, as Lindanus says, Quod per
occidentem fuerit populo utraque administrata Species in proximum fere usque
Constantiensis Synodi Saeculum haud Prolixa opus est demonstratione. Panopl. l.
4. sub finem.
There needs no long demonstration to prove that both kinds were administered in
the West almost till the times of the Council of Constance.

Was it thus in the Eleventh Century in which Lanfranck says, That Sanguis
ejus de Calice fidelium ore potatur. De Sacr. Euch. f. 126. a.
the Blood poured out of the Chalice, is taken by the Mouth, and poured into
Mouth of the Faithful? In which Pope Paschal made a Decree, That the Body and
Blood of the Lord should be received apart, and that Sic semper in Sancta
Ecclesia conservandum docemus.
this Custom should always be observed in the Church, except in the case of
Infants and infirm Persons, not able to swallow down the Bread: In which Apud
Baron. Tom. 11. p. 971.
Humbertus declares, That in the Roman Church the Sacrament was ministered in
both kinds apart: Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 18. p. 862.
Why then is Cardinal Bona so positive in his Assertion, that always and every
where, from the beginning of the Church to the Twelfth Century, the Faithful
Communicated under the Species of Bread and Wine? Was it so in the Twelfth
Century, when L. 2. c. 8.
Algerus says, That both the Body and the Blood were taken by the Faithful,
and that neither the Flesh without the Blood, nor the Blood without the Flesh
are rightly Communicated? Apud Cyp. p. 41.
Arnoldus Carnotensis, That we Christians drink of the Blood by his Command. P.
217.
Petrus Cluniacensis, That they took the Body and drank the Blood in likeness
of Food. Why then does L. 4. did. 11. Lit. f.
Peter Lombard put the Question, Quare sub duplice specie sumitur, why is the
Sacrament taken in both kinds?

Was it thus in the Thirteenth Century, when the Apud Chesn. f. 5. Franc. p.
840.
Deam of Meaux with his Monks administered the body and the blood of Christ, to
the Soldiers of Charles King of Sicily; when Contra Gentiles l. 4. c. 61.
Provide in quibusdam Eccelsiis observatur ut populo sumendus sanguis non detur.
In 3. -- part. qu. 80. Ar. 12.
Thomas Aquinas says, That the Sacrament of the Body is delivered to us apart,
under the Species of Bread, and the blood under the Species of Wine; and
elsewhere confesses, That this custom of Communicating under both kinds, was
still observed in some Churches: When a Council held at -- Solis enim
celebrantibus, sanguinem sub specie vini consecrati sumere in hujusmodi
minoribus Eeclesiis est concessum. Council. Tom. 11. Part. 1. p. 1159.
Lambeth A. D. 1281. says, That only the Celebrators in lesser Churches were
permitted to drink the blood under the Species of consecrated Wine, clearly
insinuating, That in some Churches all drank of it; when lastly Sum. de Sacram.
Euch. did 3. Tr. 2. c. 5.
Albertus Magnus says, That under one Species we deliver the Body, under the
other the Blood.

Was it thus in the Fourteenth Century, when, says Nicolaus In 1 Cor. 11.
Lyra, the Sacrament is given under the double Species of Bread and Wine; when
Vid. Cassand. de utraque specie, p. 1036.
Petrus de Palude, expressly says, That in his Age it was the Custom in many
Churches to communicate under both Species. And Id. Liturg. p. 77.
Guilielmus de monte Laudano, That in many places they communicated with Bread
and Wine, that is, with an entire Sacrament.

Was it thus in the beginning of the Fifteenth Century, that very Century in
which the Council of Constance forbad both Species? Why then does Calixt. de
Com. sub utraque specie, p. 110.
Fervendus Bishop of Lucca say, That in many Churches or Monasteries, either by
Privilege or Custom, not the Conficient only, but others did communicate under
both Species? And why does Francis King of France declare, A. D. 1535. That
Patrum memoria (dicebat) distributum fuisse per Galliam quibuslibet integram
coenam, non quidem in medio Templo, sed in Sacellis, hocillum a nonnullis
accepisse Grandi aetate, qui ritum istum in Galliis fuisse confirment ante
centum and viginti annos. Sleidar. Comment. l. p. p. 243. Cassand, de utraquc
Specie, p. 1037.
in the Memory of his Ancestors the entire Supper was throughout France
distributed to whosoever would have it, not indeed in the middle of the Temple,
but in the Chapels, and that he received this from some Ancient Men, who
affirmed that it was not 120. Years since the Custom was so in France. Now take
120 Years from 1535, and there remains 1415, which is the very Year in which
the Council of Constance debarred the Laity of the Cup. And what is now become
of those many Ages in which the People Communicated not, but in that manner,
that is, under one Species only? And what just matter of admiration is it that
Men of Learning should with such confidence assert what may so plainly be
disproved? And that even General Councils should be so little to be credited in
what they do so considently say, and lay as the Foundation of their Definitions
and Decrees?

CHAP. VII.
The Contents. The Doctrine of Concomitance is confuted (1.) from the words of
the Institution,. 1. 2dly. From Reason, viz. (1.) Because, according to this
Doctrine, the depriving of the Laity of the Cup must be depriving them of whole
Christ and all his Benefits,. 2. 2dly. Because Christ's Institution, according
to this Doctrine, must be the Institution of a thing directly contrary to the
Law of Moses,. 3. Concomitance frees not the Romanist from the Imputation of an
half Sacrament, though it does from the Imputation of giving half Christ,. 4.
It is contrary to the received Customs of the Church of Christ, v.g. (1.) to
the Custom of putting a piece of the consecrated Bread into the Cup, and
saying, Fiat commixtio Corporis and sanguinis Domini. 2dly. To the Custom of
mixing the Bread and Wine when they communicated Infants, or persons extremely
sick, and so not able to swallow the Bread dry, that they might truly say, The
Body and the Blood of Christ profit thee, etc. 3dly. To their constant Custom
of speaking of the Body and the Blood of Christ as two Sacraments. 4ly. To that
distinct effect they attribute unto the several Species. 5ly. To their saying
that the Body is given under the one, the Blood under the other Species. 6ly.
To the Decrees of Leo and Gelasius,. 5. Mr. Condom's vain attempt to prove
Concomitance considered, and found to be a farther Evidence, that the Church of
Christ for a Thousand Years knew nothing of it,. 6.
MOreover the better to conceal this Sacrilegious Defalcation of the Cup,
Council. Constable. Sess. 13. Basil. Sess. 30. Trid. Sess. 43. cap. 3.
these Councils jointly have determined, That by force of that natural
Connection and Concomitance, which is betwixt the parts of Christ's raised Body,
Christ's Body is entire under the Species of Wine, and his Blood under the
Species of Bread, it being firmly to be believed, and in no wise doubted, that
the whole Body and Blood of Christ is contained as well under the Species of
Bread, as under that of Wine, and not the Flesh only under the Species of
Bread, nor the Blood only under the Species of Wine: This whosoever shall deny,
let him be Anathema, says the Trent Council; whosoever being learned will not
declare upon Oath that he believes, and asserts this Doctrine of Concomitance,
he must suffer as an Sess. 13. can. 1. Partinaciter dicentes oppositum tanquam
haeresin sunt arcendi and puniendi. Sess. 45. apud Bin. Tom. 7. p. 1124.
Heretic, says the Council of Constance: And yet this Doctrine which cannot
be denied without incurring an Anathema, nor disbelieved without the Crime of
Heresy, is in it self absurd, and plainly contrary to Scripture and to Reason,
and that it was unquestionably unknown to all the Ancient Fathers, and the
whole Church of Christ, is very easy to demonstrate.

That this Doctrine is absurd, that it does not expound, but rather does expose
our Savior's Institution to the derision of Men of Reason and Consideration,
will be evident from these following Arguments: For,

Lord, when he had given his Body broken to his own Disciples, and they had
actually received it, says of the following Cup, Drink ye all of this, Matthew.
xxvi. 27, 28.
for this is the blood of the New Testament shed for you. Whereas if he knew
any thing of this Concomitance, he must know also they had received this blood
of the New Testament already, and therefore might have spared his Cup and
Reason both. This do as often as you drink it came too late, for they had done
what he commanded, in effect, before he bid them do it. Sess. 13. c. 3.
Tantundem sub alterutra specie atque sub utraque continetur, as much is
contained under either Species as under both, says the Trent Council, i. e.
whole and entire Christ, his Body, Blood, his Soul, and his Divinity, and so as
much as is delivered in, and as much Grace conveyed by the Reception of one
Species as both. For, I suppose, that by participation of Christ in this entire
manner, we have entirely the Grace of the Sacrament. Why therefore did our Lord
institute the other Species so perfectly unnecessary to conveigh any thing of
Christ, or of his Grace unto us? Why did he bless the Cup, and blessing said,
with like Solemnity, and with express injunction, Drink ye all of this? Or why
did he permit his Church for a whole Thousand Years to give his Members, a
thing which might be often of a pernicious influence to them who did receive it
unworthily, but could be of no spiritual advantage to them who did receive it
worthily; since after we have taken worthily the consecrated Body, we have
taken as much as when we have received the Blood also?

Mr. Condom sets down this as their Principle, Treat. of Communion in both
Kinds, p. 327.
That he who has received the Bread of Life, has no need of receiving the
sacred Blood, seeing he has received, together with the Bread of Life, the
whole Substance of the Sacrament, and together with that Substance, the whole
essential virtue of the Eucharist. Now from this Principle it follows with the
clearest evidence, that it was needless for our Savior to have said to his
Disciples, after they had received the Bread of Life, Drink ye all of this Cup.
That his Institution of the Cup to be received after the Bread of Life, was a
needless Institution, that the Church was employed in a needless Action for a
Thousand Years, when she distributed the Cup to all Believers. That when our
Savior said, Drink ye all of this, for this is my Blood of the New Testament
which is shed for many for the Remission of Sins, he gave a needless reason of
a needless Action, exhorting them to do what they had wholly done already, to
the end here assigned by him of the drinking of it. And can that Principle be
true which casts such horrid Imputations on the Commands, the Institution, and
the Reason of that Institution assigned by our Blessed Lord, and on the
constant Practice of the whole Church of Christ.

And indeed this new Capricio of Concomitance cannot well be thought of by a
Roman Doctor, but presently this Question stares him in the Face, To what
purpose then was the Institution of both Species? they being conscious to
themselves that the very natural, and obvious Conclusion from it would be this,
That our Lord's Institution of both Species was to no purpose; they therefore
have invented a new Reason of the necessity of Consecrating both the Species
apart, Mr. Condom, ibid. p. 179, 180.
viz. That the Separation once made upon the Cross of our Lord's Body and
Blood, might never cease to appear on the Holy Table. Now is it not wonderful,
that Christ should stablish a continual representation of the separation of his
Blood from his Body by Species, which he commands us to believe, contain his
Body and his Blood united. What a pretty Mystery do these Men make of the
sacred Institution of our Lord. Bread and Wine never cease to appear unto our
Senses, and yet we must not believe this Appearance, but by Faith believe there
is no such thing; the same Faith teaches me, that our Lord's Body and Blood
are united there, and yet I must believe our Lord designed the continual
representation of them there as separate, where Faith informs me there is no
such thing.

Secondly, This Doctrine of Concomitance seems even to ridicule our Savior's
words, and make them run to this effect; I say unto you, This is my Body
broken, not by way of representation only, but substantially so; and yet I know
my Body neither is substantially broken in this Sacrament, nor can it ever be
so. I bid you take this Cup, and to encourage you to do so, I say, This is my
Blood shed, or separated from my Body, and yet I know that there is always in
this Sacrament such a Concomitance, as renders it impossible my Blood should be
thus separated as I say it is. But notwithstanding I institute a Mystery, which
by some broken Accidents of Bread annihilated, or some few colors or bare
Species of Wine, without a subject, shall give some faint resemblance of my
Body broken, and my Blood shed for you: This is my broken Body; that is, under
these broken Accidents of Bread lies my Body whole, and united to my Blood,
and therefore not my Body broken for you. This is my Blood, shed for you; that
is, under this empty show of Wine lies my Blood united to my Body, and so my
Blood not shed; and whether hoc est corpus, thus interpreted, does not make
Nonsense of the words, let the considerate Reader judge.

Thirdly, If there be such a necessary Concomitance in the Sacrament, then must
each part of the Sacrament exhibit whole and entire Christ, with all his
Benefits, and consequently the depriving the Laity of one part, or Species of
the Sacrament, must be the depriving them of whole Christ, and all his
benefits. Now then in doing this, either they are deprived of some spiritual
Benefit, or not; if the first, then must the Romanists be Sacrilegious, because
they do deprive the people of some spiritual Benefit from those sacred
Mysteries they formerly received, and that agreeably unto the Institution of
our Lord, and the common practice of the Church for a Thousand Years. If the
receiving of the Chalice worthily be of any advantage to Souls, then he, who
does not receive it, is a looser; and he by whom they are deprived of this
spiritual Good must be a Sacrilegious person. If it be said that no spiritual
Benefit can accrue to them by drinking of the Cup, then must it be asserted
that albeit a Man receive entire Christ worthily, yet may he never be the
better for it, and what is this but to esteem the Blood of the Covenant thus
received an unholy thing.

Fourthly, had our Lord taught Concomitance, his Institution of this Sacrament
had been the Institution of a thing directly contrary to the Law of Moses, viz.
The eating of Flesh with the Blood, and then it must have ministered offense to
the Apostles, and the first Jewish Converts, who were all strict observers of
that Law. Since then we do not find that the Apostles, the Jewish Converts, or
even the Sects of Nazeranes and Ebionites did ever scruple the receiving of the
Sacrament on this account, we may presume our Savior taught no such
Concomitance.

Romanists from the Imputation of an half Sacrament, though it would from
delivering of half Christ. For feeing a Sacrament is an outward visible sign,
it follows evidently, he who has but half of the outward visible signs, has
but half of the Sacrament, and consequently an half Sacrament. He that receives
only the Bread, receives only the Sacrament of the Body, and not the Sacrament
of the Blood of Christ, and so receives not an entire Sacrament.

Fathers of the Church till the Tenth Century knew and believed nothing of this
Doctrine of Concomitance, as it is evident from many of their Testimonies cited
in this Discourse, so may it fully be evinced from the received Customs of the
Church of Christ.

And, First, this may be proved from that received Custom mentioned in all the
Liturgies, both of the Eastern and the Western Churches, which was to bite or
break a piece of the consecrated Bread, and putting it into the Cup, to say
these words, Fiat commixtio and consecratio corporis and Sanguinis Domini
nostri. Ordo Romans apud Cassandr. p. 112, 119.
Let there be made a mixture, and a consecration of the Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ. For though Durant. de rit. Eccl. l. 2. c. 52.
Durantus and Bona rerum Liturg. l. 2. c. 16. p. 814.
Bona do, in conformity to the New Doctrine of Transubstantiation, carefully
remark that the Priest does not thus speak as if those things were then united,
which before were separated, and that they made no mixture of our Lord's Body
and his Blood, according to their real essences, but only according to their
Sacramental Species, yet do the Liturgies refuse this Subterfuge, and their
Expositors sufficiently confute this uncouth Gloss, for they do never speak of
a Commixtion of the Sacramental Species, but always of the Body and Blood of
Christ. They pray that this Commixtion and Consecration may avail to their In
vitam aeternam. Ord. Romans
eternal Salvation, which cannot be expected from the Sacramental Species, but
only from the real Body and the Blood. Albinus Flaccus does inform us, That
this Commixtion is made Ut calix Domini totam plenltudinem contineat
Sacramenti. Cap. de celebr. Miss. p. 93.
that the Cup of the Lord may contain the whole fullness of the Sacrament, as it
were by the Copulation of the same Mystery. This is not done in vain, says De
Eccles. Offic. l. 3. c. 3.
Amalarius, for corporal Life consists of Flesh and Blood, whilst these two
continue in Man his Spirit or Life continues. In that Office is shown that the
blood shed for our Souls, and the flesh dead for our Body, return to their
proper Substance, and that the New Man (Christ) is made lively by the
quickening Spirit; that he who died for us, and rose again, can die no more.
Per particulam oblata immissae in calicem ostendit Christi corpus quod jam
resurrexit a mortuis. De inst. Cleric c. ult.
Rabanus Maurus in like manner says, That the particle consecrated, thus put
into the Chalice, shows that the Body of Christ is now risen from the Dead. Ad
designandam corporis and animae conjunctionem, in resurrectione Christi. cap.
17.
Micrologus says, That this mixture is made to signify the Conjunction of the
Soul and Body of Christ in the Resurrection, and that the particle put into the
Chalice signifies the Body of our Lord risen from the dead. Now they who say
this mixture was made that the Cup might contain the fullness of the Sacrament,
did not believe that the Cup before contained the Sacrament completely, as it
must do, if it contained the Body before. And they who say, That this is done
to show that the Body of Christ is now alive, and risen from the dead, and that
this mixture therefore shows this, because it joineth, or uniteth Flesh and
Blood, did not believe they were before united by Concomitance. And as our Lord
by consecrating the Wine, after he had distributed the Bread, and bidding them
all drink thereof, because it was the Blood of the New Testament, declared
sufficiently, that he did not conceive that his Disciples had received already
that same Blood he Consecrated that they might receive it. Even so these
Christians, who mixed the Consecrated particle of our Lord's Body with his
Blood, that so the Union of both, in which our Savior's Life consisted, might
be represented, sufficiently declare, they did not think his Flesh and Blood
were by Concomitance before united.

Secondly, This will be farther evident from that known Custom of the Church
which was to mix the Bread and Wine, that so when they Communicated Infants, or
infirm persons who could not swallow down the Bread alone, they might truly
say, The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, profit thee to Life Eternal;
for that this Decree of the Council of Tours, That the Sacred Oblation given to
such persons should be dipped in the Blood of Christ, that so the Priest, who
gave it to them, might truly say to the infirm Person, The Body and Blood of
Christ profit thee, etc. was observed in the Church from the Ninth to the
Twelfth Century, we learn from Quae sacra oblatio intincta debet esse in
sanguine Christi ut veraciter possit Presbyter dicere infirmo, corpus and
sanguis domini proficiat tibi, etc. Regino de Eccles. Discipl. l. 1. cap. 70.
Proficiat tibi in remissionem peccatorum and vitam aeternam, Jvo Decret. part.
2. cap. 19. Burch. l. 5. c. 9.
Regino, Ivo and Burchardus, who all make mention of this Canon, as a Law which
was observed in their times. That this practice was used though not with
Approbation, in the Fourth Century, even in the Administration of this
Sacrament in public, is evident from the Condemnation of it, by Council. Tom.
2. p. 528.
P. Julius, A. D. 336. in these words, We have heard that some, possessed with
a Schismatical Ambition, do deliver to the people the Eucharist dipped for a
complete Communion; which thing, how contrary it is to the Evangelical and
Apostolical Doctrine, and how repugnant to the Custom of the Church, it is not
hard to prove, from the Fountain of Truth, from whom proceeded the appointment
of the Mysteries of the Sacrament. For this they have not received from the
Gospel, where Christ commended his Body and his blood to his Disciples, for
there the commendation of the Bread apart, and of the Cup apart, is rehearsed;
nor do we read, that Christ gave Bread dipped to any but to that Disciple whom
he would show to be the betrayer of his Master by the sop dipped. This, says
Cap. 19.
Micrologus, is the prohibition of Julius, the Thirty fourth Pope, writing to
the Bishops of Egypt.

Thirdly, This will be farther evident from this Consideration, That the
Fathers do certainly speak of the Consecrated Bread and Wine, as of Two
Sacraments; and that as really distinct as are the Sacraments of Baptism and
Chrism. This we may learn from all those numerous passages in which they are
still styled by the Fathers of the Western Church, Sacramenta, Mysteria,
Sacramenta Coelestia, divina Mysteria: The Sacraments, and Mysteries (in the
Plural), the heavenly Sacraments, and divine Mysteries: and by the Eastern
Fathers, (...): The Holy Gifts, the divine Mysteries, the Holy Sacraments, etc.
Thus do the Greeks speak of them to this very day; thus did the celebrated
Writers of the West speak and write of them till the Eleventh Century, when
Transubstantiation began to be established, and with it the Doctrine of
Concomitance. The Sacraments, says Sunt autem Sacramenta Baptismum and
chrisma, corpus and sanguis. Orig. l. 6. c. 19. Raban. M. de Inst. Cler. l. 1.
c. 24. Pasch. cap. 9.
Isidore Hispalensis, are Baptism and Chrism, the Body and the Blood of Christ,
which are therefore called Sacraments, because under the veil of Corporeal
things, the divine Virtue does more secretly work the Salvation of those
Sacraments. Which words are borrowed from Pope Gregory, and are repeated by
Paschasius, only with this addition, These are the Sacraments of the Church of
Christ. Rabanus Maurus has the same words; and having discoursed of Baptism
and Chrism, he proceeds thus, Because we above discoursed, as much as God
enabled us, of Two Sacraments, Baptism and Chrism, De Inst. Cler. l. 1. c. 31.
superest ut de reliquis duobus, id est, Corpore and Sanguine Domini
diligentius investigemus, It remains that we discoi se of the Two other
Sacraments, viz. The Body and the Blood of Christ. Whence first we learn that
then the Sacraments were not accounted Seven, as they are now at Rome; but only
Four, or rather Two, Chrism being held as one with Baptism, and the Body and
Blood of Christ being, as to the Species in which it was to be celebrated,
double; which Species were therefore called Sacraments by Gregory, says In 4.
Sent. did. 12. Art. 2. q. 2.
Bonaventure, yet are they but one Sacrament by virtue of the Institution, and
end for which both are designed, viz. The Union of the body Mystical. Now they
who do so often speak of both these Species as Sacraments, the Sacraments of
the Church, and as Two Sacraments, because they have their distinct operations
toward the health or the Salvation of those who worthily Receive them, and
both conduced to the Union of the Mystical Body of the Lord, could not imagine,
that by virtue of that Concomitance, of which they never speak one word of
syllable, the virtue of both Species was contained in, and was entirely
conveyed by one alone. For they must be supposed to hold the Cup a Sacrament
of our Lord's Institution, and therefore not superfluous; that it was Sacrae
rei Signum: a Sign of a thing Sacred, which did conveigh the Grace it
signified, and operated to the Salvation of those who worthily Received it,
after they had received the Body, and which conduced unto the Union of the Body
Mystical, to their head Christ Jesus. They lastly must conceive, that to
deprive Christ's Members of the Cup, was to deprive them of one Sacrament.

And, Fourthly, this appears from those sayings of the Fathers which attribute
a distinct effect unto the several species; Caro salvatoris pro salute
corporis, sanguis vero pro anima nostra effusus est. In 1 Cor. xi. p. 270.
The Flesh of Christ was delivered, says St. Ambrose, for the Salvation of the
Body; and the Blood was poured out for our Souls, etc. Haym. in 1 Cor. xi. p.
129. Anselm. ibid.
Haymo and Anselm use the same words with a little variation; saying, That we
receive the Sacraments for safety of the Body and Soul; for the Flesh was
offered for the Salvation of the Body, and the Blood shed for our Souls, that
both our substances might receive the inheritance of Eternal Life. L. 4. did.
11. Quare sub duplici specie.
Peter Lombard, Decret. p. 2. c. 7.
Ivo Carnotensis, Tom. 5. c. 6.
Hugo de Sancto Victore, and Sum. Theol. part 3. number. 29. Art. 9.
Alexander of Hales cite the very words of Ambrose, to prove the same thing.

And, Fifthly, This will be farther evident from those Fathers who assert, That
the Body is given under the one, the Blood under the other Species: This Cyril
of Jerusalem informs those whom he Catechized, That Catech. Mist. 4. p. 237.
in the Species of Bread is given the Body of Christ, and in the Species of
Wine his Blood. The Lit. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. p. 998.
Liturgies do in like manner pray, That God would make this Bread the precious
body of Christ, and that which is in the Cup the precious blood of Christ. F.
11, 12.
Lanfrank informs us, That sumitur quidem caro per se, and sanguis per se, The
Flesh is taken by it self, and the Blood by it self, the Flesh under the form
of Bread, and the Blood under the form of Wine. They therefore seem not even in
his days to have been acquainted with the new Doctrine of Concomitance.

Sixthly, This is apparent from the Decrees of Leo and Gelasius concerning
those who in their time abstained from the Cup. For of the Manichees Sermon. 4.
in quadrages. cap. 5.
P. Leo says, That they indeed received the Body of Christ, but they declined,
haurire sanguinem Redemptionis nostrae, to drink the Blood of our Redemption;
he therefore thought that they could not drink the Blood, according to our
Savior's Institution, who received not the Cup. Apud Ivon. decr. part. 2. cap.
89.
Gelasius says, That the declining of the Cup was the dividing of one and the
same Mystery, which could not truly be affirmed, if by taking of the Bread
alone an entire Sacrament, and whole Christ, Body and Blood were taken and
received. He also adds, Let them either take the whole Sacrament, or be driven
from the whole, clearly intimating, that by receiving the Bread only they
received not the whole.

But it is needless to proceed in confutation of this vain imagination, for had
it ever entered into the Heads of the Renowned Fathers of the Church, they
would not so unanimously have said, the Cup was necessary to be received for
the remembrance of our Lord's Death and Passion, for the procuring of our union
to Christ, for the Remission of Sins, for the increase of Grace, for the
Sanctification and Salvation both of Soul and Body; they would not have
concluded the Sacrament was imperfect when it was not received; nor would they
with such Passion have exhorted those who had received the Body to come and be
partakers of the Cup; or styled it, as in their Liturgies they always do, the
Cup of Life, Redemption and Salvation, as we have seen they did.

Condom nevertheless thus Triumphs over us; Gentlemen open your own Books, open
Aubertine, P. 356.
the most learned Defender of your Doctrine, you will find there, in almost
every Page, passages taken from St. Ambrose, St. Chrysostom, the two Cyrils,
and from many others, where you may read, That in receiving the sacred Body of
our Lord, they received his Person it self; seeing they received, say they, the
King in their Hands, they receive Jesus Christ, and the Word of God; they
received his Flesh as living, not as the Flesh of a mere Man, but as the Flesh
of God; is not this to receive the Divinity together with the Humanity of the
Son of God? and, in a word, his entire Person; after this what would you call
Concomitancy?

Romanists since the New Doctrine of Transubstantiation was invented, and since
the Sacrilegious Defalcation of the Cup? Do they express Concomitance by
saying, You receive Jesus Christ, the King, the Word of God, the living Flesh
of God? Is it not this they carefully and frequently inculcate, that under that
one Species alone, which is distributed to them, they receive Jesus Christ
whole and entire? Does not the Council of Constance thus express it, That Sess.
13. vide Basil. Sess. 30. Council Tom. 12. p. 601.
it is firmly to be believed, and no way to be doubted, that the whole Body and
Blood is truly contained both under the Species of Bread, and likewise under
the Species of Wine? Does not the Sess. 13. cap. 3. and can. 1
Trent Council say, That by virtue of this Concomitance, the Body is under the
Species of Wine, and the Blood under the Species of Bread, Anathematizing them
who teach the contrary; and that under one Species is contained a true
Sacrament? Are not the Romanists still endeavoring to possess the People with
these Sentiments, That in receiving one Species alone they loose nothing, since
by Concomitancy they receive both the Body and the Blood? Is it not this which
the Sess. 13. cap. 3.
Trent Council is so concerned to teach, that as much is contained under either
Species as under both? Let therefore Mr. Condom, if he believes the Fathers
held Concomitancy, show out of all their Writings any thing of this Nature,
which may convince us that they did assert it, or let him rest assured, that
what the Romanists, since the Twelfth Century Attendant insuper Sacerdotes quod
cum Communionem sacram porrigant simplicibus, solicit eos instruant sub panis
specie simul eis dari corpus and sanguinem Domini. -- Council. Lambeth. A.D.
1281. Council. Tom. 11. part. 1. p. 1159.
have been continually inculcating, and obtruding upon others, what fills all
their Books, and their Discourses on this Subject, but never was once mentioned
by any Christian Writer for a Thousand Years, though they were equally
concerned, and had all the same reason, if they believed Concomitancy; yea, and
the same occasion, if they had generally practiced the half Communion; so to
do, is but a Novelty invented by the Romish Doctors only to serve a cause, and
justify the Defalcation of the Cup. When the Doctors of that Church would in
their suppositious Treatises make the Ancients speak in this new Dialect, they
do not mince the matter thus, but make them speak exactly in their Roman
Language. Thus in that Epistle falsely said to be writ by Isidore Hispalensis to
Redemptus, they introduce him speaking thus, Cum praedictorum fuerit
consecratio, non, ut quidam putant indocti, sub panis specie, sola caro
Christi, and in Calice tantummodo sumitur sanguis, sed in utroque Deus and homo
in corpore glorificato totus and integer Christus, integer Christus in calice,
panis vivus qui de coelo descendit totus est in utroque. Epist. Isidori ad
Redemptum, p. 696.
When the consecration of the Elements is made, there is under the Species of
Bread not the Flesh of Christ only, and in the Chalice not his Blood only, as
some unskilful persons think, but in both there is God and Man, whole and
entire Christ in his Glorified Body, whole Christ in the Cup, the living Bread
who came down from Heaven is entire and whole in both. Here is plain dealing,
only the Language and other unquestionable circumstances, as De Eucharist. p.
902.
Aubertine well notes, demonstrate, that the Author could not write before the
middle of the Eleventh Century, because the Controversy betwixt the Greeks and
Latins touching unleavened Bread, which gave occasion to that Discourse, began
not till the year 1053.

APPENDIX.
CHAP. VIII.
The Contents. The Assertions of J. L. touching Communion in one kind,. 1.
Against whom it is proved, (1.) That Christ's Institution of the Sacrament is
virtually a Command, obliging all the Faithful, as much as in them lies to
receive both kinds, which is proved by Three Reasons,. 2. 2dly. That it appears
not from the words of our Savior, Joh. vi. that Christ left that Practice
indifferent; where by many Arguments it is proved, That nothing in that Chapter
relates to the Sacramental eating of the Eucharist,. 3. 3dly. That this appears
not from the Practice of our Lord or his Disciples,. 4. 4ly. That it was the
Custom of the Church for a Thousand Years to give the Sacrament to the Sick in
both kinds,. 5. And in like manner to Infants capable of receiving both,. 6.
5ly. That neither Leo nor Gelasius gave any precept to the Church touching this
matter,. 7.

Appendix to this Treatise, I shall consider what the Author of a Papist
misrepresented and represented has discoursed upon this Subject, Chap. 21.
where he asserts, "That the Papist truly represented, believes, That he is
obliged to obey all the Commands of Christ, and that neither his Church, nor
any other Power upon Earth can limit, alter or anull any precept of Divine
Institution, contrary to the intention of the Lawgiver. Neither is the denial
of the Cup to the Laity a practice any way opposite to this his Belief; he
being taught, that though Christ Instituted the blessed Sacrament under both
kinds, and so delivered it to his Apostles, who only were then present, and
whom he had made Priests just before; yet he gave no command, that it should be
so received by all the Faithful, but left this indifferent; as is evident from
his own Words, where he attributes the obtaining Life everlasting, (the end of
the Institution) sometimes to the receiving under both kinds, sometimes under
one; as when he says, If any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever. He
that eats me, even he shall live by me. He that eats of this Bread shall
live for ever, (Joh. vi. 51, 57, 58.) And a curious Reader may find as many
Texts for thus receiving under one kind, as for the other. And St. Augustine who
was so far of this Opinion, that he says, That Christ himself administered the
Sacrament to some of his Disciples under one kind only, viz. to those two going
to Emaus, ( Luc. c. last. 30.) and that the Apostles afterward did often
practice the like, when they assembled to break Bread, ( Acts ii. etc.) which
place he and many other Fathers explicate of the Sacrament, ( Aug. l. 49. de
Cons. Evang.) And this was the Custom of the Primitive Christians, to give it
under one kind to Children, the Sick used so to carry it with them, is attested
by all ancient Writers, and modern Historians. Nay he finds that this was the
practice of the Church, to communicate under one kind only, or else under both,
as every one thought good, especially in all Private Communions, for the first
Four hundred years after Christ; and that the first precept of receiving under
both kinds was given to the Faithful by Pope Leo I. in the Year 443, and
confirmed by Pope Gelasius in 490. Not for correcting any Abuse that had crept
into the Church, but for the discovering the Maniches, who being of Opinion
that Christ had no true Blood, and that Wine was the Gall of the Devil, used to
lurk among the Christians, and receiving under the form of Bread only, as the
rest did, remained undistinguished, till by this obligation of all receiving
the Cup (which they judged unlawful and abominable) they were all detected. And
now, if a thing till that time indifferent, was for these motives determined by
an Ecclesiastical Precept, and so observed for many hundred Years, without
scrupling or questioning the Authority; why should he doubt to submit to the
same Authority, when upon different motives and circumstances, they issue forth
another Precept? Which Harangue contains these two Assertions.

I. That Christ gave no Command that the Sacrament of the Eucharist should be
received in both kinds by the Faithful. II. That he left this indifferent; and
that this appears, 1. From his own words, Joh. vi. 2. From his own practice,
and from the practice of his own Disciples administering the Sacrament to the
Faithful in Bread alone. 3. From the Custom of the Primitive Church, who gave
it to the Sick, to Infants, to Men in a Journey to carry with them, in one kind
only. 4. Because it was a thing indifferently practiced, even in the Church
till Leo the First, in the Year 443, upon occasion of the Manichees; and for
Conviction of them, commanded the Receiving in both kinds; and Pope Gelasius,
A. D. 490. confirmed that Precept.

In Opposition to which Assertions, I dogmatically affirm,

First, "That Christ's Institution of this Sacrament is virtually a Command,
which lays an Obligation on all the Faithful, as much as in them lies, to
receive both kinds.

Secondly, " That it does not appear either from the words of our Savior, Joh.
vi. or from the practice of himself, or his Disciples, that he left this
practice indifferent.

Thirdly, " That it was the Custom of the Church for a Thousand Years together,
to give the Sacrament to the Sick, and to Infants capable of Receiving it in
both kinds.

Fourthly, " That neither Leo, nor Gelasius gave any new Precept to the Church
touching this matter. And,

First,That Christ's Institution of this Sacrament is virtually a Command,
obliging all the Faithful, as much as in them lies, to receive both kinds,
will be apparent from these following Arguments:

1. That our Lord said in the Institution of this Sacrament, Drink ye All of
this. For whereas Romanists pretend, That Christ said only, Drink ye all of
this, to them, to whom he said, when speaking of the Bread, Do this; and that
those words were only spoken to his Apostles, whom he then made Priests. To
this I answer, That we have clear and convincing Evidence that these words,
Drink ye all of this, are to be applied to others besides the Apostles: As V.
Gr. 1. From Christ's Institution, whence I argue thus, Christ Instituted no
other Supper, than that which he administered to his Disciples; if then he did
not institute that for all Believers capable, they have no right to any part of
it, by virtue of Christ's Institution; it can be unto them no Sacrament, for
whom it was not instituted by Christ, since, by the definition of the Sess. 7.
c. 1.
Trent Council, the Sacraments of the New Testament were all instituted by him;
they can expect no blessing from it, since that depends upon Christ's
Ordinance; nay they must be esteemed Sacrilegious Usurpers, as laying claim to
that Sacrament which never by Christ's Institution did belong unto them. If
Christ did Institute that Sacrament for all Believers capable, that is, to be a
standing Ordinance by which, as his Disciples then did, so all Believers
capable, should afterward eat of what he called his Body, and drink of what he
called his Blood, then did he Institute it to be received of all that were
fitted for, and capable to receive it, and in it said unto them, Drink ye all
of this.

2. This appears farther from the Reason annexed to the Receiving of the
Sacrament by Christ's Apostles; for since that Reason equally concerns all
Believers capable, and fitted to Receive it, the Institution must concern them
all. Now the reason why Christ said to his Apostles, Take, and eat what I have
broken, is by himself declared to be this; because it was his Body broken, or
his Body given for them; take it, says Christ, this is my Body given for you;
this therefore being the Reason why they were to take, and eat, and this Reason
concerning all Believers capable, and fitted to receive it, as much as the
Apostles, and succeeding Priests, the Institution, or command to take and eat
must equally concern them. This Argument transferred unto the Cup runs thus:
The Reason of the Participating of the Cup, viz. because it is the Blood of the
New Testament, which is shed for the Remission of Sins, does concern Laics as
well as Priests, his Blood being equally shed for both; therefore the Command,
Drink ye all of this, to which the Reason is annexed, concerns them also.
Again, another Reason why Christ said to his Apostles, Eat this Bread, and
drink this Cup, was, that by so doing they might remember his death, his Body
broken, and his blood shed for them, says St. Luke, and show it forth till his
second coming, says St. Paul. Now this, as St. Paul clearly shows in his
discourse to the Corinthians, and all the World believes, as well concerns
all Believers as it does Priests; and therefore the drinking of the Cup, by
which, as well as eating of the Bread, this Commemoration is by our Lord's
Institution to be made, must equally concern them.

A Second Argument to prove that Laymen, by virtue of Christ's Institution,
have a right to, and are obliged to Receive this Cup of Blessing, is taken from
these words of the Evangelist St. Mark, Chap. xiv. 23.
And taking the Cup, giving thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of
it; For here the Evangelist informs us, That All the Apostles drank of this
Cup, and I presume, they did it, because our Savior gave it to them for that
end, for to what other end it should be given them the Roman Doctors have not
yet informed us. Now hence it follows, that Laymen also have a right to be
partakers of the Cup; for the Apostles were then Laymen; they being afterward
made Priests by our Lord's saying, Joh. xx. 22.
after his Resurrection, As my Father has sent me, so send I you, receive the
Holy Ghost. For as our Savior says, Joh. vij. 39.
The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not glorified, or risen
from the dead. I know the Roman Doctors, Syn. Trid. Sess. 22. cap. 1.
and J. L. from the Trent Council teach, That the Apostles were made Priests
when Christ said, Do this: and that then he gave them the Chalice, as
Representatives of the Clergy, not of the People. But,

1. Let it be considered how unlikely it is, that Christ should at one time
institute Two Sacraments, as they esteem them, viz. that of Ordination, and the
Eucharist, and yet speak nothing of the Use or the Reason, or the Benefit or
the Necessity of one of them, nor tell them that he did so, nor explicate the
Mystery, nor distinguish the Rite, or the Words, (though the nature of these
Sacraments, being so extremely different, required these things) but that he
should leave all this to be supposed by the most improbable construction in the
World.

2. If the Apostles were made Priests by, Hoc facite, Do this, spoken before
the Institution of the Chalice, then must Judas also be made a Priest by
Christ; for that he also did receive the Sacrament, is extremely evident from
these words of Luke, Luke xxij. 20, 21.
This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood -- but behold the Hand of him that
betrayeth me is with me on the Table. And,

3. If the Apostles were made Priests by our Lord's saying, Do this, then were
they doubly Consecrated, and the Character of Priests was twice imprinted on
them, which contradicts the common tenet of all Christians, that the Sacrament
of Orders is not to be reiterated; and the peculiar Tenet of the Church of
Rome, Council. Trid. Sess. 7. Can. 9.
That Sacraments which impress a Character must not be reiterated. The reason
of the Consequence is plain, because, as the Apostle witnesses, our Lord said,
1 Cor. xi. 24, 25.
Do this, both after the giving of the Bread, and after the giving of the Cup.

4. Had the Apostles been made Priests by our Lord's speaking of these words to
them, yet being not Conficients, they had no right to receive it as Priests,
more than the Laity; for the forementioned Councils have determined, That
Clerks being not Conficients, are by no Divine Right obliged to Receive under
both Species. There being then no difference betwixt them and the Laity, in
reference to this matter, since All the Apostles drank of this Cup, why should
not the Laity do so too?

A Third Argument to prove that Laymen, by virtue of Christ's Institution, are
obliged to receive the Cup of Blessing, is taken from the Recapitulation of our
Lord's Institution by St. Paul, who does expressly teach us, That our Lord
Jesus, 1 Cor. xi. 25.
in the same Night in which he was betrayed, took the Cup, saying, This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood; this do ye, as often as ye drink it in remembrance
of me. Now in the Three Evangelists no such words are expressly to be found;
nor any thing like them spoken at the distribution of the Cup, unless these
words, Drink ye all of this, for this is my Blood of the New Testament, that is
shed for many, for the Remission of Sins, be of like import with the words of
St. Paul. Since therefore the Apostle does expressly teach, That our Lord used
these words at his last Supper, and that he received them from the Lord, as
words which he had spoken, then what remains, but they virtually are the same
with those recorded by St. Matthew; and then they must also be a Command
obliging all to drink of this Cup, as being the Memorial of the Blood of the
New Testament shed for them, and therefore to be drunk by all, in the
remembrance of the Blood shed for them, as often as they did present themselves
to Celebrate that Holy Mystery. I say, obliging all that are capable, when they
present themselves before God, to Celebrate the memory of his precious Death,
and his Blood shed for their Redemption, to drink of that Cup, which is the
Memorial and Symbol of his Blood shed for them. For sure, the means which
Christ appointed for such an end, ought to be used by all who are obliged to
pursue that end: Since therefore all Christians are obliged Sacramentally to
remember, That Christ shed his Blood for them, and by that Blood shed,
confirmed the New Covenant to them; and since Christ has appointed the
drinking of this Cup and this alone, to be the memorial of his Blood shed, all
Christians, capable of doing so, must be obliged, when they do Sacramentally
Commemorate these Mercies, to drink of this Cup. And this demonstratively
follows from the ensuing words, Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance
of me;for as often as you eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, you show the
Lord's death till he come; for they do manifest, that as well by drinking of
the Cup, as eating of the Bread the Lord's Death is showed, and that until his
second coming, both these things are to be done in order to that end: And since
these words are not the words of Christ, but of St. Paul, who speaks here of
the whole Church of Corinth; the words preceding, Do this, as often as you shall
drink it, in remembrance of me, must belong also to all the Members of that
Church, because of the connective Particle which joins the 25th and 26th
Verses, and makes it necessary that the same persons should be spoken to in the
words. This do, etc. and in the following words, For as often as ye eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup. And if this was the Duty of the whole Church of
Corinth, it must be equally the Duty of the whole Church of Christ, there being
no peculiar reason why the Church of Corinth should be obliged to drink this
Cup, in order to these ends, more than all other Christian Churches.

And when our Lord has taken so great Care to tell us, That the Bread is his
broken Body, and therefore is to be eaten in remembrance of him, i. e. of his
Body broken; that the Cup is the New-Tastament in his Blood, and therefore is
to be drank in remembrance of his Blood shed for us: When his Apostle does as
distinctly say, 1 Cor. x. 16.
The Bread which we break is the Communion of the Body of Christ, the Cup which
we bless is the Communion of the Blood; and neither of them have hinted in the
least, that the Cup is the Communion of his Body, or the Bread of his Blood,
but by a particular and separate institution, distribution, and signification
ascribed to them, have strogly insinuated the contrary; for men, after all this
to say one of these Species will suffice, for the Bread is as well the blood
shed as the broken Body, and the participation of it is the Communion of the
Blood of Christ, and that by the partaking of it, we do as well remember and
show forth the shedding of his Blood upon the Cross, as by the partaking of the
Cup, is to my apprehension an affront offered to our dear Lord, and to the
Wisdom of the Holy Ghost.

In Answer to these Arguments, some of the Roman Doctors are pleased to say,
that this Discourse of the Apostle imports only a conditional Order to do this
in Remembrance of Jesus Christ, as often as one shall do it, and not an order
absolutely to do it.

To this I Answer, 1st. He who not only does command us at the celebration of
the Sacrament, to remember his Blood shed, but also Institutes a sign for the
memorial of it, and does command us to use this sign, because it is appointed
to be the memorial of it; commands us when we receive the Sacrament, to receive
that sign, for he who wills the end, must will the means which he has
instituted for the accomplishing that end; but this does Christ, for he
institutes a Cup of Wine to represent his Blood shed; he says, Drink ye all of
this, for this is my Blood shed, this I command you to do in remembrance of me:
He therefore does command us when we receive the Sacrament to receive this
sign, which, in his Institution of this Sacrament, he appointed as the means of
this remembrance.

2dly. He who commands us to drink this Cup, as often as we drink it in
remembrance of him, because we do by drinking of it show forth the Lords Death
till he come, commands us to do it as often as we receive the Sacrament, seeing
as often as we receive the Sacrament, we show forth the Lord's Death; but Christ,
says the Apostle, did lay upon us this command for this very Reason, saying,
Do this, as often as you shall drink it, in nomembrance of me, for as often as
you shall eat this Bread and drink this Cup, you show forth the Lord's Death
till he come.

3dly. Where there is parity of Reason, there the command may very well be
deemed of equal latitude and extent, for ratio legis est lex, where there is
equal reason to command, there may we reasonably suppose the will of the
Lawgiver to be equal in commanding, but there is equal reason why our Lord
should absolutely command the drinking of the Cup in remembrance of his Blood
shed, as why he absolutely should say, touching the eating of the Bread, Do
this in remembrance of me, the one being as much the Symbol of his Blood shed,
as is the other of his broken Body, and the one showing forth his Death as much
as does the other; we therefore have no cause to doubt, but that he equally
intended the doing both in order to this end.

That it does not appear either from the words of our Savior, Joh. vi. or from
the practice of himself or his Disciples, that he left this practice
indifferent, will be made evident from an impartial consideration both of our
Savior's words and of his practice, and first to clear up the true meaning of
our Lord's Discourse in the Sixth Chapter of St. John; Let it be observed,

First, That our Lord's mystical Expressions of laboring for the Meat that
does not perish, of eating the true Bread from Heaven, are by himself plainly
expounded to import only the believing on him, or the embracing of him as their
Prophet and their Savior; for when he had exhorted them to labor for the meat
that did not perish, he tells them, v. 29. That this was to believe on him that
God had sent; when he had told them, v. 35. That he was the Bread from Heaven,
he immediately adds, He that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that
believes in me shall never thirst. Having said, that he was he Bread which
comes down from Heaven, and gives. Life unto the World, v. 33. He confirms
this Expression, v. 40. by these words, This is the Will of my Father, that
every one that sees the Son, and believes on him should have eternal Life.
And again, v. 47. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me has
everlasting Life, I am that Bread of Life.

Secondly, Observe, that nothing was more common among the Eastern Nations,
than to express the Actions of believing, embracing, and obeying the words of
Wisdom, Vide Leight. Hor. Hebr. in Joh. p. 112, 113.
or hearkening to her Councils and Instructions, by eating and by drinking of
them: Thus Wisdom cries in the Streets, says Solomon, Come eat of my Bread,
and drink of my Wine that I have mingled; Prove. ix. 5.
that is, Go in the way of understanding, v. 6. Eat you that which is good, and
let your Soul delight it self in Fatness; that is, Isa. lv. 2.
Incline your Ear, hear, and your Soul shall live. And by the Son of Syrach
Wisdom is introduced speaking thus, They that eat me shall yet be hungry, and
they that drink me shall yet be thirsty, Ecclus. xxiv. 21. i. e. He that obeys
me, v. 22. Hence Philo the Jew informs us, That, (...), In Joh. vi. v. 51.
to eat is a Symbol of Spiritual nourishment. Add to this that of Mr.
Leightfoot, That the Talmudists make frequent mention of eating the Messiah,
and thereby understand only their being made partakers of his Benefits: And
that of Clemens of Alexandria, upon that passage of St. Paul, I have fed you
with Milk, Strom. l. 5. p. 579.
and not with strong Meat, viz. Milk is the rudiments of Faith, or the
Doctrines of the Catechism, the first nourishment of the Soul, strong meat, a
comtemplation which makes us to discern the divine power and essence, (...);
these, Contemplations, are the Flesh and Blood of the Word; (...), the meat and
drink of the divine Word is the knowledge of the divine Essence.

Thirdly, Observe that from these Metaphors our Lord proceeds to that contained
in these words objected by the Roman Doctors, v. 51. The Bread which I will
give is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the World; that is, It is
my Body which I will give up unto death, that by it the world may have life,
which is a greater Benefit exceedingly than that which you received from that
Manna which Moses gave you in the Wilderness, or from that meat with which I
did so lately fill your Bodies. The Jews taking these words in a gross sense,
as if our Lord had promised to give his real Flesh to be swallowed down their
Throats, and eaten by them as they had eaten Bread the day before, and as their
fore- Fathers had eaten Manna in the Wilderness, exclaimed against him, as
promising a thing absurd, inhumane and imposible, saying, How can this Man give
us his Flesh to eat? to this our Savior Answers, v. 53. in words still more
expressive of his violent and bloody Death for the salvation of Mankind; viz.
Except you eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, etc. Now these words are by some
conceived to import thus much, Unless you with the Mouth of your Bodies do eat
my real and corporeal Flesh, and drink my proper Blood, you cannot have eternal
Life.

Having premised these Observations, I shall now proceed to show both from this
Chapter, and from other Reasons, that our Lord spoke not here of oral and
corporeal eating of his natural Flesh, and drinking of his proper Blood, but
only of doing of these things spiritually; and that not only in the celebration
of that Sacrament which by our Lord was Instituted for the remembrance of his
Death and Passion, but generally believing that by his Death and Passion he
became the Savior of the World, and purchased Pardon and Salvation for all
that heartily believed in him, and would sincerely yield Obedience to his
precepts. And,

1. Against the gross, and for the spiritual Interpretation of these words I
argue from the 51. v. thus, The Flesh which Christ here promised to give for
the Life of the World, is the same with the Bread of God that comes down from
Heaven, and gives Life unto the World, v. 33. for so we learn expressly from
these words; I am the living Bread which came down from Heaven, if any Man eat
of this Bread he shall live for ever; and the Bread which I will give is my
Flesh, that I will give for the Life of the World. And again, having said, He
that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood has eternal Life, v. 54. and he
that eats me shall live by me, v. 57. he adds immediately, This is the Bread
which came down from Heaven -- and he that eats of this Bread shall live for
ever. Now our Lord has expressly taught us, that the eating of this Bread of
Life imported only our believing on him, v. 35. as has already been made
evident from our second Observation; therefore the eating of his Flesh does
certainly import the same spiritual Action. Moreover we are only to eat of
Christ as Flesh, in that importance of the Phrase in which we are to eat of
Christ as Bread, for as Christ says, he will give Flesh to eat, so does he
say, he will give Bread to eat; as he says, He that eats of my Flesh shall
live for ever, so he says He that eats of this Bread shall live for ever;
but none can say that Christ was or could properly be Bread, or eaten by the
Mouth as such, wherefore he being only figuratively and spiritually Bread,
could only figuratively and spiritually be eaten as Bread; if therefore in the
same importance only we are to eat his Flesh, that also is to be eaten in a
spiritual Sense.

2. From these words, v. 52. How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? it is
evident the Jews conceived that our Lord promised to give them his proper Flesh
to eat, and swallow down their Throats, as they had done the Bread with which
he fed them. And it on all hands is agreed, that they mistook the sense of
Christ's words, and fansied such a meaning of them as he did not intend; but
had our Lord intended the corporeal eating of his Flesh and drinking of his
Blood, it is certain that it must be swallowed down their Throats, as properly
as was the Bread which they had eaten; and therefore no Man who maintains
this corporeal eating of Christ's Flesh to be intended here, can, suitably to
his Opinion, say, That they imposed a false sense upon our Savior's words,
since from this sense it does inevitably follow, that Christ intended that his
humane Flesh should properly be eaten; and their words signify no more. Add to
this one Consideration, which shows what apprehensions the Fathers of the first
Three Centuries had of this eating of the Flesh of Christ, viz. when 'twas
objected to them by the Heathens that they did eat Man's Flesh, they constantly
in their Apologies reject the accusation as the vilest calumny, and as a most
abominable thing sufficient to discover that the Author of such an institution
must be some wicked Damon, (...); We Christians, says Apol. 2. p. 70. 1. 50.
Justin Martyr, do not own the eating of humane flesh, it is an infamous thing,
and falsely is reported of us: This is, says Ad Authol. l. 3. p. 119, 126.
Theophilus, the most wicked and inhumane of all Crimes objected to us, (...);
that we partake of humane flesh, it is not possible we should be guilty of so
vile a thing. Amongst us there is no eating of Man's flesh, says (...), Contr.
Graec. p. 162.
Tatian, you are false witnesses who say this of us. No Man, says Legate. p. 38.
Athenagoras, who is not mad, can charge us with this thing, (...); for we may
not eat humane flesh. It is the Calumny of the Devil, says P. 32.
Minutius. You may be ashamed to object it to us Christians, says Apol. cap. 9.
Tertullian; whereas had they received this as an Article of Christian Faith,
that they did daily eat the Flesh of the Man Christ, and thought that this
Discourse not only taught, but even obliged them so to do, I know not with what
Truth or what Sincerity they could, without all limitation or exception, not
only have denied, but even detested the doing so.

But that which puts it without dubt, that Christians in the Primitive Ages had
no apprehension, that Christ by this Discourse had taught them, that his proper
flesh and Blood was to be eaten in the Sacrament, is the memorable History of
Sanctus and Blandina, two Christian Martyrs, written by Iraenene Bishop of
Lions, and preserved to us in In 1 Pet. ii. 12. p. 149. g. a.
Oecumenius thus, That the Heathens having apprehended the Servants of
Christians Catechized, and using force with them, that from them they might
learn something secret; the Servants having nothing to say that might be
pleasing to their Tormentors, in as much as they had heard from their Masters,
that the Holy Sacrament was the Body and Blood of Christ, (...); they thinking
that it had indeed been flesh and blood, told this to the Inquisitors, who
apprehending, (...), as if the Christians had done that very thing, gave notice
of it to other Heathens, and they endeavored by torments to force the May
tyrs, Sanctus and Blandina, to confess it, to whom Blandina readily and boldly
answered, saying, How should they endure these things who so fast as not to
enjoy lawful Flesh. This, I say, is a clear indication, that the Ancient
Christians did not believe that in this Sacrament they did eat Christ's proper
flesh and blood, or that our Lord did here require them to do so; for if they
had thus thought, how could Irenaeus have represented it as a plain mistake,
both in these Servants and these Heathens, to think the Sacrament was, (...),
really Christ's flesh and blood; and that the Christians by receiving of it did
really eat Flesh and Blood? How could he have introduced Blandina refuting this
Imagination, had it been the Sentiment of the then Church of Christ, since by
so doing, she must have rejected one great Article of Christian Faith? How,
lastly, could Oecumenius have inserted these words into his Commentary, without
endeavoring to sweeten, and explain, and reconcile them to the Doctrine of the
proper Manducation of Christ's Flesh and Blood.

Again, since that this Doctrine came into the world, that is, since it was
broached first by Paschasius in the Ninth Century, the Assertors of it give two
Reasons why, though we corporally eat that very Flesh which suffered on the
Cross, and drink that very Blood which was then shed corporeally, yet is that
Flesh and Blood concealed from our outward Senses under the shape of Bread and
Wine. The first is this, C. 13. Al. 36.
Vt ridiculum nullum fiat Paganis quod cruorem occisi hominis bibamus, that we
might not be ridiculous to the Pagans, by eating humane Flesh, and drinking the
Blood of a slain Man; for this, says he, would make our Religion execrable,
and cause them to condemn the Christians as the vilest of Men: And again,
should the shape of Flesh appear, it would be C. 37.
Perfidis execratio, execrable to the Heathens. It Is thus concealed, says
Alger. l. 2. c. 3. f. 15. b.
Algerus, Ne infidelibus pateat, and eorum Blasphemiis vilescat, Least it
should appear to Infidels, and lie open to their Blasphemies, and least they
should judge us inhumane and cruel, as being eaters and drinkers of humane
Flesh and Blood. Secondly, Least Christians perceiving things raw and bloody,
should be filled with horror, says P. 133. b.
Lanfrank, least if the Faithful should perceive the Color and the taste of
Flesh and Blood, humana pietas abhorreret, humane piety should abhor the
Action, says L. 2. c. 3.
Algerus. Should it appear thus, says P. 224.
Hugo Lingonenesis, Rarius in terris esset qui hoc non abhorreret, There would
be scarce a Man on Earth that would not abhor it. It would, says P. 215. h.
Petrus Cluniacensis, Fidem laedere, vel ad scandalum quorumlibet possit corda
movere, Be prejudicial to the Faith, and scandalize the Minds of all Men. The
profit of the receiving the Sacrament would be hindered, says Impediretur
perceptionis ejus commoditas pro humani corporis comedendi horrore injecto. L.
1. c. 7. l. 1. c. 16.
algerus, by the horror of eating humane flesh, quoniam Christum vorari
dentibus fas non est, for it is not lawful to devour Christ with the Teeth. Now
let us in the fear of God consider, whether that Sense of Scripture is to be
received, which makes that certainly to be believed by the eye of Faith, which
if it werre perceived by the Eye of Sense, would render our Religion
Ridiculous, and execrable to the Pagan World; which, did we see our selves but
ready to perform what actually we do, we should utterly abhor to do, and
should be horribly scandalized at our own Actions, which did Men see us do,
they could not but esteem us cruel and inhumane: Since that the Heathens have
understood this is become an Article of Christian Faith, do they not open their
Mouths in Blasphemies against us, as freely as if they saw us eat and drink
Glorist's flesh and blood corporeally? Did not Apud Dionys. Carth. in Sent. 4.
Did. 10. Art. 1.
Averroes declare in the 12th. Century, He found no Sect more foolish than the
Christians, because they ate the very God they worshipped? Does not Apud
Hotting. Hist. Eccl. Saec. 16. Part. 2. p. 160.
Achmed Ben Edris say, We use Christ worse than did the Jews, because it is
more Savage to eat his flesh and drink his blood, than only to procure his
Death? Do not the Monsieur la Boulay Voyag. part. 1. c. 10. p. 21.
Mahometans point at us, saying, There goes a God-eater? And does not then this
their Doctrine render their Religion as plainly Execrable and Ridiculous to the
Heathen world, as if they saw them eat of humane flesh and drink of humane
blood?

3. The 53. v. affords two further Arguments in Refutation of the corporeal
sense of these Expressions, 1. That it follows plainly from it, that the Thief
upon the Cross, and all the pious and believing Jews who heard these words, and
died before our Savior's Passion, Joh. vi. 4.
must of necessity be damned, for our Lord says with an asseveration to them,
Except you eat the flesh, etc. now this was said at least above a Year before
our Savior's Passion, and so before the Institution of that Sacrament, in
which alone his flesh could be corporally eaten; and therefore had it been
intended of corporeal and sacramental eating, it was impossible that any person
of those Hearers could be saved, who died in the ensuing year. 2. These words
interpreted in the corporeal Sense do plainly and inevitably infer, That they
who do deprive the Laity all their whole lives of drinking of this blood,
expose them to inevitable damnation, Christ having said, Except you drink the
Blood of the Son of Man, you have no Life in you; for though eating and
drinking being taken figuratively, do signify the same thing, viz. believing
in a crucified Savior; yet being taken properly, they cannot be reputed the
same thing: For albeit they who receive the body only, may be well said to eat
the flesh of Christ, because they take something by way of Meat into their
Mouths, yet cannot they be said to drink his blood, if they take nothing into
their Mouths by way of Drink: Since therefore eating and drinking are two
distinct Actions, so that he cannot properly be said to drink, who only eats,
since the privation of Life is here connected with not drinking of Christ's
Blood, as much as with not eating of his flesh, according to the corporeal
Interpretation pretation of these words, he must certainly be deprived of the
Life here promised, who does not receive the Cup; because he is deprived of
drinking of the Blood of Christ.

4. From Verse. 54, 56. the Argument runs thus, whoseover eats the Flesh, and
drinks the Blood of Christ in the sense here spoken of, abides in Christ,
and Christ in him; and therefore is a true and living Member of Christ's Body,
and he shall have Eternal Life, and be partaker of an happy Resurrection, and
so no person can be either wicked here, or deprived of Everlasting Life
hereafter, who in this sense here mentioned eats of the Flesh, and drinks of
the Blood of Christ. Now this is very true of eating Spiritually, and by Faith,
as it imports believing on Christ; for This, says Christ, is the Will of him
that sent me, That every one who believes on the Son may hve Everelasting
Life; and I will raise him up at the lat Day: but then of Sacramental eating of
Christ's Flesh, it is as false; for this was eaten by a Judas, and continually
is eaten by Millions who are both wicked here, and will be damned hereafter;
this therefore cannot be the import of our Savior's words: and here observe,
1. That our Lord speaks in the general, whosoever eats. 2. That he speaks thus,
not by way of Promise, which might be conditional, but by way of plain
Assertion, and declaration of a thing most certain. And, 3. That the Text shows
the eating mentioned here, can never be performed unprofitably, no not without
the greatest benefit; for it is opposed to the eating of Manna in the
Wilderness, on this account, that whereas that gave only Temporal Life, this
would assuredly conferr Eternal; whereas that was not able to preserve from
Temporal, this would preserve from Death Eternal.

5. Moreover, Verse. 61, and 62. our Lord speaks thus, Does this offend you,
what if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before: i. e. are
you offended that I thus speak of giving you my Fleh to eat; do you look on
this Expression now as so absurd and unintelligible, what then will you think
of it, when this Body shall be removed hence to Heaven? i. e. HOw will you then
be scandalized, and think it still more difficult, and more impossible to
apprehend how you should eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, provided you go on to
understand my words in the gross carnal Sense. For Athanasius In illud Evang.
Quicunque dixerit, P. 979.
says well, That Christ here mentions his ascent into Heaven, (...), That he
might divert them from the corporeal sense; and therefore argued thus, "Seeing
it will be hen impossible that you should corporally eat my Flesh, when it is
so far removed from you; by this you may discern, I speak of a spiritul eating
of it. Whence by the way we learn, That Christ thought his Ascension into
Heaven sufficient demonstration to the Jews, his Flesh could not be eaten upon
Earth; and why it should not be so to the Christian I am yet to learn.

6. The 63. Verse. affords us a more plain and certain Exposition of our
Savior's meaning in the precedent words; for thus they run, It is the Spirit
that quickens; the Flesh profits nothing; (...). Eusebius. de ecclesiaftic.
Theolog. l. 3. c. 12.
The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are Life: For the
import of these words is to this effect; unto that eating and drinking, of
which in this Discourse I have still spoken, I have annexed the Promise of
Life, saying expressly, He that eats me shall live by me; he shall by me be
quickened: Now all Men know, That it is the Spirit in them that gives them Life,
and when that Spirit is taken from them, the Flesh cannot live, or minister to
the continuance of their Life; by which similitude you may plainly learn, I
spoke not of my real Flesh, when I told you, that by eating it, you should have
Life, but of my Word and Doctrine, that of my Passion more especially; for my
words which I speak to you, they are Spirit, and they are Life; i.e. if you
will hearken to them, they will make you live Spiritually here, Eternally
hereafter, and by so doing will be Life: yea, where they are embraced, they are
that to the new Man, which is the Spirit to the Flesh; they give him Life,
Activity, and Motion, and therefore they are Spirit. Had our Lord said, it is
the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh profits nothing, therefore the Flesh
which I will give, shall be still joined to my Divinity, and by the virtue of
it give you Life, he had said somewhat like the sense which others put upon
this Text; but saying only, The words which I speak unto you, they are Spirit,
we cannot doubt but he speaks of eating and of drinking of his words
spiritually.

7. Our Savior having said unto the Twelve, Will ye also go away? St. Peter
Answers, To whom should we go? Thou have the words of eternal Life, and we
believe thou art that Christ the Son of the living God. Where, (1.) observe,
that Peter here does as it were repeat the words of Christ; My words are Life,
says Christ; Thou have the words of Life eternal, says St. Peter; whereas, if
he had understood our Savior, to have spoken here of Oral Manducation, his
Answer would in all probability have been to this effect, Whatsoever appearance
there may be of inhumanity, absurdness, and impossibility in eating of thy
natural Flesh, and drinking of thy Blood; yet we believe it, because thou have
said it, who art Truth it self, and who art able to make good thy words; we
therefore hearing nothing of this tendance from him, we may conclude, that he
knew nothing of this import of them. And, 2. observe, that he thought it
sufficient to say, We belive thou art the Christ, which if our Lord spoke here
of Oral Manducation, was nothing to the purpose, but if he only spoke of
spiritual eating of him, was the very thing which was designed by our Lord in
this Discourse, and which he spoke of in those words, which so much offended
others. We therefore conclude with Clemens of Alexandria, That (...), etc.
Paedag. lib. 1. cap. 6. page 100. (...), etc. ibid. page 104, 105.
when our Lord said, Eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, he allegorically meant
the drinking of Faith, and of the Promises, and that our Lord is by way of
Allegory to those that believe in him, Meat, Flesh, and Nourishment, and Bread,
and Blood. With Tertullian, That De Resur. Carn. cap. 36, 37.
our Lord all along urged his intent by Allegory, calling his word flesh, as
being to be hungered after, that we might have Life; auditu devorandus,
ruminandus intellectu, and fide digerendus, to be devoured by the Ear,
ruminated upon by the mind, and by Faith digested. With Origin, That Bibere
autem dicimur sanguinem ejus verusest citanquam mundo 73.
we are said to drink his Blood, when we receive his words, in which Life
consists, that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed, because he
feeds all Mankind with the flesh and blood of his word, as with pure meat and
drink. With Ubi supra.
Eusebius, That his Words andDoctrines are Flesh and Blood. With Arhanasius,
That (...). Tom. 1. page 979.
the words which Christ spoke were not carnal but spiritual; for how many could
his Body have sufficed for Meat, that it should be made the Food of the whole
World. With St. Austin Tract. 25. in. Johan. Tom. 9. p. 218. and Tract. 26. p.
223
Vt quid paras dentes, and ventrem, creed and manducasti, credere enim in eum,
hoc est manducare panem vivum, why providest thou Teeth and a Belly, believe,
and thou have eaten, for to believe in him, is to eat the living Bread. And
lastly with Licet and in Myfterio possit intelligi, tamen verius Corpus
Chrifti, and sanguis ejus sermo scripturarum est. In Psalm. 147. fol. 94. a.
St. Jerome, In the truest Sense, the Body and the Blood of Christ is the Word
and Doctrine of the Scripture: Caro Christi and sanguis ejus in auribus nostris
infunditur, the flesh and blood of Christ is poured into our Ears. We say in
the Language of Origin, Hom. 7. in Levit. ibid.
Si filii estis Ecclesiae, -- agnoscite quia figurae sunt, -- si enim sedundum
literam sequaris; If you are Sons of the Church, own these things to be
Figures, for if you follow the Letter, this very saying, Except you eat the
Flesh, is a killing Letter: In the words of Ubi supra.
Eusebius pronounced in the name of Christ, do not think that I speak of that
Flesh with which I am compassed, as if you must eat of that, neither imagine
that I command you to drink of my sensible and bodily Blood, but understand
well, that the words that I have spoken to you, they are Spirit and Life; for,
as St. Austin says, touching the Exposition of Scripture Phrases, De Doctrine.
Chriftiana li. 3. cap. 16.
If the saying be preceptive, either forbiding a wicked Action, or commanding
that which is good, it is no figurative Speech, but if it seems to command any
wickedness, or to forbid what is profitable and good, it is figurative. This
saying, Except you eat, etc. seems to command a wicked thing, it is therefore a
figure, enjoining us to communicate in the Passion of our Lord, and sweetly and
profitably to remember that his Flesh was wounded and Crucified for us.

2. 4. Luc. xxiv. 30.
I should proeed Secondly to show, That it does not appear from the practice of
Christ himself in breaking Bread, and giving it unto Two Disciples at Emaus;
nor from the practice of this Disciples, Acts ij. 42.
who are said to have continued in breaking of Bread, and who were gathered
together to break Bread; Acts xx. 7.
that both our Lord and his Disciples communicated in one ikind only: But these
Pretensions have been so fully answered by a late excellent Discourse of
Communion in one kind, in Answer to the Bishop of Meaux from Page 22 to 28,
that it is superfluous further to insist upon them, especially seeing the
Author of the Li 6. page 486.
History of the Trent Council has informed us, that 'twas the Judgment of some
of the Fathers there, That all these places must be laid aside as impertinent
to this matter, or insufficient to prove that for which they are produced,
because had they concerned the Eucharist, they must have been Instances, not
only of taking, but also of consecrating the Holy Sacrament in one kind, and so
by them it would be concluded that it was not sacrilege to consecrate one kind
without the other; which, say they, is contrary to all the Doctors, and the
meaning of the Church, and overthrows the distinction of the Eucharist, as it
is a Sacrifice, and as it is a Sacrament.

3. Waving this therefore, I proceed Thirdly to show, 5.
that it was the Custom of the Church to give the Sacrament to the Sick, and to
Infants capable of receiving of it, in both kinds. And,

1. Whereas J.L. does with true Romish confidence affirm, That all ancient
Writers do attest, that it was the custom to give this Sacrament under one kind
to the Sick; the contrary is extremely evident, not only by the instances
collected by the learned De Cultu Lat. l. 5. c. 11. p. 641, 642.
Dally, of Sick Persons who communicated in both kinds from the 4th. to the
10th. Century, but also from the Canons of the whole Church of Christ; for in
the third Century St. Cyprian, and the Presbyters of Rome inform us, That they
had agreed that Si urgere exitus ceperit. Ep. 18. Si premi infirmitate aliqua
and periculo coeperint. Ep. 19. si de Saeculo excederint. Ep. 20. item Ep. 30,
31.
if the lapsed Penitents were endangered by sickness, and they were nigh to
Death's door, they should be admitted to the peace of the Church, and that they
should be relieved in the thing which they desired. How was it that they did
relieve the infirm when death approached? even the same way that they did the
strong, Ep. 57.
Protectione sanguinis, and corporis Christi, With the protection of the Body
and the Blood of Christ, faith Cyprian. What was it that they desired, and some
of them invaded? St. Cyprian informs us that it was Ep. 31.
Sanctum Domini, The Holy of the Lord; it was the Eucha rist, that is, the Body
and the Blood of Christ; which St. Cyprian shows plainly, by saying it ought
not to be given to them till they had done penance, confessed and received
imposition of hands, because it is written, Ep. 16.
He that eats the Bread or drinks the Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. What was it that they endeavored to
extort? St. Cyprian says, It was Vis infertur corpori ejus and sanguini, De
Lapsis, p. 128.
the Body and the Blood of Christ, being angry with, and even threatening the
Priests, that they did not Quod non statim Domini corpus inquinatis manibus
accipiat, aut ore polluto Domini sanguinem bibat.
presently receive the Body of Christ into their defiled Hands, or drink the
Blood of the Lord with their polluted Mouth. What was it that Trophimus a
lapsed Priest was admitted to? St. Cyprian says, It was Ut Laicus communicet,
Ep. 55.
Lay-Communion. Now what that was, Haec erat tunc temporis cummunio Laica cujus
adeo participes Euchariftica Sacramenta, Speciem inquam utramque panis and vini
sumebant.
Rigaltius upon the place informs us, saying, That it was the participation of
both Species, but as a Layman, not in the Order of Priests, to which having
once lapsed, he was not by the Discipline of those Times to be again admitted,
and this was the Law established by the Councils of those Times in Rome,
Africa, and many other places, touching the receiving of Penitents. This, says
Hoc est, apud Cyprianum lapsis pacem dari, Hoc est, ad communionem corporis and
sanguinis Domini admitti. Not in Can. 11. Council. Tolet. undecimi.
Garsias Loaisa is that which Cyprian styles, affording them the peace of the
Church, even the giving them admission to the Body and the Blood of Christ.
According to this Law which generally obtained, Dionysius of Alexandria lest it
in command to his Preshyter, that if any of the Penitents who were about to
depart this Life, should ask is, and chiefly, if they had before been
Supplicatns for it, Hist. Eccl. l. 6. cap. 44. Vide Not. in locum.
they should participate of the Divine Gifes, and so be sent out of the World.
This is that O (...). Can. 13.
old Canonical Law, confirmed by the first Nicene Council, that if any one (who
had not finished his time of Penance) was about to die, he shouldnot be
deprived, (...), of his last and most necessary Viaticum; that is, say Zonaras
and Balfanon, he should not be deprived, (...), of the participation of the
consecrated Gifts: (...); of the participation of the Divine Mysteries, says
Con. Oxon. Tom 2. p. 180.
Matthew Blastares. This is that Law of the Fathers of which Epist. Canon. p.
121.
Gregorius Nyssen speaks, when he says, That the Philanthropy of the Fathers
took care, that if any departed this Life, having not finished his Penance, he
should, (...), participate of the consecrated Gifts, that he might not be sent
out of the World without his Viaticum.

The same we learn from the 6th Canon of the Council of Ancyra, which commands,
If these Penitents be in danger of Death, they shall then be permitted, (...),
to Come to full Communion; (...); to the Communion of the Holy Gift, says
Zonaras: (...); To the participation of the Divine Sacraments, says Balsamon.
From the 73 Canon of (...).
St. Basil, which Decrees, That he who denies Christ (in times of Peace) shall
be a Penitent all his Life, and only be admitted to the participation of the
Sacraments at his Death; and from the Second Canon of Gregorius Nyssen, which
Decrees in like manner, That such a one shall be, (...), deprived of the
Mystical Sacraments till he comes to die, and only then partake of them.

Now albeit those Canons speak chiefly of such persons as were in a state of
Penitence, yet since, as Not. in Can. 11. Con. Tolet undec.
Garfia Loaisa notes, it was looked upon by the Ancients as an Argument of
eternal Life, and an heavenly Gift granted to those who were going to their
eternal Rest, to be worthily refreshed, pabulo Corporis and Sanguinis Domini,
with the Food of the Body and the Blood of our Lord, which therefore was fitly
called their Viaticum. And since it cannot be imagined, that the Faithful
should at the close of their Life be excluded from what was granted to the
Penitents, these Canons must convince us, that it was a standing and universal
Custom of the whole Church of Christ, confirmed as such by the first Nicene
Council, to give the Sacrament in both kinds to dying Persons. And though we
cannot doubt that a Custom established by so many Canons, continued to be
observed in the Church, had we no other Evidence of its continuance to future
Ages, yet in this case we find great evidence of the continuance of this Custom
for a Thousand Years. For the 11th. Council of Toledo says, That Solet humaze
naturze infirmitas, in ipso mortis exitu praegravata, tanto siccitatis pondere
deprimi, ut nullis ciborum illationibus refici, sed vix tandem illati
delectetur poculi gratia suftentari, quod etiam in multorum exitu vidimus, qui
optatum suis votis S. Communionis expetentes Viaticum, collatam sibi a
Sacerdote Eucharistiam rejecerunt, non quod infidelitate hoc agerent, sed quod,
praeter Dominici Calicis haustum, traditam sibi non possunt Eucharistiam
deglutire. -- Quicunque ergo fidelis inevitabili qualibet infirmitate coactus,
Eucharistiam perceptam rejecerit, in nullo Ecclesiae damnationi subjaceat.
Council. Tom. 6. page 552.
the infirmity of humane nature was often at the time of Death depressed with
such a weight of drought that they could scarce receive the Cup, that they had
seen this in the exit of many, who desired the wished for Viaticum of the Holy
Communion, have cast out of their Mouths the Eucharist given to them by the
Priest, not out of infidelity, but because they could swallow nothing besides a
draught of the sacred Cup. Whence they Decree. That whosoever of the Faithful,
by an inevitable infirmity being compelled to do it, casts out of his Mouth the
sacred Eucharist, shall be subject to no penalty for so doing. Whence we learn,
1st. That dying Persons then desired this Viaticum inboth kinds. sdly. That the
Priests accordingly did attempt to give it them in both kinds. 3dly. That it
was culpable then not to receive both, except in cases of necessity unavoidable.

3. This will be farther evident from the very Forms of Communicating the Sick,
used in the Ancient Liturgies of the Church, and from the Canons which concern
this Affair. For, after the Unction of the infirm Person, it was the Custom to
give him the Communion, and that he received in both kinds, is evident from the
words of the Priest, who ministered the Sacrament; viz. Corpus and sanguis
Domini nostri Jesu Christi custodiat animam tuam in vitam zeternam. Amen.
The Body and Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy Soul to Life eternal:
And from the following Prayer, viz. Domine Sancte Pater Omnipotens aeterne
Deus, te fideliter deprecamur ut accipienti huic fratri nostro famulo tuo
Sacro-sanctum Corpus and sanguinem Jesu Christi filii tui Domini noftri tum
Corporis and animae sit salus. Ex Theodori Poeniten. p. 326.
Father omnipotent, eternal God, we faithfully pray thee that the Holy Body and
Blood of our Lord received by our Brother, thy Servant, may tend to the
Salvation of his Body and Soul. Apud Larroq. Hist. Euch. p. 135, 136.
Hugh Menard tells us from a Manuscript of St. Remy of Rheims, That when the
sacrament was ministered to such as were not extreme ill, it was said unto them
separately, the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ keep you to life everlasting, the
Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ ransom you to Life everlasting, which words make
a separate and distinct reception. But as for those who were at the point of
Death, these two Expressions were joined together, The Body and Blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ preserve thy Soul unto everlasting Life, because there was
given to the Sick Person in a Spoon the Body of our Lord steeped in the Holy
Blood. The reason of this steeping we learn from the Quae sacra oblatio
intincta debet esse in sanguine Christi, ut veraciter Presbyter possit dicere
infirmo, corpus and sanguis Domini proficiat tibi in vitam aeternam. De Discip.
Eccles. l. 1. can. 70.
Canon of the Council of Tours, cited by Regino, That every Priest shall have
his Pyx or Vessel worthy of so great a Sacrament, where the Body of our Lord
shall be carefully reserved for the Viaticum of the Sick, and that this sacred
Oblation ought to be steeped in the Blood of Christ, that the Priest may truly
say to the Infirm, The Body and the Blood of our Lord profit thee to Life
eternal, and for the Remission of Sins.

Now this practice, and the reason of the practice here assigned and approved
of, do expressly show their Faith was this, That the Priest could not name them
both without a Lie, unless he gave both; and that they who enjoined that what
Christ had instituted to be received separately, should rather be received
together, than that either Species should not be received at all, did think
both Species necessary to a full and entire Communion, as it has been well
noted by Cassander. For to what purpose should hey so carefully require this
intinction, if they had then believed that there was nothing wanting to the
Grace, or the integrity of the Communion, when they received under one Species
alone?

And though this be abundantly sufficient to show what was the practice of the
Church till the 12th Century, yet it is easy to produce farther evidence of
this matter. A Synod held in the Region of Ticinum, and therefore styled
Synodus Regio Ticinensis, thus Decrees, That Si is qui infirmatur publicae
poenitentiae mancipatus est, non potest hujus myfterii consequi medicinam, nisi
prius reconciliatione percepta communionem corporis and sanguinis. Christi
meruerit. Council. Tom. 8. p. 64.
if who is infirm is in a state of Penance, he cannot have the benefit of this
Mystery, viz. of Sacred Unction, unless being first reconciled, he be worthy of
the Communion of the Body and the Blood of Christ. And among the things which
visibly and wholesomly are done in the Church, In perceptione corporis and
sanguinis ejus -- infirmis Viaticum dari. L. 1. de Sacr. Euch. cap. 7. fol. 18.
b.
Algerus mentions the giving the Body and Blood of our Lord for the Viaticum
of the Sick, In the 13th Century L. 3. contr. Albing. cap. 7.
Lucas Pishop of Tuy informs us of an Heretic, who being Sick was admonished
by his Host to send for a Priest, and discourse with him as a Penitent, that he
might receive from him, Sanctissimum Sacramentum corporis and fanguinis Domini,
the most holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of the Lord. Now all these
Instances do plainly show, that it was far from being a received and authorized
Custom of the Church, to Communicate the Sick under the Species of Bread alone,
or to give nothing to them, but one Species only.

On the contrary, it is extremely evident from all the Canons of the Church
produced, touching the case of Penitents and others, that it was a thing
established by the highest Authority of the whole Church of Christ, that both
the holy Mysteries should be exhibited to the infirm and dying Person. And
seeing the Ancients looked upon it as so great a benefit to dying Persons, to
be refreshed with the food of the Body and the Blood of Christ, since they took
so much care to give the Bread steeped in the consecrated Wine to them, who,
through infirmity of Body, could not sallow it down dry, and to minister each
Species apart to them who were not extreme ill; since, as De Discipl. eccles.
l. 1. c. 195.
Regino does inform us, they determined, that great care was to be taken, least
the doing this being deferred too long, it should prove to the destruction of
the Soul, our Lord having said, unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and
drink his Blood, you shall have no life in you. I say, from all these things it
is extremely evident, that it was a receied, and in subjects capable, was
deemed a necessary thing to communicate the infirm and dying person under both
Species of Bread and Wine.

Moreover, 6.
that Children also, if capable of doing so, received in both kinds, will be
evident against the precarious Assertion of J.L. 1. From the clear Testimony of
St. Cyprian in his Book De Lapsis, for there he introduces the Children who by
their Parents were carried to eat things offered to Idols, or to offer to them,
thus pleading of their Cause to God, Nos nihil fecimus, nec derelicto cibo and
poculo Domini, ad profana contagia sponte properavimus, perdidit nos aliena
perfidia, parents senfimus parricidas, p. 125.
We have done nothing, nor did we of our own accords, leaving the Meat and Cup
of the Lord, hasten to these profane contagious Solemnities, our Parents were
our Parricides. Where he affords us a plain demonstration, that they then
ordinarily received both the Elements; for had they not, as many as were
capable, received the Bread, as well as the Cup, why does he introduce them
purging themselves from the neglect of both? Why does he make them, with as
much care, to plead, We did not leave the meat, as we left not the Cup of the
Lord?

Having thus showed the custom of this Age, I shall consider what is, from St.
Cyprian, suggested to the contrary, viz. that he relates, That the solemnities
being ended, the Deacon who presented the Holy Cup to the Faithful, being to
give it to a Child, Page 67.
she turned away her face, as not able to support so great Majesty; she shut
her Mouth, and refused the Chalice, and when the Deacon had forced some of it
into her Mouth, she could not retain it in those defiled Entrails, so great was
the power and Majesty of our Lord. Whence it is argued, that she received the
Cup only. Now to give a clear and satisfactory Answer to this Objection, it
will be necessary to reflect a little upon the Customs of these times, as V. Gr.

1. The business of the Deacon, which was not to administer the Bread, but when
the Priest or Bishop had administered that, to follow with the Cup. So the
Apostolical Constitutions order, (...). Lib. 8. c. 13.
Let the Bishop give the Oblation, saying, The Body of Christ -- And the Deacon
let him hold the Cup, and giving it, let him say, The Blood of Christ, the Cup
of Life. and accordingly here, this happened, faith St. Cyprian, Ubi Calicem
Diaconus offere praesentibus coepit. P. 132.
When the Deacon began to distribute the Cup to them that were present; and is
it then to be admired, that here is no mention made of the Body? if hence it
follows, That no Body was distributed to this Child, it also follows, that no
Body was given to the rest of the Faithful then present; for there is no more
mention made of the Body given to them, than of the Body given to the Child.
Nor could S. Cyprian regularly speak of it, when discoursing of the Deacon, who
then ministered the Cup only.

2. Note Secondly, That the Children received in the Rank of the Women; so the
same Constitutions, speaking of that order in which the Encharist was to be
received, says, (...). Ibid.
Amongst the Women let the Diaconesses, the Virgins, and the Widows Receive,
and then the Children; and this was doubtless ordered so, that the Women might
take care of their Children, and assist them in Receiving; Ibid.
accordingly, this Child comes in the Arms of its Mother, and when she had
Received, Locus ejus advenit, Came the time for the Child to Receive too.

3. Note thirdly, That the Bread was not then put into the Mouth, as it is now
in the R. Church, but it was given into the Hand of the Receiver, to eat at
leisure of it, whilst the Bishop or Priest went on distributing, as is
acknowledged by the learned Vid Dallaeum de cult. lat. l. 5. c. 2.
Doctors of the Church of Rome, and proved by innumerable Testimonies of the
Ancients, Now it is not to be conceived that they who had a reverence for the
Holy Sacrament would put it into the Hands of little Children, who might let it
fall, or throw it away, or that the Priest should stay till he could make the
Child eat, or swallow it down, but rather, that he should give it to the
Mother, from whose Hands the Child more likely would receive it, and who could
better chew it for, and put it down his Throat. This being so, the Bread might
be given to the Mother for the Child to eat at leisure, and the Priest take no
notice of her refusal to receive it; but then, because the Cup was by the
Deacon to be received again into his hands to be distributed to otehrs, he must
stay till the Child had participated, and so he must endeavor to make it drink
of it. And this, I verily believe, is the whole Truth touching this instance;
which therefore is no proof at all, that both the Symbols were not offered, or
distributed to this Child, but only that she had not eaten of the Bread given
to her Mother for her use, before the Deacon followed with the Cup. Nor can
this reasonably be questioned, if we consider how constantly the Tradition of
the Church informs us in all the following Centuries, that Children received in
both kinds: For,

To omit the passage in the Apostolic Constitutions, where they are reckoned
amongst those who received the Eucharist; when without any distinction or
exception, the Bishop separately gave the Bread, and the Deacon the Cup to all.
Dionysius in the Fourth Century informs us, That (...). Phot. c. 177. Eccles.
Hier. c. 7. p. 360, 361.
little Children did partake of the most holy Symbols of the divine Communion.
And Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia, expressly notes, That (...)
they gave to Infants the Communion of the immaculate Body for the Remission of
Sins, where (...). P. 400.
Photius adds, That he invented many absurd things, that he might solve the
question of those that asked, Why do Children partake of the Holy Mysteries? in
the plural, and that he might have found out better Solutions of that question,
and given better accounts of that Custom then he did; he therefore
Synecdochically spoke of the Receiving both these Mysteries. The passages of
St. Austin in the fifth Century are very numerous, in which he both asserts it
as an universal Practice, that little Children did partake of the Body and the
Blood of Christ, and also says, that without eating of his Flesh and drinking
of his Blood, they could not have eternal Life. But having produced these
already, I only add his Testimony that Innocentius P. sine Baptismo Christi and
sine participatione corporis and sanguinis Christi vitam non habere parvulos
dicit, Contra duas Ep. Pelag. l. 2. c. 4.
Pope Innocent the First declared, That Infants could not have Life without the
participation of the Body and the Blood of Christ.

To proceed now in farther confirmation of our Assertion, "There is no better
proof, nor better interpreter of a Custom, than the Custom it self, nothing
which more demonsrates that a Custom comes from the first Ages, than when it is
seen to continue successively to the last: This of communicating little
Children, not under the Species of Wine only, but of Bread also, or of both, is
evidently such; for, in the 6th. Century De glor. Martyr. l. c. 10.
Gregory of Tours makes mention of a Jewish Child coming with other Children to
the Communion of Christ's Body and Blood. In the 7th. Century the Council. Tom.
6. p. 552.
11th. Council of Toledo, excuses those from censure, qui Eucharistiam receptam
in tempore infantiae rejecerunt, who in their Infancy have cast out the Bread
received into their Mouths. In the 8th. Century we are informed by Charles the
Great, that this was then the general Custom of the Church of God; for, against
the Doctrine of the Second Nicene Council, and of the Roman Church pronouncing
Anathema to those who did not worship Images, he and his Council of 300 Bishops
argue thus, that then Infantes Car. Mag. de Imaginib. l. 2. c. 27.
Baptismatis unda loti, and corporis dominici edulio and sanguinis haustu
satiati, pereunt; Infants who have been Baptized, and have received the
Sacrament of our Lord's Body and Blood must perish. In the 9th. Century we are
told by Apud Menardum Not. in Greg. Sacr. p. 107.
Jesse Bishop of Amiens, That the Infant was confirmed by the Body and Blood of
Christ, that he might be his Member. By Corpore and sanguine Dominico omne
praecedens Sacramentm in eo confirmatur, quia haec ideo accipere debet, etc. De
Inslit. Cleric. l. 1. cap. 29.
Rabanus Maurus, who says, That the precedent Sacrament of Baptism is
confirmed in the Baptized Porson by the Body and Blood of our Lord; for he
therefore ought to receive these things, that he may be his Member who died,
and rose again for us, and may deserve to have God dwelling in him: For he who
is Truth it self says, He that eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood abides in
me, and I in him, and also, Except you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and
drink his Blood, you shall have no Life in you. By De Ord. Baptiz. c. 18.
Theodulph Bishop of Orleans, That when any one is new born by Water and the
Spirit, he is nourished with the body of our Lord, and drinks his Blood. By the
old Statim autem confirmetur infans and communicetur ab Episcopo ita dicente,
Corpus and Sanguis Domini, etc. Baluz. Not. in Reg. p. 551.
Roman Pontisicial, which says, That the Infant being Baptized, he is
presently confirmed and communicated by the Bishop, saying, The Body and the
Blood of Christ, etc. In the 10th. Century we are informed of the continuance
of the same Custom from a Pontificial written about the year 980, says
Baluzius, where it is commanded, Statim enim confirmari oportet Chrismate, and
poftea communicari, and si Episcopus deest, communicetur 2 Presbytero dicante,
Corpus Domini Jesu Christi custodiat te in vitam aeternam. Bal. not. in Reg. p.
552.
That the Baptized Infant should presently be Confirmed and Communicated by the
Bishop, or in his absence by the Priest, saying, The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ keep thee in Life eternal. In the 14th. Century we find the same Custom
in Ne lactentur antequam communicent. De Sabb. Pasch. p. 64.
Alcuin from the very same words, which, says he, were then used at the
Communicating of the Infant after Baptism. And in the Three and thirtieth
Epistle of Lanfranck we find these words, Credimus enim generaliter expedire
omnes omnibus aetatibus tam viventes quam morientes dominici corporis and
sanguinis perceptionese munire. Apud Baluz. ibid. p. 657.
We believe that it is generally very expedient for all Persons, of all Ages,
living and dying, to arm themselves with the Reception of our Lord's body and
his blood. Whence, faith Nor. ad librum Sacram, p. 298.
Baluzius, we gather, That in his time is was the Custom to give to Children
the Communion of the Lord's Body and his Blood. And Hugh Menard, does
ingenuously confess, That the Custom of giving the body of Christ to Children,
continued till the time of Paschal the Second, and that they gave it to them
then dipped in the Wine, by reason of the wekness of their Age.

That this was the Opinion of the Greek Church even almost to our present Age,
we learn from L. 3. de S. Euch. cap 40.
Arcadius, whose words are these, They judge the Sacrament of the Eucharist to
be required of necessity to Salvation, both to Adult and Infants, so teach
Simeon Thessalonicensis, Nicholaus Cabasilas, and Gabriel Philadelphiensis, who
all say, that the (...).
Communion is therefore necessary, because the Lord has said, If you do not
eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, you have no life in you. We Baptize Infants,
says (...). Act. cum Virtum. E. 1. c. 9. p. 85.
Jeremiah their Patriarch, and afterward we give them the Communion; for,
according to St. Basil, he that is regenerated, wants still spiritual Food; and
our Lord has said, Unless you eat, etc. Eccl. ord. c. 9. p. 98.
Metrophanes Critopulus adds, That their Infants are Baptized, and that then
they afterward partake as often as their Parents will, (...), of both Species,
at the Lord's Table, The Georgians, Circassians, and Mengrelians are of the
same Religion with the Greek Church in all things, and therefore must be sof
the same Opinion in this Matter. The Armenians minister the sacrament of the
Eucharist to Infants in both kinds. So do the Habassines, says Viagg. de
Aethiop. c. 22.
Alvarez, and the Maronites, says P. 178.
Brierwood.

And here let it be noted, that not the latter Grecians only, but the Ancient
Fathers did generally hold that this was necessary to be done, by virtue of
that Precept, Except you eat my Flesh and drink my Blood, you shall have no
Life in you, from whence it is extremely evident, that neither in the Fifth
Age, when Infants were by virtue of this Text admitted to the Sacrament; nor in
the following Ages of the Church, could it be an established Custom, to give to
Children the Cup only.

Lastly, That neither Leo nor Gelasius gave any new Precept to the Church
touching this Matter,. 7. Chap. 5.. 2.
is partly evident from what has been already said, nor are there any
Footsteps of this new imaginary Law to be found in their Decrees: For the words
of Leo only command, That when the sacrilegious dissembling of the Manichees
was discovered, they should be driven by the Priests Authority from the Society
of the Saints. And the words of Gelasius do only say, That they, who, in the
Region of Squillaci, were bound up by a Superstition unknown to him, from
receiving the Cup, should either receive the whole sacrament, or be kept back
from the whole. Where now, I pray you, is any appearance of this new pretended
Law, or First Ecclesiastical Precept, That all the Faithful should from
henceforth be obliged to receive under both Species, unless those words of
Gelasius import, that the Receiving of the Bread without the Cup is not
Receiving an entire Sacrament; or, unless his following Reason, That the
division of one and the same Mystery cannot happen without Sacrilege, be a
general Rule concerning all the Faithful?

But to dispute no longer in a case so plain, both Leo and Gelasius
sufficiently inform us of the practice of their times; for Leo does not only
say, That De pass. domini Sermon. 14. p. 284.
participatio Corporis and sanguinis Christi, this participation of the Body
and Blood of Christ is that by which the New Creature is fed and inebriated,
from the Lord himself, That Ep. 46. c. 2. p. 518.
in the Church of God, in the Mystical distribution of the spiritual
Nourishment, the Body and the Blood of Christ is taken: But adds, That Ser.
Sancto de jejun. Sept. mensis Ser. 89.
the Lord saying, Unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, you shall have no Life in you; we ought so to communicate of this Holy
Table, as not to doubt of the Truth of the Body and Blood of Christ. Gelasius
also says, Disp. de duabus naturis. Christi Bib. patrum. Tom. 4. p. 432.
That the Sacraments we take of the Body and Blood of Christ are a Divine
Thing, whence by them we are made partakers of a Divine Nature, and yet the
Substance and Nature of Bread and Wine does not cease to be, or to remain, and
in this Decree, that the taking of both Species is the taking of one and the
self-same Mystery, which therefore is not celebrated by taking of one Species
only, and that the not receiving of the Cup, when the Bread has been taken, is
the dividing of one and the self-same Mystery, or the destroying of its Unity;
so that he argues against this practice from a Reason essential to the Mystery,
and which respects the Unity thereof, which, by the practice of receiving in
one kind only, is destroyed.

Having thus demonstrated that the Fathers and Doctors of the Church till the
12th. Century taught, Cap. 1.
That the Laity by divine Precept were obliged to receive both kinds, when they
were capable of doing so. Cap. 2.6.
That they condemned all variation from the matter of the Institution, and the
Doctrine of Concomitance. Cap. 3.5.
That they conceived the Receiving of the Cup by the Laity was requisite to
their showing forth the Lord's Death, their Union to Christ, the increase of
Grace, the Remission of their Sins, the Sanctification and Salvation of their
Souls and Bodies; and lastly, Cap. 4.
for their receiving an entire Communion. That they constantly exhorted the
People, having received the Bread, to take the Cup also, Cap. 6.5.
declaring that it was Unlawful, Erroneous, and even Sacrilegious to receive
the one without the other, if they were capable of receiving both; and having
fully answered and confuted all that J.L. has offered to the contrary, Cap. 8.
I shall conclude in these words of Mr. Condom on this subject a little varied;
viz. Thus many constant practices of the Primitive Church, P. 160.
thus many different Circumstances, whereby it appears in particular and in
public, and always with an universal approbation, and according to the
established Law, that she gave the Communion under [both] Species, so many Ages
before the Council of Constance, and from the origin of Christianity, till the
time of this Council, do invincibly demonstrate, that this Council did [thwart]
the Tradition of all Ages, P. 161.
when it defined that the Communion under one kind was as good and sufficient
as under both, and that in which manner soever they took it, they neither
contradicted the Institution of Jesus Christ, nor deprived themselves of the
Fruit of this Sacrament.

In his Second Part, P. 194.
Sect. 4th. he lays down this as a principle which alone carries along with it
the decision of this Question. P. 195.
viz. That in all practical Matters we must always regard what has been
understood and practiced by the Church. P. 196.
That the true means to understand God's Holy Law, is to consider in what
manner it has been always understood and observed in the Church. Since there
appears in this Interpretation and perpetual Practice, a Tradition which cannot
come but from God himself, P. 200.
and that Sense thereof which has always appeared in the Church is as well
inspired as the Scripture it self. Now by this, as he well says, P. 203.
our Question is decided, for in the sacred Ceremony of the Lord's Supper, we
have seen that the Church has always believed and taught for a Thousand years
and upwards, that the Laity by divine Precept, and for the ends forementioned,
were obliged to receive both Species, that the Fathers exhorted them to do so,
and did, both by express Declarations, and by many Customs and determinations,
sufficiently condemn the contrary Practice, when any Heretics or Superstitious
Persons did decline the Cup. That they did generally so Interpret our Savior's
Institution, that it as well concerned the Laity as Clergy, and with one voice
asserted it was not lawful to vary from it, or celebrate the Mystery otherwise
than it was delivered by Christ and his Apostles, and practiced in the
Primitive Church. Behold what has been always practiced, behold what ought to
stand for a Law, in opposition to all the Definitions of the Councils of
Constance, Basil, Trent, and all their Non obstante 's to our Lord's
Institution, and to the Practice of the Primitive Church.

FINIS

