A MEMORABLE SEA FIGHT PENNED AND PRESERVED BY PETER WHITE ONE Of the IIII.
Masters of Attendance in ENGLANDS Navy. (Never before now,) Published for the
good of Englands Commonwealth, By ANDREWS BVRRELL. Gent. OR, A Narrative of
all the Principal Passages which were Trans-acted in the Downs, in the Year,
1639. Between ANTONIO DE OQVENDO, Admiral of the Spanish Armado, And MARTIN
VAN TROMP, Admiral for the States of Holland. Wherein (by a Similary
illustration) Englands (present) sluggish Navy is proved to be Unserviceable,
and in a like Condition with the Spanish Fleet.

When GOD ordaines his Lights to shine,
There Is little need of Thine or Mine.
LONDON, Printed by T. FORCET, (Septem. 4. 1649.) dwelling in Old Fish-street.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE COUNCIL OF STATE for ENGLAND and JRELAND.
ANDREWS BURRELL, Gent. Humbly presents this ensuing Narrative or Journall, of
all the Memorable Passages which were acted in the Downs, when the great Fleet
of Spaniards were vanquished by the Hollanders, in the Year, 1639.
Right Honorable:
IT is now more then five years, since I first Complained of the sluggish and
unserviceable condition of Englands Navy. In which Time there has been wasted
(by Mr. Greenes Account) to guard the Seas, (as he calls it) Seventeen hundred
seventy five Thousand, 600 and 10 Pounds, or thereabouts. But the Seas are not
Guarded, and which is worse, the Honor of the Seas is lost and shamefully
lost. The truth is for want of Victual and other due Encouragements (that is,
for want of their Thirds, (...)

This Journall shows You, how those great Ships were Incountred, dissipated,
and destroyed by the Hollanders, though Englands Royal Navy endeavored
seriously to protect and defend them.

With these Spectacles you may see clearly, that Great sluggish Ships, manned
with Land-men, are not serviceable for this State.

That fleet of Spanish Ships, was much greater in Number, Tonnes, Men and
Ordnance, then Englands Navy is, or ever was, but Maugre their Greatness, and
Number. That Fleet was Incountred, and in a few hours, scattered and
Confounded by the Hollanders, in their small Ships; for excepting some few,
which of late years they have fondly framed in Imitation of the English Navy,
(that is, for Countenance) All their Men of war, are small Ships, and do carry
but one Tire of Ordnance.

I say in a few hours, they so confounded the Great Spanish Ships, that scarce
one of ten Returned into Spain.

In this Great and memorable Fight, some of the Spanish Ships were Burnt, some
were Sunck, and some were taken. The rest run ashore, or run away; This
Ship wa^ not much lest in burden th^^ the Royal So versigne.
and in their flight the great Great Admiral of Portugal, having 1100 Men,
and 70 Pieces of Ordnance, was in part Blown up, and her remains burnt to
Ashes; she was not able to defend her self, much less to offend others.

If you compare the Spanish Armado, which came into England, in the year 1639.
To that which came against England, in the year 1588. Your Honors, will find
many Ships in Oquendoes fleet, of far Greater force, then any of the Galeons,
or Galleasses, which were so much admired by the Spaniards, (and by some fools
in England) when their Invincible Armado was Honorably Incountred, and put to
flight.

Here follows a Comparison by an (Antiparalell) discovering the difference of
Two famous Sea Fights etc. Viz.

When the English Navy first encountered the Spanish Armado in the year 1588.
The English Navic consisted of 23 great Ships, and 37 small Ships.

When Van Tromp first encountered D^n Antonio de Oquendo, in the year 16 9. His
Fleet consisted of 17 Ships and Frigates, and there was but 3 of the 17 which
carried two Tyres of Ordnance, all the rest were Ships of the fourth rank in
Englands Navy, or Ships of less force.

When the Spanish Armado first encountered Englands Navy in the year 1588.
The Spanish Armado consisted of 91 great Ships. 4 Galleasses, and 59 small
Ships.

When Don Antonie de Oquendo first encountered Van Tromp, His Fleet consisted of
66 great Ships, fortified with One thousand, nine hundred twenty and four
Pieces of Ordnance. And besides his Seamen, he had Ten thousand Landmen in his
Fleet.



Here note, That when Van Tromp did first fight with the Spaniards, it was upon
a Retreat (as J may call it) which he durst not attempt until he had tried
what his Ships would do for him; That is, he durst not fight with them until
he knew by experience, that his Ships were nimbler then the Spanish Ships; So
that if he were worsted, he might run from them, as indeed he did, when he
stayed for the 9. Ships which were at Dunkirk, which Ships soon after came to
him in the Night, as you have it in the 5. page of this Journall.

Here you see, that nimble Ships are the Ships which must perform the desired
service.

In the last and greatest Fight which was in the year 1588. The Spanish Armado
consisted of One hundred 48 Ships.

In the last and greatest Fight which was in the year 1588. Englands two
Fleets being met, consisted of One hundred and 30 Ships.

In the story of 88. The four Galleasses are much admired, because each of
them carried fifty Pieces of Ordnance.

In Oquendoes Fleet, two of the five Admiralls, carried 136 Pieces of Ordnance,
which according to Proportion did much exceed the Galleasses.

In 88. There was but 64 Galleons, 4 Galleasses, and 23 great Hulkes; all the
rest were Petaches, Carrovels, and Victuallers, which were of so small force,
that in the Story there is no mention of any service done by them.

In 88. There was but one Galleasse, and one other Ship fired a shore in all
the Fight.

In 39. There was Sixty six great Ships, fortefied with Ninety five Pieces of
Ordnance, more then all the Galleons did carry in 1588. and they were the
strength of that Armado.

In 39. There was 26 great Ships forced ashore, whereof the Vice Admiral of
Spain, with 56 Pieces of Ordnance was one.

In 88. There was but 6. considerable Ships taken.

In 39. There was 12 considerable Ships taken.

In 88. There was not one Ship burnt.

In 39. There was eight great Ships burnt.

In 88. There was not one Ship blown up.

In 39. The great Admiral of Portugal with a 1100 Men and seventy Picces of
Ordnance was blown up.

In 88. There was not one English ship lost.

In 39. Van Tromp did loose one of his greatest Ships.

In 88. The English and Hollanders fought against the Spaniards.

In 39. The English and Spaniards fought against Van Tromp.



This memerable Service was performed by MARTIN VAN TROMP, Admiral for the
States of Holland, in the year 1639. The Fight was maintained valiantly by the
Dutch, and give the Devil his due; some of the Spaniards deserved no less
Commendation.

This memorable Service was performed by MARTIN VAN TROMP, Admiral for the
States of Holland, in the year 1639. The Fight was maintained valiantly by the
Dutch, and give the Devil his due; some of the Spaniards deserved no less
Commendation.

It had been good sport to have seen the Scuffle; But Neptune with a Mist so
blinded them, That the Affront which was then cast upon the English Nation, was
therein, not only hid, but Buried, and is no farther mentioned, by

Your Honors, most humble Orator, ANDREWS BVRRELL.

A TABLE SHOWING Viz.
THat Oquender's Fleet consisted of Sixty six great Ships, Page, 1 That besides
the Seamen and Soldiers, Oquendo had 10000 Land-men in his Ships, Page 2 That
three of Oquendoes Ships were fortified with an 192 Pieces of Ordnance. 3 That
Van Tromp did Fight with Oquendoes Armado when he had but 17 Ships in his
Fleet, and some of them very slight Men of war. Page, 6 That in the first
Fight Van Tromp lost one of his greatest Ships, fortified with 36 Pieces of
Ordnance. Page, 10
At the beginning of the last great Fight.
That Van Tromps Fleet consisted of 131 Ships. Of which Number 30 were
commanded to attend the English Fleet. Twelve were Victuallers, and 16 were
Fireships. So that Van Tromp encountered Oquendo with 73 small Ships; for there
was not many of them that carried two Tyres of Ordnance. Page, 11 That Van
Tromp had 1000 Land Soldiers in his Ships, which was too many by 999. Page, 16
That one of Van Tromps Captains by Van Tromps Commandment did fetch Oquendo^s
Top-masts from Dover, being a rare Example. Page, 17 That Van Tromp would not
be Entreated to fool away his time in Feasting. p. 20 That one of Van Tromps
Pinnesses wearing Englands Colors, did take and carry into Holland, two
English Vessels laden with Soldiers, when theywere lying under the Fort at
Marget. Page, 23 That one of Van Tromps Fleet, searched, and rifled the Kings
Packet Boat, and when Sir John Penington complained of it, Van Tromp gave him a
baffling Answer not worth the writing. Page, 24 That Van Tromp did offer to
give Oquendo 500 Barrels of Powder to goo out of the Road, which was an
Argument of great Valor, joined with a large Commission. Page, 26 That Van
Tromp Promised Sir John Penington, not to shoot one shot at his Enemies, before
he gave him notice thereof by a Letter. Page, 27 That in stead of a timely
warning, when the Fight should begin, there were whoth Broad-sides fited
without number, before the large Letter written in Dutch, came to Sir John
Peningtons hands. Page, 32 That when the Hollanders chased the Spaniards, the
English Fleet chased the Hollanders. And the more the English Fleet chased the
Hollanders, the farther they werefrom them. Page, 34 This last Report is very
remarkable, it is of a greater Concernment then all the Passages in this book;
By it you may know, that Englands Navy is Contemptable, and must come behind.
That the great Ships which were prepared at London and Chatham, to aid Sir John
Penington, were so long Wind-bound, that the Fight was ended three days before
they came into the Downs. This mischief is usual, and therefore very
considerable. Page, 36 That in all the Fights which were betwixt the Hollanders
and the Spaniards, the Hollanders were to Windward of the Spaniards; which is
the greatest Advantage that any Ship can have of her Adversary. Page, 42 That
when the last great Fight began, Thirty of the Hollanders were to Windward of
the English Fleet, which in my opinion was a high Presumption. But when the
English Shot at them they did not return one shot, which Honor is since laid
aside, with the Expense of Two Millions, Four hundred eighty five Thousand
eight hundred fifty four Pounds or thereabouts. Page, 44. The Conclusion of
these Observotions is, That Van Tromp violated his Promise in falling upon
Oquendoes Fleet in the Kings Road. He did not keep his Promise with Sir John
Penington; For which affront, it had been equal and just, that Englands
Admiral should have taken the same Liberty when he was with the Parliaments
Ships, at the Gorey in Holland. But no more of That.
A IOVRNAL OR, Narrative, of all the principal Passages which happened in the
Downs in the year 1639. Faithfully penned and preserved, By PETER WHITE, Then
Master of the English Admiral.
THe 8.th of February 1638. There came from under the Fort at Mardick near
Dunkirk, 12 sail of the King of Spaynes men of War, having in their Company
six other ships called Floyts, full of Soldiers bound for the Groyne in
Biskay, the wind was at E. S E. when they set sail out of the Splinter, which
was about 8. in the morning, at the same time there was 16. sail of Hollanders
riding in Dunkirk Road, under the Command of Hear Martyn hartezan van Tromp.
The Brakes a Sand so called.
They likewise set sail and run to the Westwards between the Brakes and
Splinter before the Dunkirkers, and did attend their coming out between
Graveling and Mardick-hoock, The Fight and ^^gan at 8. in t^^ morning.
and as soon as they came within shot one of the other, the Fight began and
continued for 4. hours a very sore fight, inso much that Admiral Tromp was
forced twice to carreen and stop his leakes, the water being smooth and very
little wind, ^^e Fight en^^d at noone.
and the tide of ebb being spent, about noone the wind shifting westerly the
Dunkirkers bore room again for succor under Mardick-fort, and the Hollanders
after them, still in fight one with the other, the Viceadmirall of Dunkerk the
Hollanders did take; for as report went she had lost the use of her steeridge,
her rutherhead being shot. ^he Vice Ad^irall of Flan^^rs set on fire.
But as I conceive it was for want of good Pilotage, and being in that
distraction she ran aground upon the wester Tail of the Splinter, and fearing
that the Hollanders might come and take out her Provisions, they set her on
fire, and so burnt her and all her provisions, not saving so much as her sails
that were at the Yards.

The next day some of the Hollands fleet were forced to go for Flushing, to
repair the damage that they had received in the fight, and carried their Prize
with them, and their Men that were hurt and maimed in the Fleet; for it was a
bloody fight, the Sea being very smooth and little wind, so that almost every
shot took place. By report from Dunkirk there was above 400 men slain and
hurt amongst them in that Fight. The next day the Hollands fleet lay looking
out for them between Calice and Dover, but the Dunkirkers could not fit
themselves so suddenly; for they could not encounter or recover that Fleet,
until the beginning of March, and then the wind came fair but thick misty
weather, whereby they escaped clear from the Hollanders and got safely to their
Port being the Groyne in Biskay, where there was a very great Fleet of
Spaniards making ready to come for Flanders, unto whom the Dunkirkers reported
the passages of their bloody Fight which they had with the Hollanders, as is
formerly described; But the Spaniards according to their natures, The Spaniards
bragga^oissio^.
out of their pride slighted the fight, and said that the Dunkirkers did not
behave themselves as they ought to have done, and wished that they had bin
there, and then they would have beaten those Pitchellinggos out of the Sea or
have sunk them all, and did always afterward slight the Dunkirkers, and gave
them no respect at all, and did take out of their Ships the choysest of their
Gunners and most of their best men (to manage their Ordnance and to man their
Spanish ships) and placed in their stead (abord of the Durkirkers) very
Scoundrels.

The which was taken very much to heart by the Dunkirkers, The Dunkirkers
resolution^
insomuch that they made as it were a Combination between themselves, that when
they returned (if that they did meet with the Hollanders of the which they made
no question) they would make trial what the Spaniards would do; for they were
to fight by Squadrons, the Admiral of the Spaniards his squadron first to
begin, and the rest according to instructions. And the resolution of the
Dunkirks squadron was, that they would not shoot one shot at the Hollanders,
nor give the Spanyard any succor, except they did perceive that some of their
Admirals were in danger to be taken by the Hollander, and then they would do
their best to secure them, the which they likewise performed when the fight
was, as hereafter I shall make mention.

This Information I received from Mr. T. Williams of Dover, and diverse others
that brought ammunition and victuals unto the Groyne out of the wester and
southern Islands, and likewise from the main of Spain and Portugal for that
Fleet, which was making ready, it seems, until toward the later end of
August, 1639.

For on the 5. of September following, 5. Of September. the Hollanders first met
with the Spaniards against Arundest.
Admiral Trump with 7 sail of Ships and Frigots, waiting for this Fleet,
which was a far greater number (then he did expect) consisting of 66. sail of
Ships, the most part of them great Gallions and Flemish ships that they had
bought, hired, and taken from the Dutch, all well fitted with Ordnance and
ammunition, and 10. thousand Land men besides the Seamen, and Soldiers
belonging unto their ships. These Ships were commanded by Don Antonio de
Oquendo principal Admiral, whose ship had 66 Pieces of great Ordnance, and
his Vice Admiral was Don Andrews de Castrewd, a ship with 56 Pieces of
Ordnance, and the Admiral of Portugal his name was Don Lopez de Ossad, a ship
of 70 Pieces of Ordnance, the 2 Admirals being brave old Men. There was also
the Admiral of Sivell, and the Admiral of Naples, and the Admiral of
Dunkirk, with their Vice and Rere-admirals, but for their names and the
strength of their Ships I was not so inquisitive as to give you any Relation
thereof.

Presently after day light, this present day aforesaid, the wind being at N. N
W. this Fleet being to the Eastward of Wight, The Fight began at 9 in the
morning, the 5. of September, 1639.
thwart of Arundell, The Hollander discryed them being right to Leeward off
them, upon which Admiral Trump called a short Council, and encouraged all his
Fleet now to behave themselves like Men, and then with Gods assistance he
doubted not, but they should do their Country good service and gain themselves
honor, the which all resolved with heart and hand to perform, and having the
Larbord-tacks aboard, held it up close upon a wind, and as they came neat unto
them they paid a little room to get from amongst them, and likewise to try
how their Ships did sail by the Spaniards, and perceiving that they went
better then the most part of their Enemies, they laskt it away with a fathom of
the sheat to the Eastward, and the Spanesh Admiral and some other that were
the best sailors gave them chase and the rest of the Fleet followed, the
Hollanders perceiving that they had got the Admiral and a part of the Fleet
from the rest, shortened sails, and about 9. of the clock in the morning the
Fight began; the Hollanders still as it were flying from them, but Birtht
themselves so, having a fair gale of wind, that in following each other, they
were but two Ships length a sunder, and when they looft up to give their broad
sides, one was clear of the other. But the first broad side that one of the
foremost ships of the Hollanders gave, by what accident no man knows, the
Ship blew up all to pieces, but some of their men were taken up by the
spaniards; which accident was much lamented by the Hollanders for the loss of
the Ship and Men, and likewise for the want of her force, being a good Ship of
36 Pieces of Ordnance.

Likewise after this another mischanee happened aboard their Vice Admiral De
White, he having a barrel of Powder in his Round-house to fill Cartridges,
which by negligence was fired and blew up the Round house whereon the Drummer
was beating his Drum, who was likewise taken up by the spaniards, the fire was
presently quenched and not much disheartning to the hollander, but a mighty
incouragament unto the spaniards, who did still pursue their Fight, Ceased
sighting at 3. after noone.
and the Hollanders in a seeming flight behaved themselves so well, that at 3.
a clock afternoon the spaniards began to grow weary, having his Masts and
yards shot, struck his Top-sayles and lay by the Lee, and staid for the rest of
his Fleet, and when they came up they all lay by the Lee together, to repair
their Masts, and rigging, upon which the Hollander run to Leewards off them out
of shot, and likewise clapped his Ship by the Lee, and called a Council and sent a
Frigot presently to call 9 other of their fleet from Duakirk road, September,
and gave him Instructions when he returned with those 9 Ships, to shoot of 2
Pieces of Ordnance every quarter of an hour, and when he was answered by one,
presently after the discharging of his 2 Pieces, 5. th
4 or 5 times one after the other, then they might be sure that it was their
Fleet, and might thereby steer with them, albeit it were dark night or thick
weather, the which as hereafter was carefully observed.

Toward night the wind shifted and came to the S.w. fair weather, they lay
all night by the Lee, and until afternoon the next day, before they could
fit themselves, and were drove between Beachy and Faire-Lee, and toward night
Sir Henry Mannoring Vice Admiral unto Sir John Pennington with 6. of his
Majesty's ships that were to lie between Beachy and the Ness, espying this
great Fleet, bore into the fleet, and having a Council aboard the Vice
admiral, 6. th
agreed to send Captain John Hall aboard of the Spanish Admiral, to command
him to strike his Flag, who was cour^eously entertained by the Spanish
Admiral, who related unto him their Fight that they had had with the
Hollanders the day before, and that they had sunk one of the Hollanders ships,
which was not so, for she was blown up by accident with her own Powder as is
heretofore mentioned; also that in their Fight in the Spanish Admiral there
was 60 men slain outright, and 30 men that were maimed; after a short
couference Captain Hall delivered his message to the Admiral, from his
Vice Admiral; which was to will him to strike his Flag. Don Antonio answered,
that he did expect to have as much freedom in the English Seas, as his Master
did give unto our Kings ships in his Harbors, which was to wear their Flag;
and therefore he would not strike his Flag; with which answer Captain Hall
returned unto Sir Henry Mannering, who presently made a fair Shot at the
Admiral. Upon which, both the Admiral and Vice Admiral stroke their Flags,
and hoyst them up again, which was as much as could be required of them in the
Sea. After which our Vice Admiral bore for the Downs, and the Spanish fleet
steered along to the Eastwards, very little wind Southerly, 7. th
and the Hollands fleet continually running before them with a short sail (and
never shot shot one at another. All Saturday it being thick weather) toward
night the wind came to the S. S. E. they being then thwart of Foulstone, and
the tide of Flood spent the Spaniards anchored to stop the Ebb, and the
Hollanders did the like, being some 4, or 5 miles from them, right in the wind
of them; the Spaniards bearing from them N. by W.

About 10 a clock at night, the Hollanders heard two Pieces of Ordnance toward
Calice, and they answered with one rejoicing to hear that their Dunkirk fleet
were so near unto them, who continuing shooting every half hour at first,
and every quarter of an hour after they heard one another, and by two a clock
in the morning the tide of Ebb being spent, and the 9 Ships from Dunkirk and
the Frigot were joined with them, they having got up their anchors, bore up,
all together upon the Spanish fleet and steered with them, N. by W. But the
Spaniards not being so vigilent as the Hollanders, was longer before they weyed
anchor then they were, so that the Flood being come the Hollanders had fallen to
the Eastwards off them, had they not espied the Admirals Lantern in the
main-top, by the which light they bore all upon him, and gave him every one
their broad side, and tore him exceedingly, and then to work pell-mell with
all the Fleet, and continued the fight, the Ordnance going off so fast, 8. th
Sunday.
that it was a wonder to those that heard and saw them. The Fight began again,
which was a very sore fight.


The wind then at S. and by W. the Spanish fleet haled over for the French
coast, and the Hollanders to windward off them, still continuing their fight
upon the Spanish, and Portugal squadrons, the Dunkirkers keeping still on the
Leeboughs off them without shot, and all the Lubeckers and other ships that had
the Soldiers in them, were a good birth a head of them all, some of them being
as we did conceive that looked upon them out of the Downs with prospective
Glasses, were past Callice. About 9 a clock we could perceive one of the great
Spaniards which proved the Admiral of Sivill, lie with her head to the
westward, with her mayn-yard shot down, and her mayn-top-sayle stroke; which
Ship was taken by Capt. Forran, a valiant Frenchman, that was Captain of one of
the States of Hollands small ships, he had the possession of the ship above an
hour, and not having men in his ship sufficient to man her, he did expect
that some of the Hollanders would have borne up unto him to spare him some
help, to carry her along with him. But whether it were out of Envy unto
him, because he was not of their Nation, and had taken so great a Ship with so
few men, as it is greatly to be suspected, for not one of them bore up unto
him to aid him. On the contrary side, the Admiral of the Spaniards, seeing one
of the Admirals of his Fleet taken cast about to rescue him, which caused
Captain Forran to rifle and pillage what they could, and took out the Captain
and all the principal men of that Ship to the number of 70 Men, aboard of his
ship and left her; after that the two spanish Admirals cast about, intending to
relieve the Ship that was taken by Forran, but the hollanders did ply them so
fast, especially the Vice Admiral of the Holland fleet, (as the English men
which were amongst the spaniards did relate unto us) that the spaniards laid
down their Arms and would not fight; so that they shot not one Piece of
Ordnance in almost half an hour the which we could very well perceive out of
the Downs; then the Dunkirkers fearing that their Admirals would be lost, and
those that had the Soldiers in them, which might have been in Dunkirke within
two hours to follow Instructions, which was to follow their Admiral, they all
cast about. The hollanders perceiving the Dunkirks making all the speed that
they could to relieve their Admirals, knowing them to be resolute men of War,
and fresh; and the Powder in his Fleet being almost all spent, about 10 a
clock he made Sail and stood away to the Westwards from them, having taken
one of the Spanish fleet, and as they afterward reported, had sunk another,
of the which I doubt; for they were not so far from us but that we could
have perceived a Ship to sink; and then he stood for Calice to supply
himself with Powder. 8.th Sunday.


The Hollanders having left the Spaniards, and the tide of Ebb being spent,
before they could fit the Admiral of Sivil to sail, the wind being at South,
and S. by W. except they would have lost that Ship, September, 1639.
the which the Admiral would not give way unto, and the flood being come they
could not fetch over unto the French coast, The Spenyards anchored at the South
foreland, and rode with Flags aloft,
but was forced to bear toward the Downs and anchored with all his Fleet,
between the South forland and Weymar Castle, which was 4, or 5 miles from us,
where they rode with their Flags aloft, there being 65 Sail of them.

His Majesty's fleet that was then in the Downs, under the Command of Sir John
Penington, were the Unicorn Admiral, the Henretta Maria Vice Admiral,
commanded by Sir Henry Mannering, the Antolope by Captain Stradling
Rereadmirall, the Bonaventure by Captain Richard Feelding, the Dreadnaught by
Capt. John Hall, What Ships were then in the Dewnes of the Kings.
the Providence by Captain Rob. Slingsby, the second Whelp by Capt. John
Burley, the 3. Whelp by Capt. Philip Hill, the Roe-buck Pinness by Mr. Wollard,
the Unicorns a Merchant man by Capt. Edw. Popham, with some other Merchant men,
which were in the Downs at that time.

Sir John Penington was very much discontented, that they should ride so near
him with their Flags aloft, but could not presently send unto them, the wind
and tide being against them that should go; but at 5. a clock in the
afternoon the tide beginning to slack, Captain Robert Slingsby and Captain
Edward Popham, was sent unto them to command them to take in their Colors. And
when they came to the Spaniards they were courteoussy entertained, and
delivered their message; to which the Spaniards replied as they had formerly
done unto our Vice Admiral, viz. That they did expect as much liberty in the
King of Englands Roads as the King of Englands ships had in their Harbors,
where they were suffered to wear their Colors without control, yet rather
then that should breed any difference, if our Admirals Instructions did reach
so far, as to command in their Flags, he did entreat, that our Admiral
would be pleased to send them a Command in writing, that he might show it his
Master at his return, and he would presently obey his Command, September,
1639.
and withal desired that he might have leave to come into the Road for the
better security of his Fleet; about 7. at night they returned with this Answer.
Upon which, Sir John Penington resolved not to send them any thing in writing,
but gave order to those Captains to go again abord of them betimes next
morning, to command them to do their Obeisance unto his Majesty of England,
who was Admiral of all those Seas, and to certify them if they refused it,
that he would come with his Fleet and compel them thereunto. Unto which
purpose he gave me Order at day light in the morning, Monday, 9.
to go abord of all the English Merchant ships, great and small that were in
the road to Command them to make ready to set Sail, to go along with the
Admiral if he did wey, and to assist him in what he should Command them to
do, the which I did very early in the morning; and in the mean time unmoored
all our ships. Captain Slingsby and Popham likewise followed their Command by
day light. But at half an hour past 7. a clock, our Admiral sent me after
them with his Pinnesse, to know the reason why their Flag was not stroke, and
why the Captains did not return to give him their Answer, and in the mean
time he would get his Fleet and all the Merchant men loofe and turn it up
toward the Spaniards; for if there were any delay they should not have tide
enough to get to them.

We rowed away with all speed, and when I came abord of the Admiral the
Captain of the ship gave me entertainment, and led me aft unto the Admiral,
who was in Council with his other Captains in the Gallery. But coming into
the Cabin, I found our two Captains sitting there something discontent, that
they could not have their Resolutions; unto whom I related my message, upon
which they both went into the gallery with me and showed the Admiral,
wherefore I was sent, they gave me civil entertainment, and answered me that
they would do any thing that our Admiral should command them, but said that
they were writing to him; September. 1643.
to the which I made no answer having no spanish, but put the nail of my thumb
to my teeth and gave a snap, and said; My Speech to the Spanish Admiral.
Nath o pre ell skeetoe, bessee Lee pavilyon, etterman notter naverros, some
preat a venae; which is in English, Strike your Flags, otherwise our ships are
ready to come toward you (and showed him our ships, who were diverse of them
under sail) and would force him to strike. And so I parted from them out of
the Cabin, and made as much have away as possible I could, the wind being
southerly with sail and Oars, we made good speed toward our ships; yet
before we were a mile from the Spaniards the Admiral took in his Flag, and
shot of a Piece of Ordnance over his Vice Admiral, who likewise stroke his
Flag and furled it, and so did all the rest of the Ships that wore Colors. And
presently after, they percelving the Hollands fleet under Callice cliffes
making toward the Downs. The Spaniards like men scared out of their wits,
albeit they had a windward tide, and might have got up all their Anchors before
the Hollanders could get half Seas over, or come near them by 4, or 5
leagues, the most of them like mad men cut their Cables in the halss and came
into the Road and anchored to the Southwards off us, the Admirals saluted us
with 7, and 5 Pieces, the Vice-admirals with 5, and 3 Pieces. After which the
Hollanders came all in, and saluted us every Ship and anchored to the
southwards off the Spaniards, Monday, 9.
after which Sir John Penington fearing that the Hollanders might attempt
something upon them in the Road, he sent me unto Admiral Tromp Admiral of the
Hollanders, to forwarne him from meddling to attempt any thing in his Majesty's
road, the which he promised me faithfully to obey; yet for his better security
to prevent any such attempt, Sir John sent to the Spaniards Captain Slingsby to
command them to birth themselves to the Northwards off us, unto which purpose
Sir John would give them his birth, because there was not water enough for some
of their ships to ride to the Northwards off him, September, 1639:
if he did not remove, and assured them that he would Ride with his Fleet
between the Hollands fleet and them, and gave Order to all his Fleet, and all
the English Merchant men that were in the road, to birth themselves
accordingly; the which was performed by us. When the tide of Ebb came on
Tuesday morning, but not so punctually as we desired, by reason that many of
the spaniards did not remove themselves; after noone there came in 4. Tuesday,
10.
Hollands men of War more, wherein was Viceadmirall De White, that carried
the Spaniards into Holland, that they had taken as is aforesaid, and left his
own Ship to be repaired and was appointed another ship, one of the best they
had in the Road; the Hollanders being in number 30. sail of men of War. At
night there came a Packet from the Earl of Northumberland unto Sir John
Penington, wherein there was mentioned, that according to the Articles of
Peace, between his Majesty of England and the King of Spain, they might take
8. Days liberty, to repair, or refresh themselves, which time being expired
they were to depart the Coast.

In the morning the Spaniards removed from amongst us, and we did birth all
the Kings ships according to our intent, and the Hollanders did all wey and
took their births to the Southwards of us; but after noone Admiral Tromp sent
his Vice Admiral, and Rereadmirall, and some other Captains to desire leave
from Sir John, that some of their ships might ride to the Northwards of the
Spaniards, fearing that some of the Spaniards might run away in the night,
Wednesday, 11.
to the which Sir John made answer, that the Channels were narrow and the
nights dark; so that he was verily persuaded they could not, nor would not
put it to such a hazard as to go that way, yet he said, that if so be that
they did doubt of any such thing, they might if they pleased send some of their
Ships to ride to the Northwards in the mouth of the Gualls, and likewise at the
inner Channel, between the Brakes and Quearns, September 1639.
and at the North sands head; but to ride to the northwards of them in the
Road, he would by no means condescend unto it, with which answer they
returned, but did not send any Ships to the Northwards as aforesaid. Toward
night the Marquis Hamilton, the Earl of Denby, and Mr. Some of the Spanish
ships missing.
Indimeon Porter and others, came from London abord of Sir John and lodged
there all the night, the wind at W. S w.

At day light in the morning the wind continuing, we did miss 13, or 14 sail
of the small Spanish ships that rode to the Northward of ns, the which did
trouble Sir John Penington exceedingly; Thursday, 12.
after noone the Lord Marquis and his Brother, with the Earl of Denby rode
away for London, the Hollanders sent abord unto Sir John, to desire leave that
they might ride to the northwards of the Spaniards, the which he presently
granted, with an expression of sorrowfulness; that the Spaniards had made such
an escape. 14 Sail of them past by us and saluted us, and birtht themselves to
the best advantage to the northwards of the Fleet within less then musket shot
of the Spany-rds.

In the morning by sun rising diverse of the Rere-admirals of the Spanish fleet
put out their Flags it being one of their Holidayes, but we shot a fair shot
at the next Ship to us, The 8 English ships camein with 2000 Spanish soldiers
in them.
and presently they took in all their Flags; after which the Exchange Capt.
Will. Brown, and the Peregrene, Peter Tatom of London Mr. and the Assure of
Ipswich, Isaac Bromwell Mr. and 5. other English ships came into the Downs,
with 2000 spanish soldiers in them, the which they should have carried unto
Duakirk, the wind at W. S W. fair weather. They were no sooner at an anchor,
but the Hollanders sent abord to Sir John to complain of their coming into
the rode. Our Admiral sent me presently to stay them all until they had order
from him to depart, Friday, 13
and he presently wrote a Packet up to the Lord Admiral for directions
therein; after noone the Admiral of the Spaniards sent unto Admiral
Penington, September, 1639.
to defire him to stay the Hollanders in the Rode two tides after he was gone
with his Fleet, who answered, that he could not do the Hollanders that
injustice, but did advice them to make all the speed that they could and get
into Fl^nders before the winds came Easterly, otherways they would have more
enemies come out of Holland then they did expect.

The wind then blew stiff at S W. by W. and at night westerly, and so
continued all night, and all the day following; this day Sir John sent to
invite Admiral Tremp to dinner with him to morrow, the which he modestly
denied, desiring excuse (for his business was very great that he was to look
after.) Toward night the wind southered and likely to prove foul weather,
Saturday, 14.
which caused me to doubt of the safety of the Spaniards, they riding so thick
and being very badly fitted with ground-tackle. Amongst other discourse with
Admiral Tromp, he said, that if the weather should storm up, as it does
usually at this time of the year, Admiral Tromps account made up what would
become of the Spanish fleet
Within short time the King of England would have all the Spaniards Guns; the
Country people would have the Ships, and the Devil would have the men.
Meaning that they would all drive a shore if not worse. As yet, the 8. English
ships with the Soldiers for the most part rode amongst the Hollanders; Sir
John Penington sent to them to Command them to birth themselves to the
Northwards of the Spaniards, but some of them could not wey their anchors,
their men were so feeble with sickness, and indeed there was many Seamen sick
in all the Spanish fleet. Sunday, 15.
This day came the second Whelp from Dunkirk, and Capt. Burley certified our
Admiral, that there was 13. sail of the Spanish fleet arived there with 3000
men. These were the Ships that ran away to the Northwards in the night which
are formerly mentioned, the wind being all this day between the SE, and S.S E.
which caused the Hollanders to rejoice, Monday, 16.
for with those winds they did expect more aid. Toward daylight on Monday,
the wind backed again to S. S W. September, 1639.
and Three small Hollands men of War came in, who were part of a Fleet of 20
sail, most of them great ships, 20 Sail of Hollands men of War more came in.
who had amongst them besides their Seamen 1000 choice Soldiers to be put into
these ships that were here; which Fleet came all in that night, and the next
morning they being now 50 sail, and the Spaniards as many.

Before day there came a Packet to our Admiral, wherein the Lord Admiral sent
word, that diverse of his Majestis ships were fitting up at Chatham, and 6
Merchant ships at London, and would very suddenly be down with him, in the
mean time, he gave him order, to stay all the English ships that were in the
Road, and all that should come into the road (either outward or homewards
bound) to assist him if any occasion should be for it. Upon which our Admiral
gave me a warrant to stay all the English in the road if they had 12 Pieces of
Ordnance or upwards, and I found but 10 of that force, the names whereof, and
the Commanders names were as follows, viz.

The William and Ralph, James Flawes Mr. having 18 Pieces of Ordnance. From
Zant.


The Hope of London, William Iope Mr. with 16 Pieces of Ordnance, bound to
Plymouth. The Anne Bonaventure of London, William Spencer Mr. 24. Pieces of
Ordnance. The Speedwell of London, Benjamin Peter's Mr. with 25 Pieces of
Ordnance. The John and Thomas of London, Diggory Man Mr. with 22 Pieces of
Ordnance.
All 4. bound for Plymouth to load Pilchers.

Thomas Clarke Mr. of the Leopard of London, with 20 Pieces of Ordnance, bound
to Maligo.

John Flowers Mr. of the Dorset of London, Merchant ships taken up.
with 18 Pieces of Ordnance, bound for Summer Istands.

John Flowers Mr. of the Golden Eagle of London, with 22 Pieces, bound for
Barbary.

Richard Deane Mr. September 1639.
of the Mary of London, with 16 Pieces of Ordnance, bound for the Canaries.

The Martha of London, Tho: Wiliams Mr. with 15 Pieces of Ordnance, bound for
St. Lukar.

All these Masters J commanded to be ready to assist the Admiral to the
uttermost of their power, if any occasion should present it self by any Fight
between the Hollanders and Spaniards. Tuesday, 17.
This day there came a Packet from the Lord Admiral to our Admiral, wherein
was mentioned that the Dutch Ambassador, upon a letter that he had received
from Admiral Tromp, made a complaint of our Admiral, that he should say unto
Capt. Cats Rere-admirall of the Hollanders, and some other Captains, that he
sent abord unto Sir John, to desire leave that some of his Ships might ride to
the northwards of the Spaniards, as is before mentioned the 11.th day, That he
would engage his head that the spanish ships could not nor should not go to
the Northwards in the night; otherways he would have sent ships to the
Northward to look unto them, the which did trouble our Admiral exceedingly.
And the next day in the morning, he sent Captain Richard Fielding, Capt.
Robert Slingsby, Capt. Edward Popham, and my self, abord of the Hollands
Admiral, to justify that our Admiral did never engage himself unto Capt.
Cats and the other Captain, that the Spaniards should not go out to the
Northwards in the night; for we did all of us hear all the Conference that
past between our Admiral and Capt. Cats, and we gave him to understand that
our Admiral did not take it well from him, that he should write such
falsities of him unto their Ambassador. To the which Admiral Tromp answered,
Wednesd. 18.
that he had writ nothing but what his Rere-admirall Capt. Cats had related
unto him; which was, that Sir John Penington did say, that he would engage his
head that the spanish ships could not nor should not go out in the Night. But
Capt. Cats being there present, denied in secret unto us that he never
mentioned, should not, but that his Admiral had added that unto the message
that he brought him, and as I conceived thereby the better to clear himself
from his neglect of sending some ships to Ride in the Chanells to the
Northwards as aforesaid, But Cats durst not openly deny it, fort hen he should
have given his Admiral the lie: so the fault was wholly laid upon Capt. Cats,
with the which answer we returned. Afterward I was sent again single aboard of
Admiral Tromp as it were to give him a visit by my self, and to have an hour
or twoconference together, to which he had diverse times invited me familiarly
and called me brother, hoping thereby to get something out of him being single
more then we could when there was more company with him. But I could not learn
from him, that he had as yet received any other instructions from the States
then his general instructions; albeit that he had diverse times writ unto them
for some other instructions, what he should do in this particular business;
But as yet could hear of any, only that they did leave all to his discretion,
which did much trouble him (for says he) if so be that the Spaniards should
begin to stir from thence, if he did not begin with them before they were
wholly out of the Road when they came a broad many of them if it were a gail of
wind would escape them; and again on the contrary if so be that he should
begin with them in the Road, then he doubted that we would take part with the
Spaniards, whereby a breach might be made between his Majesty and the States
of Molland, which would not easily be reconciled, 18. Wendsd.
if so be that the States should allow and support him in what he should do in
this kind.

But he doubted that rather then the States would have any difference with his
Majesty they would leave him to the mercy of the King, and then said he it may
be that I may be hanged for my good service. Wherefore he resolved not to begin
nor do any thing in the Road unless they gave him warrant for it; also in our
discourse he demanded of me how many ships we had of the Kings and Merchant men
that we had taken up in the Road? I answered that we were four or five and
twenty Sail: well said he, you are so many, and the Spaniards are 50 Sail,
and we are (said he) of our Fleet 50 Sail, I would you were all enemies, and
had freedom to fight in the Road: to which I replied, that if the Spaniards
were all manned with English men, and I had the command of them, we would beat
them out of the Sea; unto which he replied you do mistake me, I do mean that I
would that your Fleet were away, and so many Spaniards in your place, mane'd
with their own Nation, and then he would not fear to buckle with them all.

After this I had order to take up all the small English ships that had
Ordnance in the Road, and to give them order to put our pendants. One half I
appointed for the Admiral and the other half for the Vice-admiralls squadron,
the wind toward night at S. S. E. and S. E. by S. and began blow hard, and
about 3 a clock in the morning very much wind; so that diverse of the Spaniards
drove and brought all their anchors a head, one of them drove thwart a
Genawesses (...) and put her from her anchors and Cables, who drove a shore
right against the Beacon that stands amongst the sandhills; 19th.
but it being a most a quarter ebb before she drove a shore, and being a strong
ship the water fell from her so fast that he took no hurt that tide, and before
the flood came again the wind Westward and proved fair weather; so that the
Sea was very smooth, and when she fleeted set sail having one anchor and Cable
brought her from one of the Pilots of Deal, and anchored amongst the
Hollanders. This day there came a packet from the Lord Admiral, with order to
our Admiral to stay five vessels, that it seems had taken upon them to carry
over all the Spaniards to Dunkirk that were brought in the English ships, and
the names of the Masters of these Barks, viz. were as follows, Thursday 19th.
Richard Gilbert, Henry Read, Hugh Laws, and Richard Tattom, and William
Williams; to which purpose Sir John Penington gave me a warrant and command to
search diligently amongst the Fleet for these Masters, and vessels, which order
I showed unto Admiral Tromp, the which did cause him to rejoice exceedingly to
see that his Majesty was so just in his carriage between them and the
Spaniards; and said that by his next he would make it known unto his Masters
the States.

All that afternoon and the next morning I searched for these Vessels, and
went abord of all the small Vessels in the Road, but could not find any
Soldiers abord of any of them, and likewise forwarned all of them in the Kings
name that they should not take in any Spanish Soldiers to transport them for
Flanders, and amongst these Vessels by inquiry, I was certified that Thomas
Gilbert, and Hugh Laws, 20th. Friday.
were staid at Gravsend, and as yet the other three were at London, where we
conceive they are likewise staid. But this order came something to late for the
most of the Soldiers were sent away before by Dover-men, Deall, and
Ramsgate-men with other small craft, that took them abord in the dark nights
and carried them away; the wind this day being at S.S.E. three Hollanders more
came in, and two turned out at the South-sands-head, all the night following
not much wind only some puffs: with thunder lightning, and Rain; in the
morning we could perceive that diverse Hollanders more were come in that night,
and diverse other that we did see without the sand, whereof 12 of them were
victualers as the Hollanders that came in did report and some of them were to
be made fireships after that there victuals was disposed off. Some of them
got in before night and some could not; John Whitman this day came in with a
great Hamborough ship that he had bought at Dunkirk with 22 Pieces of Ordnance,
swhich ship I likewise stayed by warrant.

21. Saturday.
Afternoon our Admiral sent Captain Robert Slings by, and my self abord of
Admiral Tromp, to command him to give order, that two of his ships that Rode
to the Southward of us, might be removed from thence; and that he should not
suffer any of his ships hereafter to do the like, for it was a kind of hindering
of him in his Majesty's Road. But at our first coming abord before we could
deliver our message, he circumvented us, and said do you see those fellows,
meaning the Captains of those two ships, how they have Birth themselves I think
the devil is in them for I cannot get them to follow my directions as they
should; and thereupon presently sent to warrants and caused them two remove,
21. Saturday.
and did likewise promise, that when his fireships did come, he would send both
his Vice-admiralls abord to Sir John, that he might if he pleased send men
abord of them to search them, and promised that he would cause them to ride to
the Southwards amongst his ships and promised that he would not atempt any
thing in the Road, but would be conformable to to what our Admiral should
desire or Command. Little wind toward night, in the morning the wind
southerly; the rest of the ships that we did see thwart the sand and 10
fireships came into the Road; the third Whelp likewise came in from Dunkirk,
who said that there was not any ships there that were making ready. The Dutch
Admiral sent both his Vice-admiralls abord to Sir John, to proffer him if he
pleased to send men abord of their fireships to search them, and promised that
they should not Ride near unto any of his ship, nor near unto the Spanish Fleet.

This day came in two English ships of 14 Pieces of Ordnance each ship, the one
was the Blessing of London, the other the James of Yarmouth both bound for
Farrow in Portugal, which ships were likewise staid by Sir John's order; 21.
Sunday.
after-none Don Anthony de Oquendo the Spanish Admiral, sent one of his
Captains unto our Admiral Sir John Penington, to desire him to give him safe
conduct for his masts that were made at Dover for some of his Fleet, into the
Downs, for he feared that the Hollanders might seize upon them between Dover
and the Downs; upon which our Admiral answered the Spanyard that he would
take course that their masts should not be intercepted; and presently after
sent me abord of the Hollands Admiral to charge and command him not to hinder
the passage of the Spaniards masts from coming from Dover, to which Admiral
Trump answered that he was so far from hindering of the coming of their
masts, that he would fetch them from Dover for them, The Spanard. Masts.
if they would give him leave, and to further their business he would send men
abord of their ships to set their masts for them, and presently gave order to
one of the Captains of his Frigates to repair with all speed to Dover Road,
commanding him with his men and boat to give them the best assistance that
they could to get their masts out of the Peer of Dover, and to bring them into
the Downs: which answer was sent to the Spanish Admiral. Little wind, our
Admiral gave order to all the English to get up their Top-masts, and Yards,
and that all things should be in a readiness in every ship if any aoccasion
should present it self. In the morning the wind t N. by W. the second Whelp
conveyed. 4 Barks for Dunkirk, which Barks I searched for Soldiers, and
afterward proffered Admiral Trump that he might search them by some of his
Captains for the which he showed himself very thankful, but answered that he
would trust my report for a greater matter then that; at this time all the
Cannary men and other English ships of small force that were staid, were
released by Sir John, who set sail to follow their intended voyages; also Mr.
James Flawes that came from Zant in the Dorsset, 23. Monday.
Mr. John Flowers bound for the Summer Islands, and John Whitman in the
Hambrough from Dunkirk, having procured warrants for their release, were all
discharged and set sail out of the Road, and the third Whelp was sent to
Chatham; this day the Spanish Admiral sent word to our Admiral, that he did
hope to set sail to morrow with those ships that were ready, if Sir John would
give him leave, whose answer was, that he was so far from hindering of him
that he would further him the most he could; but it was but a bravade, for he
never intended it.

The next morning more Dutchmen of War came into the Road, I was sent abord
to Admiral Trump, to will him to give order for the removing of four of his
ships that were anchord on sea-bord of us, the which he gave present order for
and they were removed. This day there came abord our Admiral, the Lord of
Carliles son, and some other Lords, who did after go abord of the Spanish and
Dutch Admiral, and at their being abord of Amirall Trumps, they heard one of
his Captains complain to him that a hundredth and 50 Spanish Soldiers were
transported over to Dunkirk in the last convoy that went from hence; 24th.
Tuseday.
But he answered him that he did not believe it, yet at the return of the Lords
abord of Sir John, they relating unto him what they had heard caused Sir John
to be something angry, and sent Sir Henry Mannering his Vice Admiral, and
Captain Pophaem and me abord of the Dutch Adimrall to clear that aspersion,
but it was in a manner cleared before, for he protested unto us that he did
never believe one word of it; But said he, this Capt. that told him this news
is very subject to relate false tales; after this answer; we demanded of him if
that he had as yet received any other instructions from the States of Holland
then he had formerly, he said not one word. This day the Earl of Warwick in
his Pinnesse called the Penington came down from London to view the two Fleets,
the Dutch being now about 80 sail or upwards, the wind Easterly and so it
continued; the next day Sir John received order from the Lord Admiral for the
clearing of the Mary of London, Richard Dearme Mr. for the Cannaries, after
which Sir John sent me abord of all the English ships that brought Soldiers,
and to take them up that I found fitting for his Majesty's service; but I found
but three of them fitting for that service, which was the Exchange of London,
William Brown Captain with 32 Pieces of Ordnance, the Perregreen of Loadon,
Peter Tattom Mr. with 17 Pieces of Ordnance, and the Assurance of London, Isaac
Bromwell Mr. with 18 Pieces of Ordnance, 25th. Wendsday.
in the which ships (especially the two last) there was diverse sick men, for the
rest of that Fleet they had so many sick men that they were cleared away to go
whether they would; the wind continued Easterly, and more Hollanders came into
the Road. A Packet came from London certifying Sir John Pennington there was
order for 6 ships more of the Kings to be made ready with all expedition,
besides those 8 ships and 6 Merchant men formetly mentioned, and that they were
all ready to set sail, nothing wanting but a wind to bring them to us; the
wind being st^ll Easterly, in the morning Sir John sent me abord of Admiral
Trump to invite him to dinner but he desired to be excused, Trump invited the
second time to dinner.
the which he did relate unto me that I might give Sir John our Admiral to
understand that it was not for want of love and respect unto him, for he said
in the first place, I have so much business that I cannot be absent from my
ship one half hour, muchlesse three hours which is but a usual time for a
dinner; secondly he said that he had a great many of clownish Boars amongst his
Captains, 26th. Thursday.
that neither understood civillity nor manners and that they would be ready to
m^k^ the States acquainted with my being absent from my business, and would
not stick to say as they had formerly done by my Predesessor, the G^ave Van
Dorpt, which was cast in his teeth diverse times by the States, that he did
neglect his business and lost many oportunities of doing them good services,
by feasting with our Admiral Sir John Penington, to whom he desired to
remember his humble service, and said that hereafter he was in hope to come
hither when he should not have so much business, and then he would wait upon
him. This after noone 9 Hollanders more came into the Road; also one Mr. Smith
of Marget who is Water baily of that Port, or deputy unto Mr. John Jacob
Sergeant of the Admiralty for the Sink Ports, came abord to Sir John to
complain that this morning a Hollands Frigate came into their road, with a
Pendant on the main-top-mast-head, and a lack on the Bolspit, being of his
Majesty's Colors, and an Ancient on his poop of English Colors; This Frigate
took two Catches full of Spanish Soldiers that rode at anchor close by the
Peer-head, upon which Mr. 2 Catehes taken by the Mollouders the Soldiers in
them.
Smith my Lord Wardens officer, went abord of the Fright, and demanded of him
how he durst presume to wear his Majesty's Colors, and under those Colors to
come into his Road and take away his subjects and their Vessels, the Hollanders
answered by Sir John Peningtons order, Mr. Smith demanded to see that order,
upon which they brought out their Admiralls warrant but could not show none
from Sir John, where upon he fell a starne of the Vessel, and made a figne to
the Fort who shot presently at them, and shot the Hollander through and
through: yet he ran thencewith the two Catches and carried them clear away;
Sir John hearing this relation was exceedingly vexed at it, 26. Thursday.
and presently sent Sir Henry Mannering his Vice Admiral, and myself abord of
Admiral Trump, to require satisfaction from him, for the misdemeanor of that
Captain that did presume to wear his Majesty's Colors and to take those
Vessels from under his Fort; and likewse for saying that he did it by our
Admitalls order; to the which he answered that he had given order to John
Everson the Vice Admiral of Flushing, who had the command of all the Squadron
of ships that rode to the Northwards of the Spaniards, to send a small Pinnesse
that way, to look out for two Catches with Soldiers, that he had notice of,
that had taken Soldiers out of one of the English Ships the night before, and
if so be that they could take them, to carry them for Flushing; but for the
wearing the English Colors, or giving him order to take them under the Fort,
or that they should say they did it by Sir John Peningtons order, all these he
utterly disclaimed (and said, that he would give order, that none of his Fleet
should presume to do the like hereafter,) after this answer he told us that the
Lord Connaway, and Colonel Goring desired to be abord with him in his Ship,
the Colonel alleging that it was his duty, to do the best Service he could
for his Masters the States of Holland, from whence he did acknowledge to have a
great part of his livelihood, and, the Lord Conaway desired for experience sake
to be aboard of him, but desired that he might have his great Cabin, and that
he might set up a Bed-sted in it, but he said that he could not spare his
Cabin, and said he, I have no other lodging for my self, nor any place for my
Captains to meet in, when I have occasion to call a Council, which is almost
every day upon one business or other, and likewise he told his Lordship, that
he had neither Cooks nor Cookrooms to dress his meat in, for said he, for my
part I can make a meal with a pickled Herring, and a Ham of Bacon; he likewise
told them that they could not do him any Service, they might chance if they
stayed with him, to lose a Leg or an Arm, or it may be their lives, Thursday
26th.
for they would stand but as a mark for the Enemies to shoot at: At our return
abord, Sir Henry Manering did speak as much unto the Lord Conaway, and
concluded, that if he should come to any hurt in that Service, he would be
laughed at, and derided for adventuring his person into such danger, it not
being for his King nor Countries Service.

In the morning little wind Southerly, and so continued most part of the day,
about noone the Spaniards Masts from Dover was towed into the Downs, by a
Hollands Frigot, who came to an Anchor with them close by the Spanish Admiral,
and delivered them unto him, ^he Spaniards lasts brought.
for which service the Spanish Admiral sent the Captain of the Frigot a Butt
of Sack. This night, the Second Whelp was to convoy two Barks to Dover, and
with them two others from Dover to Dunkirk, Sir John sent me abord of these two
Barks, to search for Soldiers, ^^th. ^riday.
and also to remember his love unto Admiral Tromp, and proffer him if he
pleased, to send some likewise of his Fleet with me to search them, for the
which he returned hearty thanks unto Sir John, and did at first deny it, but at
that time there being in Council with him most of the Captains of his
Squadron, for their better satisfaction he sent two Captains along with me, and
after our return they certifying, that no Soldiers were abord of them, Admiral
Tromp did most heartily desire me to excuse him to our Admiral for his so
doing. In the morning before day the Whelp set sail out of Dover Road with her
convoy, at which time the same Frigot that had towed the Masts from Dover the
day before, lying at the South-forland, to prevent any passages between
Flanders and the Spanish Fleet, the Frigot perceiving a Billander to be a good
birth astern of the Whelp bound for Dunkirk, intending to cut her off, but the
Billander cast about, and being chased by the Frigot, was forced to run ashore
under the Castle of Dover, where the Frigot ran ashore closse by her amongst
the Rocks, and the water falling, was dry aground, but being fair wether she
got off again, but took the Billander, upon which a Merchant of Dover came
abord unto Sir John Penington for relief, for the which business he sent Capt.
Stradling, Capt. Feelding and the Merchant, and my self, abord of Admiral
Tromp, but we found him not in his own ship, for at that time he was at a
Council held aboard of his Vice Admiral Dewhite, unto whom we related our
message, unto which he made answer that he did think that the Captain and the
men that were in that Frigot, were drunk with the Bu^t of Sack that the
Spaniard gave him the day before, for he had no Commission for what he had
done, and vowed that he would punish him for it, if he did not give him the
better answer, and gave order that the Billander should presently be delivered;
and said, that he would send warrants to all his Fleet to command them that
they should not meddle with any Vessels within shot of any of his Majesty's
Forts, and Castles, upon no occasion whatsoever, and for the present gave this
Command unto all the Captains that were then abord with him, which were the
greatest part of of his Fleet. 28th. Saturday.
After which by some discourse that we had with him, we did gather, that they
had an intent to do something suddenly upon the Spaniards; upon which
information, our Admiral presently writ to Admiral Tromp, commanding him not
to attempt any thing upon his Enemy in the Road, for if he did, he should find
him his mortal Enemy, and that he would make such a Breach between his Majesty
and the States that would not be easily reconciled, to which he answered, that
he had no Order to do any thing here in the Road, neither was he yet resolved,
to attempt any thing, but when he did he would give our Admiral notice
thereof, the which answer we returned. But our Admiral fearing the worst, and
the better to prepare the Spaniards, sent Captain Robert Slingsby unto Don
Anthony the Spanish Admiral, for to certify him, that he doubted that his
Enemies would assault him suddenly, and wished him to be ready to defend
themselves; and also to assure him, that upon any attempt we should take
against the Assailant, the which message did much encourage the Spaniard, who
said he would give present order for his Fleet to birth themselves, for the
best advantage to succor one another; and returned most humble Thanks unto our
Admiral.

In the morning there came a packet from the Lord Admiral, advising that the
Hollanders and French Ambassadors had engaged themselves unto his Majesty, that
the Hollanders should not attempt any thing upon their Enemies in this Road, so
that Sir John might discharge all the Merchants ships that were stayed by him,
and also he writ that now he did not intend to come down himself with that
Fleet that was making ready, yet they should be hastened down with all
expedition, Sir John sent me abord of Admiral Tromp to certify him, what
their Ambassadors had promised, he answered, that he would not break their
promise, neither had he ever such an intent, except his Masters should give him
express order for it, which answer I returned, and found aboard of our
Admiral the Earl of Arundell and his Sons, the wind being Northerly and the
first of flood. Admiral Tromp heaved out his fore-top Sail, and so did diverse
of his Fleet, and we did the like, and rode apike with our Anchor, being very
doubtful that the Hollanders would set Sail, and fall on presently upon the
Spaniards. The Lord Marshall hearing, that we doubted, the fight might
presently begin, he would not stay dinner with Sir John, albeit he did most
solemnly invite him, But went presently abord of Admiral Tromp, where he had
an excellent good pickle Herring for his Breakfast, and from thence he went
ashore, the Hollanders weyed only to see their Anchors, and let them fall
again. Our Admiral was very unwilling, for all that Admiral Tromp had
promised, as yet to clear away the Merchants ships, until farther conference
with Admiral Tromp, and to that purpose after dinner he sent his Vice Admiral
Sir Henry Manering, and Captain Stradling, Captain Feelding, and Capt. Popham
abord of him, unto whom he promised as much as formerly he had done to me,
^^nday. ^^th.
with some addition; which was, that he would give our Admiral notice before he
would begin with them, and then he hoped that he would do his best, A
misconstru^ng of Admiral Tromps words.
with this Answer they returned to our Admiral, and construed Admiral Tromps
words of saying, that he hoped they would do their best, as it were a way of
challenge, that we should do our best and our worst against them. Upon which
Sir John resolved not to clear the Merchants ships, but sent a packet thereof
presently to the Lord Admiral, and gave me order to wey our Anchor in the
morning, and to get farther off, and to ride without all the Fleet, the wind
being all Easterly, the which command was performed betimes in the morning,
after which our Admiral sent Captain Slingsby abord of the Spanish Admiral,
to assure him, that he did not remove his Fleet farther off the shore, to leave
an open gap for the Hollander to come in upon him, but to be the more readyer
to assist him upon all occasions, for the which he returned most hearty thanks,
but withal did complain of a Hollands Frigot, that was amongst their Fleet
yesterday toward night, and they fearing her to be a Fier-ship shot a Musket
at her, and demanded whether they would lay him abord or no, to which the
Hollanders replied, that he would be abord of him in the morning. Upon which
Sir John sent me abord of the Hollanders, to inquire wherefore he should
threaten to be abord the Spaniards in the morning.

I was no sooner come into the Cabin, to Admiral Tromp, but he began to
complain of that very business, saying, that heand his Vice Admiral, and some
other of his Captains, before Sunsetting.

The last night, went in one of his Frigots to view the strength of the Spanish
Fleet, and as they past amongst them, one ship shot a Musket shot through the
Frigots Misson, not far above his Head and his other Captains, upon which says
he, I sent one of my Captains in my Shallop abord of the Spaniard, and at his
Ships side, told the Captain that he had broken the liberty of his Majesty of
Englands Road, by shooting at him, and withal threatened that upon that Breach,
they would be abord of them in the morning, but said he, I did it but to scare
them, for he never had any such intent, for he would not as he had diverse times
promised, attempt any thing upon them, without givingour Admiral notice
thereof, and said, then he hoped that he would do his best for us, to the
which, I demanded whether that he meant his best and his worst against them,
^^th.
he answered me God forbid that I should say so; for that were a kind of
challenging the King of England in his own Road, Monday,
I pray you said he mistake not my meaning, for my English is not very good,
and I speak in our Dutch phrase, to do the best for us, my meaning was that
you would shoot over us, Admiral Tromp clears himself of a miscoustruction
of a word that he speak.
and to hit us; to which I replied, that his meaning was otherwise interpreted
yesterday, by our Vice Admiral, for they understood it as a challenge, that we
should do our best and our worst, and as I thought our. Admiral had sent up a
packet of it unto his Majesty, or the Lord Admiral, upon which he did vow and
protest that he did never mean any such thing, and the Dutch Audient of Callis,
that was abord with him, did aver the same; with which Message I returned,
but Admiral Tromp was very much perplexed at it, and desired the Audient above
said, and some other Gentlemen and Captains that he had abord with him, for to
come abord unto our Admiral, to clear that aspersion which was laid upon him,
the which they performed, and gave Sir John very good satisfaction therein, and
did according to their request send up an other packet to clear this mistake,
or misconstruction of his words. After noone the Lord of Suffolk being Lord
Warden of the sinck Ports, came to our ships side, and afterward Rowed round
about all the Fleet, and returned to Dover, the Wind still continuing
Easterly, by which means those Ships that we expected from London, and Chatham
could not come unto us.

October 1639,.
In the morning the wind at E, The Spaniards (...) missing.
b. N. Don Corolus sent one of his Captains abord unto Sir John to complain
that his Sattee was taken out of the Road last night, Sir John answered him,
that the fault was their own, for to Ride with such a small Vessel so far
from their Fleet; for an Adviser as he conceived should ride closse by the
Admiral; and likewise said that he could not look after every one of their
Vessels, yet thus much he would do for them, if they could hear that she were
put into any Harbor in England he would be a means that she should be stayed,
and kept for them.

Before noone the Earl of Holland and diverse other Lords came abord, and dined
with Sir John; The packet Boat rifled by one of the Hollanders.
Sir John was advertised from Dover, that one of the Hollands Fleet had
searched and rifled his Majesty's Packet Boat, but could not name the Captain
that did it, Sir John sent presently unto the Hollands Admiral, to know how
they durst presume to do it, who did utterly disclaim it, and presently gave it
under his Hand, October 1. 1639.
that he had given strict order unto all his Fleet in general that no man
should interrupt, or meddle with the Packet-boat, and that if so be that we
could bring him the Captains name, we should see that he would severly punish
him, Friday.
with which answer returned, after dinner the Lords went all abord of the Dutch
Admiral, who entertained them with 11. pieces of Ordnance, Teusday.
and gave them 21. pieces of Ordnance at their parting from him, after that
they went aboard of Don Lopus de Oquendo, and had some short conference with
him, and when they parted from their ships, the chief Admiral gave them seven
pieces of Ordnance, and the other nine Pieces.

Afternoon Mr. Vandewalle and Mr. Mass, two Dover Merchants came to complain
of a French Frigot, that lay off and on the South Forland, and did take all
Vessels that past too and fro, upon which, Sir John sent the Ro-bucke to ply
too and fro there.

I have formerly mentioned, that our Admiral did diverse times invite the
Admiral of the Hollanders abord of him, but as yet have not mentioned that he
had as often invited the Spanish Admiral by Captain Robert Slingsby, who had
their language very perfect, but for certain he was as often invited as the
Dutch, and at length came one day abord of us, but did not stay half an hour,
gave our Admiral a Spanish complement and parted from him, to whom we gave 11.
Pieces of Ordnance, and the next day Sir John Penington our Admiral gave him
the like visit, and he gave him some Ordnance at his parting, but how many or
on what days of the month, these invitations and visits were, I took no
certain notice in my Diurnall,

In the morning very fair weather the wind at N. E. a packet came from the
Lord Admiral to continue the Merchants ships until farther order, albeit that
he had formerly given order for their discharge. Sir John sent me abord of them
all to cause them to birth themselves near unto their several Squadrons, the
which was performed with all expedition.

23. October 1639.
When the Tide of flood came, likewise all the Hollanders that were to the
Southwards of us, set fail and stood off and tack't, and most part of them
Anchored to the Northwards of the Spaniards, only some few Birtht themselves a
Seabord off us, which caused us to doubt that the Hollanders would suddenly
fall on upon their Enemies, of which Sir John gave the Spaniards notice by
Captain Slingsby; likewise I was sent abord of the Hollander, to give him to
understand, that in his packet that he had received this morning, his Majesty
was pleased to mention, that within few days he would give order to warn them
all both Spaniards and Dutch out of his Road; to which he replied, I would it
were to morrow, afterward I demanded of him, Doubtful that the Hollanders had
received order to fight with them in the Rord.
whether he had received any farther order by his last Adviser that came from
Holland, he answered, that he could not tell whether he had received any order
or not, but he had received some Letters from his Masters, the which he had
sent up to London to their Ambassador, from whence he did expect an Answer very
suddenly; but withal said that he would live and dye by his word, or that he
would not attempt any thing upon the Spaniards, before he made Sir John
acquainted with his intentions, and promised that his ships without us should
remove.

Afternoon, 20 Sloops from Dunkirk with Men and Provision.
there came into the Downs twenty Sail of Dunkirk Sloops, laden with men, and
Provision for the Spanish Fleet.

Sir John called a Council of all his Captains and Masters, to advise whether
it were not fitting for us to wey with our Fleet, Wednesday
and to birth our selves to windwards of those Hollanders that did ride without
us, to the which we all agreed, if so be that the Hollanders did not remove
according to promise, at which meeting, our Admiral did encourage all his
Capt. and Mrs. to show themselves men, in the ayding of that party that should
be assaulted, in his Majesty's Chamber, as this Road is called, the which they
all promised faithfully to perform, and so departed every one to his own
Ship, it being likely to blow hard, the wind toward night at E. and by N.

At day light the wind being at E. S.E. our Admiral sent me abord of
Vice Admiral White, who commanded those Ships that rode to windward off us,
and which as we did find afterward, were appointed to attend upon us, when
their Admiral should fall on upon the Spaniards; when I came abord of him, I
demanded of him, why he did not remove with his ships, and said unto him, that
our Admiral had sent me unto him to know whether he did intend to beleaguer him
in his Majesty's Road; he answered no, he had no such intent, but would remove
with his Squadron where I should direct him. I willed him to go to the
Northward or to the Southward of us, or to the Leewards of us, and not to ride
in the wind of us, the which he promised should presently be performed; and put
out his Blood Colors upon the Poope, which was a sign for the other ships to
wey their Anchors, and they removed presently; but after my message was
delivered, the Vice Admiral who calls me Cosen, demanded wherefore the
Spaniards did still delay their time of going forth of the road; I answered him
that in the first place the wind was contrary. Secondly, they had sent to
London for Powder and other provision, and until that came they could not
stir, also I demanded of him whether they had any farther directions then
they had formerly, he answered me that he knew not what the Admiral had, and
seeing that I could not learn any thing from him, I took leave, and when I
came abord related his Answer to our Admiral, all his Ships weyed, and new
birtht themselves, and some of them Anchored right to windwards of us, Thursday
3
upon which we weyed with all our ships, and Anchored to the Southwards of them
all.

After this the Hollanders had two several Councels, The Hollanders did profer
to give Spaniards, 5 C. Barrels of powder.
which caused us to expect their falling on presently, but they did not, but
sent two of their Captains unto our Admiral, to certify him that they did
hear, that the Spaniards had sent up to London for 500. barrels of Powder, and
until that came down to them, they could not stir from out of the road, which
might be a long delay, as the winds did change, for the most part Easterly,
wherefore their Admiral having consulted with his Captains of his Fleet, has
thought fitting rather then any longer time should be lost, to entreat him to
send word unto the Spanish Admiral, that he would give him 500. Barrels of
Powder, conditionally that he would go out of the road without delay, after
that they had received it; to which our Admiral answered, that he would not
upon those Terms send to the Spaniard, but if so be that they would set a
reasonable price upon their powder and sell it unto them, then Sir John would
give them notice of it, but they answered that they had no other order but as
formerly, to give it them, upon condition they would go out of the Road with
them; and so took their leaves of our Admiral.

Toward night, came a packet from the Lord Admiral, giving order for the
clearing and discharging of 5, 5 Merchants Ships discharged.
merchants Ships that were stayed; (viz) The golden Eagle, The golden Lion,
Anne Bonadventure, the John and Thomas, and the Speadwel, the Anne Bonadventure
set sail presently, the wind at E. S.E; and the rest the next morning very
early, the wind at S. E. by E.

The Spanish Admiral sent unto our Admiral, to desire him to come and ride by
him to secure his Fleet, or that he would let him come with his Fleet by him;
to the which Sir John answered, that if so be that their Admiral would come
with his Fle^t, and ride where he did, he would go with his Fleet, and ride
where he did ride, for that was the best part of all the road, the which Sir
John had left unto him as formerly for the better security of his Fleet; but to
engage himself to ride between the Hollanders and them, and thereby to bring
himself into danger of the Hollanders Fireships, October 25.
he would not, but said to him that he might assure his Admiral, that if so be
that the Hollanders did attempt any thing upon them in the road, he would with
that strength that he had, give him his best assistance, also he told him that
the Hollanders had been with him, and proffered to give them 500. barrells of
Powder; and likewise he sent him word, that if he would have taken his former
advise, he might have gone away with less danger, before so many Hollanders
came, and not to have stayed for that Powder.

After which the Palsgrave of Rhine came abord of us, The Palsgra^^ came abord
(...) went for (...)
and dined with our Admiral, and to entertain him, both our Fleet and all the
Hollanders shot off Ordnance, he went afterward abord of the Bonadventure,
commanded by Capt. Richard Feelding, who carried him to Callis, at whose
departure from us, we and all our Fleet, and all the Hollanders, and likewise
all the Spaniards shot off all their Ordnance So that it was one of the
greatest Peales of Ordnance that ever I heard; afterward the Palsgrave sent
Capt. Slingsby unto the Spanish Admiral to give him Thanks, who returned a
Spanish Complement to him, as if he were sorry that he did not shoot off his
Ordnance as the Hollanders did for his welcome abord of us; ^^^day 4.
and discoursing with Capt. Slingsby, he said, the Hollanders it seems have
too much powder, for they proffer to spare him 500. barrels, the which if they
will perform, and give him but leave to send away a thousand sick Soldiers for
Flanders, as he was a Gentleman he would go out of the road with them, give
them fighting work enough. Sir John sent Capt. Slingsby and me abord of the
hollander, to certify him, what the Spanyard demanded, who answered, that on
the morrow he would send some of his Captains to treat with them about that
business.

In the morning very fair weather, A Hollander ^^ne by a ^^^ket shot (...) a
Span^^rd.
but the wind still Easterly, which did hinder our ships from coming out of the
Thames unto us; This morning discharging their watch, by a Musket shot out of
one of the Spaniards, a Hollander was slain abord of one of the Men of War,
which man was brought unto our Ship side in one of their Boats, and some Captains
with him, who made a grievous complaint thereof, and did allege that the
Spaniards had broken the peace or privilege of his Majesty's road; upon which
business our Admiral sent Captain Slingsby abord of the Spanish Admiral, who
seemed to be very sorry for the death of the man, but excused it, and said that
was by a mischance, for he had given command to all his Fleet to be careful
how they discharged their watch, and said if he did certainly know the man, he
would hang him up for an example. With which Answer, our Vice Admiral and
Capt. Hall and Capt. Slingsby were sent abord to the Hollander to excuse it as
a mischance done by some untuterd Rascal, alleging that his People or ours
may be guilty of the like and yet no breach of the liberty of the Road.

October 1643,
But Admiral Tromp was exceeding angry, and said that he would be with them to
morrow morning, yet after dinner he sent 3 of his Capt. abord of us, to go
Treat with the Spaniards Admiral, who were carried abord of Don Carellus in
our Pinnesse, and with them, Sir John Penington sent his Vice Admiral Sir
Henry Manering, and with him Capt. Slingsby, and Mr. Welliam White my Son,
who had both of them the Spanish language perfect, but when they came to the
Ships side, the Spaniards would not give leave to the Hollanders to come into
their Ship, whereupon our Vice Admiral delivered their message concerning the
500. barrells of Powder, The Hollanders the secon^ time proffer the Spaniards
(...).
that they expected from London, the which he showed a willingness to accept,
with a Provise, that they should give him liberty as aforesaid, to send over
1000. sick Soldiers, the which being performed, he would accept of their
proffer, and would give them their bellys full of fighting; otherwise he would
not remove out of the road with his Fleet, for he must and he would (so near
as he could) perform the Service that he came upon, otherwise he should lose
his Head at his return into Spain; the Hollanders that sat in the Boat,
desired the Spaniards answer in writing, which was presently granted, with the
which they all returned; the hollanders to their Admiral, and our People to our
Admiral, who sent up a packet presently of these passages.

This Evening Mr. John Digby, Saturday 5.
second Son to the Earl of Bristow, who had formerly been with us at Sea,
came abord unto our Admiral, to continue with us until the business were
ended; the wind at E. by S. the Bonadventure of the Kings returned from Callis
or Bullin, where they had landed the Palsgrave.

The Hollanders held a Council, where they concluded, Sunday. 6h.
that they would not give liberty to the Spaniard to transport any Soldiers,
either sickly or lusty. In the morning we fitted our selves ready, expecting
the hollanders to fall on, as he had threatened the day before, for the Admiral
and some others of his Fleet set sail, and we loosed ourfore-top sail to give
warning to all our Fleet, but the Hollanders did but new birth themselves and
Anchored again. A packet came from the Lord Admiral, that his Majesty would
not suffer any more of the Merchant men that were stayed, as yet to be cleared.
Toward night there came in 5. great Hollanders more; the wind increased, and
blew very hard at E. by N. and blew stiff all night. But in the morning it
proved less wind; our Admiral drew up a warrant and directed it unto Captain
Henry Strading, Capt. Richard Fielding, Capt. Edward Popham and my self,
wherein he gave us instructions to demand of Admiral Tromp what follows. By
which warrant (after our coming abord of him) we gave him to understand, that
it was his Majesty's pleasure that the two Catchmen formerly mentioned, that
were taken at Marget, with Soldiers should be severely punished, and that his
Majesty did expect that Van Tromp should punish the Captain that took them,
for wearing of the King of Englands Colors, and taking of them under his Fort;
to the which he answered, that he never gave him order to we are his Majesty's
of Englands Colors, nor to take them under his Fort, nor did he any way
approve of it, but did utterly disclaim it, yet he durst not punish him; for
if he should, he said, that his Masters the States would not take it well; for
said he, the Cartaine at his arrival into Holland with them, did relate unto
the States the whole story how and where he took them, and that if he had not
deceived them by wearing of the Kings Colors he had never taken them, the
which Service they did much approve of, without blaming of him for wearing of
the Colors, but if so be that he had worn them, and had not performed the
Service, he would have severely punished him, but now he must not displease his
Masters the States; then by the samewarrant, we demanded of him, whether he had
any Commission from the States to fall upon the Spanards in this road or not,
Sunday. 7th.
if he had, we did require him to go give us a Copy thereof with his hand
unto it, that our Admiral might send it up to his Majesty, that he might
thereby take knowledge, how he was abused by the French and Dutch Ambassadors;
also we commanded him by the said warrant not to attempt any thing upon the
Spaniards in three days, in which time our Admiral should have an answer of
his Packet, and then if he had not order to command both Fleets out of the
Road, that then they might take their own course. To the which he answered, he
had no other then his general instructions, which is without limitation, for to
fall upon his enemies whersoever he found them, not exempting any road or
place; but as yet they had no resolution to meddle with them in this road,
neither would he shoot one shot at his Enemy, before he gave our Admiral
notice by a Letter; but to promise to stay three days after, he could not do
that, for he could not answer it unto his Masters the States, for they were at
a great charge, having now at this present 100. and three Sail of men of
War, and sixteen Fireships, and now the Winter coming on, if he should
neglect the first opportunity, it might so happen, that he should not have the
like in a month or a longer time, and that that great charge would lie heavy
upon their Country, October 28.
and might cause him to loose his life amongst the tumultuous Commonalty at his
return, wherefore he could not, nor would not engage his promise in that kind;
with which answer we returned; upon which our Admiral writ a packet to his
Majesty, and the Lord Admiral, Monday 7th.
wherein the Answer of Admiral Tromp was mentioned, and also a request to
them, to be graciously pleased to send down some instructions, how far we
should proceed or engage our selves in the quarrel, if they should fight in
the road, which packet was signed by Sir John Penington and his Vice Admiral,
and five other Captains, Sir John sent his Lieutenant with a Packet to the King.
and our Lieutenant Thomas Penington Nephew to our Admiral was sent express
with it, who was to bring an Answer thereof, and to that purpose rode post to
the Lord Admiral, and upon receipt thereof, the Lord Admiral went presently to
Windsor to the King, where they agreed upon an Answer.

In the morning very fair weather, ^uesday 8.
the wind at East, afternoon came a packet to discharge another of the
Merchants ships called the Blessing, The rest of ^^e Merchants ^^^ps dischar^^d.
and therein the Lord Admiral left it unto Sir John's discretion, whether he
would detain, or discharge the rest, who taking into consideration, that the
Merchants had been a long time hindered, and their strength of small
concernment, and the wind being fair, discharged them all only the Exchange,
The Hollan^^rs intended (...) fight.
Captain William Brown, who brought Soldiers from Spain: The wind the next
morning, was at North west, the Admiral of the Dutch, and diverse of his Fleet
set sail, whereupon our Admiral sent Capt. Slingsby to the Spaniards, to
prepare to defend themselves, and we hove out both our Top-sailes, and were
ready with all our Fleet to attend on the Hollanders, and to assist the
Defendants, but the Spaniards rodestill fast moored, albeit Capt. Slingsby
advised him to get his Fleet loose, and rather to put it to a Sea-sight, than
to be burnt at an Anchor, who answered, that if they would go to Sea twenty of
them to twenty of his ships he would fight with them, Wednesday 9
but he held it not fitting with his fifty ships, to put out of the Road to
fight with a hundred Sail of his Enemies, and where he rode in the King of
Englands road he thought himself secure; and therefore he resolved not to
stir, but before noone the wind shifted Easterly again, so that the
hollanders anchored again, and did not begin with them as they did intend, as
we were afterward informed they would, if the wind had continued Northerly,
for the Hollands Admiral was fitted for fight, having taken down all things,
Our Lieutenant returned.
even his Bed-sted, and Table out of his Cabin; diverse Noblemen came abord
this day to visit our Admiral, who went all ashore in the Evening, at which
time our Lieutenant came again with a Packet from London; in the morning the
wind Easterly, our Admiral called a Council, afterward sent Capt. Henry
Stradling, and Capt. October 1649
Richard Feelding, and Capt. John Hall, unto the Dutch Admiral, for to
certify him, that bythe Packet that our Admiral received the last night by
his Lieutenant, his Majesty did promise to come from Windsor to London, within
four days after the date of the Packet, from whence he would send Order and
appoint a certain day for both their Fleets to depart the road; the which
message did cause Van Tromp greatly to rejoice, and withal did wish that the
time were come, that they might make an end of the business, for he had a
great deal of trouble and vexation, and it would increase daily upon him, if
their stay were long upon it, for diverse of his Ships within short time would
be out of victual, etc.

About noone the wind being at E. by N. one William Thomas came into the Road
with his Hoy, 500 Barrels Powder came down to the Spaniards.
who had abord of him five hundred barrels of Powder, and other provisions for
the Spaniards, and anchored near unto their Admiral, and came abord of Sir John
with his Boat to inquire for the Earl of Newports (the Master of the Ordnance)
men that were come down in a light Horseman, for to deliver the Powder to the
Spaniards, and without them he could not deliver it, this light, Horseman and
the men, had been abord of us in the morning but left no word whither they
went, but Sir John did expect that they had been abord of the Spanish Admiral,
but being that they were not there, he willed him to go and attend abord of
his Hoy, and he would send his 2. Boats to look for them; and found them at
length, Thursday 10 100 taken in.
who went presently abord to the Spanish Admiral and delivered 100 barrels of
Powder, but the night came on, and the wind increased, which made a little
popling Sea, so that the Spaniards put off the taking out of the rest until
the morning, which might have been all taken out and disposed of before night,
had the Earl of Newports men attended as they should have done, upon so weighty
a business as that was, which did much discontent our Admiral, the Hollands
Admiral had birtht himself to the N. Eastwards of the Spaniards; and his
Vice-Adm rall, and Reare-Admirall with 30. of their best men of War, and 3.
Fireships, Birtht themselves to the N. Eastwards of us.

In the morning at 4 of the clock the wind at N. N. W. Foggie weather, we did
hear a piece of Ordnance to the N. N. Eastwards of us, the which we took to
be a warning Piece from the Hollands Admiral, for all his Fleet to prepare
themselves for the Fight, which proved according to our expectation, for at
daylight most of the Hollanders had their Top-sailes out, ^riday 11. The
Hollan^^^s set sail to (...) the wether the Span^^rds.
and their sheats hauld home, whereupon our Admiral called a Council and we
with all our Fleet made preparation, and tore down all our borded Cabbins
between the Decks, and heaved them over-bord. At the Council we all agreed to
turn up to the Northwards, to get the wind of them, the Hollands Admiral and
all his fleet standing in under the Flood to get the wind of the Spaniards, but
the wind was so little that they could hardly stem the stood. We set sail and
stood off to the Northwards with all our Fleet, being but 9. in number, viz.
The Unicorn Admiral, the Henretto Maria Vice Admiral, these two of the
second rank the Bonadventure, the Antelope, the Dreadnaught of the third
rank, the Providence of the 4.th rank, and the Greybound Pinnasse of the 6.th
rank, and two Merchant men, viz. The Unicorn Capt. Popham, and the Exchange
Capt. The Fight be^^n, it proved (...) thick aad (...).
Brown, we all set sail and stood off, and the Hollands Vice Admiral with
the 30 Ships of war, and the 3. Fireships without us did the like, who it
sdemes were ordered to attend upon us. By that time that we were under sail,
Hollands Admiral was very near the Spanish Admiral, the weather being
somewhat misty and thick, we heard a Piece of Ordnance, and some of our men
said that it went from the Spaniards, presently after that we heard another,
after which whole broad sides without number, and instantly after this, came a
Hollands Captain abord to our Admiral, with a very large Letter written in
Dutch, which Capt. did protest that they brake not the Peace; for the Spaniards
shot the first shot, Sir John answered that might very well be so, but it was
because they came so near him with their Fireships, by which they brake the
Peace, the Ordnance went off wonderful fast, for the space of almost half an
hour, in which time there came such thick Fog that they could not see one ship
from another, neither could we see any of them, whereupon the Fight ceased,
for they could not tell when they shot, whether it would hurt their foes or
their friends, we being now by guess (for we could neither see Ship nor Land)
and far enough to the Northwards to wether them, we cast about, and stood in
toward the shore, and all the Hollanders that waited upon us did the like, and
kept close to windwards of us the wether not being so think where we were, as
it was nearer the shore where the great Fleet was We stood in thus half an
hour in all which time we heard not one Piece of Ordnance, which caused our
Admiral, to doubt that they might all chop to an Anchor, until it cleared up,
and demanded of me what I thought of it, I answered, that I doubted that they
were all come to an Anchor until they could see one another, and likewise I
said to him, that if they were Anchored, the tide of Ebb being come we stood
in, we should fall to Leewards of them, and bring our selves in danger of both
their shot, and be unable to help either party; upon which he demanded of me,
what course I thought best sitting to be taken; to the which I answered, that
if he pleased, it being very little wind we might let drop our Anchor for a very
small time, and to have it ready to heave up again upon a sudaine and nor to
take in our sails only, to strike our Tapsayles upon the Caps, and to hall up
our fore sail in the Brayles, and if so be the Hollanders that waited upon us
did the like. If he thought fitting he might either send to them by message, or
begin to fight with them; this Counsel being approved of by him, we brailed
up our fore-sayles, and the Hollanders did the like, then we stroke our
topsayles, they likewise stroke theirs, then we let drop our anchor, and all
our fleet did the like, but the Hollanders did not let fall their anchors. Our
Admiral sent presently to all our fleet to be very ready to wey, for he did
intend to wey as soon as the Hollanders should be fallen a little to Leewards
off us, within half an hour after we anchored, the Hollanders were fallen a
little to Leewards of us, we all weyed our anchors and stood in after them,
upon the wether gage of them, and presently after when it cleared up, we did
see Admiral Tromp and his fleet all in a hudle together, right thwart of Deal
Castle, and all the Strand full of shipped, at which ships the Hollanders let fly
their Ordnance as fast as they could; and we with our fleet, and also the
Castle of Deal shot as fast at them, upon which they bore room, and made all
the have that they could after the rest of the Spaniards, Friday 11. false the
Spa^yards ashore ^he rest run out of the Down.
which were run away as far as the S. foreland, being in number 25 sail of the
better sort of their ships, and there was upon the shore 25 sail of Spanish
fleet, one of them being the Vice Admiral of Spain, Don Andrews de Gastro
Comander, who run a ground and 6. or 7. more all in a huddle together between
Wamer Castle and the village of Kingsdowne, and a fire-ship amongst them, which
burnt two of them and had fired the bowl-sprit and foremast of another, but
they quenched it, also their was 2. Hollanders ashore between Deal and Sandowne
Castle, the two Castles shot at them, but they nere shot again (to begin where
I left) the Hollanders be reaway to the Southwards, shooting at them ashore as
they past by, and some of them ashore shot at them, and we so lowing them our
fleet plied our Ordnance upon them, as fast as we could charge and discharge,
but they never shot one shot at any of us, so we chased them out of the Road,
but the more we chased, the farther they were from us, and our Admiral
perceiving some more Hollanders coming from the Northwards through the Guls,
fearing that they might, if we did run out of the Road, haull in and take
these ships from the shore, for the better securing of them anchored against
Kings-downe. The wind hartned on and was with the Hollanders long before it
came to the Spaniards, We best the Hellanders out of the Road.
which caused them to fetch up the Spaniards before they were as far as
Dover, (nore this, that the Hollanders displayed no Colors till he was past
the Foreland) and the Hollanders having the advantage of them, by the means
that their ships did sail better then the most of the Spaniards they batterd
them exceedingly, but the Spaniards neglected not to answer them. For the
Spanish Admiral Don Anthony de Oquendo, his ship going better then the rest of
his Fleet, kept close to the Portugal Admiral Don Lopus de Ossa, which were
two hot ships, and behaved themselves so bravely, that as I was informed from
sufficient men of Dover, not one of the Hollanders durst come up along their
broad side, A Hollands Pinn^s^e borded the Admiral of Portugal.
until one desperate Spark in one of the Hollands Pinnesses clapped the
Portugal Admiral abord, upon the weather bow, amongst his anchors, which
entangled him and hindered his way, and presently five of their Fireships
boarded him on both sides, and fired all on a sudden and burnt all 7. together.

Don Anthony de Oquendo upon this fearing the like, made all the sail that he
could to the Westwards, diverse of the rest of the Spaniards they took. But of
that hereafter.

The Hollanders that came through the Guls from the Northwards, perceiving us
at Anchor near the Southermost of the Spaniards that were ashore, kept off
without shot of us, and followed their Admiral, the wind being at N.N.W. a
stiff gale. And by that time that the tide came to windwards, the Hollanders
men of War that were ashore fleeted and ran of, thinking to have got out to
windwards of us at the South sands head; but we stood off and shot at them; and
at the first shot they stroke their Top-sayles, and after the second shot they
bore up under our Lee, and both their Captains were commanded abord of us. Our
Admiral caused the Flag to be lung out for a general Council, who being all
met abord of us. Our Admiral demanded their opinions, what they thought
fittest to be done with these two Captains and their ships, and withal gave
his opinion, that if so be that we should detain them, they were no
considerable satisfaction for his Majesty, for the affront done unto him for
their beginning the fight in his Road, commonly called his Majesteis Chamber.
Also he said that questionless the Hollanders would return to look after
those ships of the Spaniards, that were run ashore, and finding these two of
his ships stayed by us, doubtless he would require them of us, and we having
once made stay of them, could not with honor deliver them. And if so be that
he should by force take them from us as very well he might, having five times
our strength, it would be a greater affront unto his Majesty, and disgrace
unto us. Also he said, that hereafter their force would decrease and ours might
increase, and then we might happen to seize upon some better purchase, or more
and better ships and men, thereby to give his Majesty better satisfaction, if he
required it; upon a small debate hereof, we all concluded, to clear them away,
for the which the Dutch Captains did very much rejoice; then it was likewise
concluded, that Capt. John Hall, Captain of the Dread-naught, should go up to
his Majesty with a true Relation, of what had past that day sevenight, by our
Admiral and all the Captains and Masters of the fleet. At this time he was
set ashore being 7 a clock at night, at which time we did see a great flash
like Lightning over the Foreland, which was the Portugals Admirals powder that
blew up, when the fire came to it.

At high water some of the Ships got of from the shore, after midnight the wind
came to the West, and W. and by N. and blew hard. So that the next Tide all the
ships that were tight drove off the shore, whereof their was eight Lubickers
and Hambourgers.

Sir John Penington sent Capt. Fielding and my self, a-bord of all the
Spaniards that were come off from the shore and found them in great distress
for want of Cables and Anchors, for they were all Cut away when the Fight
began. Also we found but very few men; Especially Seamen abord of most of the
Spaniards, amongst the rest we were abord of Don Andrews de Castro's ship the
Vice admiral of the fleet, who had 56 Pieces of brass Ordnance in her, which
ship was drove from the shore with the Westerly wind, but had two Anchors and
Cables out both toward the Land, which anchors were dry at lowwater. The men
we found all of them packing up to go ashore, we demanded the reason why
they left their Ship; they answered, that they were wearied with Pomping, and
said their hold was full of water. But we answered them that there could not
be much water in her; for the ship was a-float and did Swim as jocant now as
she did when she was in the Raod, also I looked down into the hold and could
perceive the flower dry, upon which we persuaded them to continue abord, and
not so basely to loose a ship of that worth and consequence, and Inquiring for
the chief Officers belonging to the said ship, found that they were all gone
ashore to Don Andrews de Castro their Vice Admiral, to take Instructions from
him what they should do with their Ship, this relation or answer, we had from
the Master and the Pilot of Captain Whellers ship. A Donkerker that was sunk
three ships length without the Vice Admiral, unto whom I proffered, that if
they would give way to it, I would bring some Englishmen abord and save the
ship; their Answer was, that they must follow the Command of the Vice Admiral
(and what he commanded they would follow) then I said unto them, if so be
that you do not get an Anchor off to keep the ship a-float, their best course
were for to heave the ship as near the shore as they could at high water,
whereby they might save all her provisions, for the Ship rid a-float at low
water. They answered as formerly, they must follow Instructions from their Vice
admiral, etc.

This ship was between Kings-downe and Wamer Castle, and close by her lay the
Dunktrker aforesaid sunk, and two ships bottoms that were burnt by the
hollands fire-ship, which drove off and burnt till she came thwart of the
South foreland and there sunk, Saturday 12 What Ships of the Spanish Fleet
were lost upon the shore at Deal.
this ship of the Vice admirals rode as we left her, and did wind too and fro
with the Flood and Ebb, and Sunk not until Monday afternoon, in three fatham
and a half or 4 fatham at low water. They having neglected my Advise to heave
her close to the shore, whereby they might have had her dry at low water, By
which neglect the most of her provisions were lost, which might otherwise have
bin saved, Likewise there was one ship sunk to the Southwards of Deal Castle a
Flemesh Hul, and two Spanish ships to the Northwards between the Castle and the
Town, and at the North end of the Town lay a brave ship of Ienaway. All these
ships were lost and torn to pieces by the stormy wether, and the Inhabitants,
but it was some 4 or 5 days after. This Evening, his Majest, ship the Leoper,
commanded by Capt. George Cartwright who was one of the ships that were making
ready for our aid came into the Downs from Portsmouth and with her the second
Whelp, who was put into Wight by the Easterly winds, having bin at the
Soyn-head with a Convoy, the wind blowing hard at W. Sunday 13. The Hollanders
returned into the Road to repair some defects.
by S. and also continued all the next day. Three of the 6. Merchant men
prepared at London for his Majesty's service, came into the Road, who reported
that the rest of their Fleet would be down soon after them. The next morning
before noone, a Spanish Commander came with a Letter from the Lord Warden, to
desire our Admiral to send some Ships into Dover Road, to secure one of the
Spanish Galeons that had bin run ashore between Dover Castle and the Peer
near unto Dover. Just at that instant we described the Hollanders fleet
coming about the South foreland, but the Admiral had no Colors abroad, they
came all unto Anchor right thwart of Kings-downe, the Admiral came headmost
and saluted us, and so did all his Fleet one after another. But we did not
answer him one Piece of Ordnance; when we deseryed them, a Council was called,
and Order given that all our Ships should be presently made ready to set sail.
Also it was Ordered, that Captain Rich. Fielding, Capt. Cartwright, and my
self, should go to the ^ollands Admiral, to inquire what his Intention was,
that he did return again into his Majesty's Road, unto whom he had given so
high an affront. But the wind blowing so hard and the tide against us, we
could not get abord of him that night.

At day light the wind not so boisterous but continuing still westerly, we got
abord of them, and demanded of Admiral Tromp his intention as abovesaid, who
answered that he had no other Intent for his coming in there, but to Repair
some defects: that his Fleet had sustained in the fight with the Spaniards, as
to fish some of their Masts and yards that were shot, and also to stop some
shot-holes between wind and water. Then we demanded of him, what hurt he had
sustained in the fight, and what damage he had done to his Enemies. He
answered, praised be God, he had received no great damage amongst his Fleet,
and that he had taken 9. or 10. Sail of the Spanish Galeons and hoped of more
taken by some ships of his, and had fired the Portugals Admiral as is formerly
mentioned, and how that Don Lopus de Ossa the Commander of that ship, and his
Company did show themselves brave Soldiers, for her lower Ordnance continued
playing upon them when the fire was at their Top-masts head; also he said that
they saved of the Spaniards that lept overbord nere 70 men, who did certify
him, that Don Lopus, albeit he was a man of above 70 years of age, and had his
arm shot of in the beginning of the fight, yet he continued above upon the
upper deek, Encouraging of his men to fight it out unto the last, until the
fire seized upon him, whose death he did much lament. Also he said, that the
prime Admiral Don Anthony do Oquendo, never Cut his Mainsayle nor let fall his
Sprit sail, but continued by his consort Don Lopus so long as he could succor
him, but when he see him fired, and past hopes of Relief, he made all the
Sail that he could and with the Admiral of Donkerke and diverse other ships of
his fleet, he ran away to the westwards.

Before midnight the wind Westered so, that so far as they were a head of the
Hollanders, so much they were to windwards of them; yet the Hollanders plied
too and fro all the night, expecting, that on the morrow, by shift of wind,
they might recover them.

But in the Morning not one of them were in sight so that he thought that they
had got Donkirk. But said he, I hope ere long to Burn both him and all his
Fleet, as they ride in the Road under the Splinter. Amongst other discourse
with him, I did Inquire for my Friend Captain Forran a French Captain
formerly mentioned, and how he had behaved himself in the fight, he answered
me, that he was a stout man of War, and said that if so be that all his
Captains had bin such as he was, they might have done more then they did.

But he employed him about a business of Consequence, otherwise he had been
in the Road. Which was as J was afterward informed, to take the Spanish Galeon
that rode in Dover Road. The which Service he performed; for the next day there
came Complaints unto our Admiral, that she was taken out of the Road in the
night and carried away, which was impossible for us to prevent; For the
Hollands Fleet did ride in the midway between the Spanyard and our Fleet.

After which he demanded of us, what was the state of all the Spaniards that
were run ashore upon the strand, we answered that the greatest part of them
were Sunk and splitt, so that they would come to the Country People according
as he had destined them at his first Coming hither, and that the hamborgers and
Lubikers had possession of there ships discharged their Soldiers and for the
rest they were sold, and possessed by English men, which was Related by his
Order before all his Captains that were abord with him which were at least 20
or 30 of them upon which be said that he was glad that the English had so
much Benefit by them, and also, that thereby he was free from being Engaged,
to fetch them from the shore, and from amongst our fleet, as some of his other
Captains had made a motion to have him do; for says he I might thereby have
given his Majesty, and the whole Fleet of England more distaste, then with all
that he had formerly done, the which he would be very loath to do, But if so
be that the English had not had possession of them, By the Instigation of the
rest of his Fleet, he must have bin forced to put it to a hazard.

To which we answered, that our strength was now increast, and we did expect
more before many hours; so that he would find it a worse bought then all,
which proved accordingly; for before Night there came into the Downs four of
his Majesty's Ships of the second Rank and one of the third Rank, and Six of
the best straights Merchants Ships that were in the River of Thames. The wind
afternoon at N. N.W. After our coming abord to Sir John, and relating what
we had heard and said, he sent Captain Slinsby and my self ashore unto the
Spanish Vice Admiral Don Andrews de Castro, To certify him of all what we
had heard from the Hollanders and how that we had Informed them that all his
Ships that were a-sloat, were in the posfession of the English. By which
means, we had diverted them from their Resolutions, which was, to have come
and taken them all away with them, which would have cost him a Bloody nose, at
least. Also we certified him, that our Admiral was sorry to hear of the base
Carriage of the Country people toward him and his Men, the which was come to
his Majesty's knowledge; for the Earl of Northumberland b^d Intimated so much
in a Packet to our Admiral, and that his Majesty would have him to take care
that they should not suffer any wrong by any of his Subjects. The which our
Admiral would endeavor to perform, so far forth as his Power would reach,
which was no further then the Road, but he had no Command upon the Land, also
J gave him notice that J had Order from our Admiral, to go abord of his Ship
and the rest of the Wacks upon the shore, to look after them; that no man
should Imbezell any thing from them, and to forbid all men whatsoever, except
it were such as were hired to by his Substitutes, upon pain of his Majesty's
displeasure, not to take any thing out of those Spanish Ships a-ground; for the
which and all former, he returned most hearty thanks to our Admiral.

In the Morning the wind was at N. by W. a staff gale, before day a Packet
came from the Lord Admiral, and by a order therein I was Sent a shore to the
Spanish Vice Admiral to give him to understand, that our Admiral had Order to
Convoy his Soldiers for Flanders, if he did ship them in English Bottoms, he
Answered that he did expect some Vessels from Donkerk for to transport them;
But if they came not he did intend to provide vessels at Dover, and then he
would thankfully Embrace our Admiralls Convoy. About noone all the Hollands
fleet set Sail and run to the Westwards about the Foreland, and then Don
Andrews gave Order to all his ships that were a-float and rid near the shore
to go Ride farther of. At night the wind Westward and proved very fair wether
all night, and all the next day afternoon all the Hollands fleet came Open of
the Forland abord, and bore about on the backside of the Goodwin, and stood
away most of them toward the East of Holland and the rest toward Flanders. At
night Captain Hall Returned from his Majesty, who had certified his Majesty
of all the proceedigns which had happened betwixt the Spaniards and the
Hollanders. Next morning came a Complaint unto our Admiral that diverse of the
Boats of his Fleet had bin abord of the wracks, and had Imbezelled and taken
out their Provisions; upon which our Admiral gave Order to Capt. Hall, Capt.
Stradling, Capt. Ramsby, Capt. Cartwright, and my self, etc. To go abord of
all the Fleet, and to search them, having with us two Spanish Captains
likewise to accompany us. In our search we found more or less abord of every
Ship, some of the Spaniards provisions, the which was carried by the said
Ships-boats abord of the St. Augustine, and the Crown, two of the Spanish
ships. But for the Anchors and Cables that we had taken up, that they Cut away
in the Road, those we detayned abord until farther Order from the Lord
Admiral. But we would not suffer the Deal Pilots to meddle with any one of
the Anchors. At Night there came a Packet from the Lord Admiral, that we
should not suffer any one to meddle with an Anchor or Wrack, if they were so
near the shore, as that a Horseman riding into the Sea at low water could
reach it with his Lance or Spear, and that we should not meddle with any
thing within that limit; for that Privilege did belong to the Lord Warden, or
to the Lords of the Manner. Likewise there came another Packet, for the Ships
that were lately sent down, to return to Chatham, and the Ships which were
sent from London to return to London; only the Winter guard, so there was
none left but the Winter guard.

The next day, Captain Slingsby carried over the Spanish Master Delda Campo;
And the same day, there came over Eight Dunkirke Sloopes, who carried away
four hundred Soldiers, that set sail in the afternoon.

The next day, all the Ships had their Warrants to take the first opportunity
of wind and wether to return from whence they came.

FINIS.
Animadversions by A. B.
ENGLAND take heed, thy Navy is not Right
And discontented are thy men of Might:
Thy Ships are sluggish and for want of Diet,
Thy best affected Seamen are unquiet.
The Prizes which they take are fooled away,
And for their Thirds the Seamen have no Pay:
These are the Reasons why they move so sloe,
And do no Service wheresoever they go.
The Resolution of A. B.
THough J do Row against the Tide and Wind,
And little Comfort in my Labors find:
J am resolved to Row whilst J can speak
For ENGLANDS Good although my heart J break.
ANDREWS BVRRELL.

FINIS.

