Licensed,

March 24, 1687/8.

ARTS TREASURY: OR, A Profitable and pleasing Invitation to the Lovers of
INGENUITY. Contained in many extraordinary Experiments, Rareties, and curious
Inventions.

In two PARTS.

PART I. Containing the Mystery of Dying Cloths, Silks Stuffs, Hair, Feather,
Bone, Horn, Ivory, Leather, etc. The manner of preparing Colors, Directions to
take out Spots, Stains, Pitch, Tar, Wax, Rosins, etc. out of Silks, Stuffs,
Woollen, Linen, etc. To recover faded Colors and preserve Apparel, etc. To
scowr Silver and Gold Lace, Plate, etc. Preparing Cement for glass, China, etc.
Diapering Linen, making Perfumes. The Art of Drawing, Limning, Painting,
preparing and laying on Colors, Etching, Engraving, Cuting, Gilding,
Enammelling, refreshing Pictures, hangings, Carpets, preparing
Flock-work-cloth, directions to paint thereon, and to make sundry Colors;
prepare Gums, Alum-Water. The Art of thickening Linen, Washing or Coloring
Maps, or printed Pictures, with sundry other things, etc.

PART II. Containing the Quality, Generation and Product of Metals and
Minerals, Natural and Artificial; directions to harden or soften them for use.
The Art of Souldering, Burnishing, and Gilding Metals Instructions for making
Inks of all kinds and Colors, preparing Gold or Silver for Writing, and all
manner of Sealing-wax, Wafers, etc. Gold and Silver to know the fineness, and
to detect counterfeit Coins. How to write sundry ways, that it shall not appear
without the help of Fire, Water, etc. taking blots and writing off Paper or
Parchment. The Mystery of beautifying, writing with Gold or Silver, Coloring,
Dressing, Cleansing, and Perfuming Gloves, Ribands, etc. Imbossing in Plate,
Wax-work, Imagery, Dyalling, Gauging, Washing Point-lace, Tiffany, Sarcenet,
Lutestring, and any colored Silks, etc. Weighing Ships, extinguishing Fire,
blowing up Houses or Vessels under Water, etc.

London: Printed for W. W^itwood, next the Bible in Duck-Lane; and Mrs. Feltham
in Westminster Hall. 1688.

(...)

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
HAving well weighed and considered, That a Book containing sundry Varieties of
this Nature, might prove exceeding useful; I held it highly necessary for the
Advantage of the Industrious part of Mankind, as well for the increase of
Profit as Pleasure, besides my own Experience to consult the best Authors and
greatest Masters, most approved in all Ages for their Skill and Dexterity in
what I have adventured to lay down; and from their worthy Labors have
extracted even the quintessential part of what their many years Study and
Practice had brought to perfection; and not only so, but rendered that which
seemed hard, and to many unintelligible, plain and easy to be understood and
practiced, adding a great number of New Receipts and Curious Matters, never
before made public: So that all things rightly considered, I may justly term
this Book, though small in it self, yet exceeding Copious and Elaborate in what
it comprehends and contains, The Storehouse or Treasury of Art, etc. nothing
being omitted that in the least I conceived pertinent or conducing to the
Illustration or Advantage of a Subject woven with so many Golden Threads of
Variety, to render it the better acceptable and more grateful to the Sons of
Art, and all Lovers of Ingenuity; which may over and above prove as a friendly
Guide and Instructor even to the unskilful in these Affairs, and lead them as
it were by the hand to the Knowledge of Things and Matters worthy their best
and more serious Considerations; the which that it may do and prove universally
Beneficial and Useful, as the various Subjects it heartily, experimentally, and
Impartially Treats of, is the hearty wish of,

Reader, Your Friend, and Very Humble Servant, John White:

Several BOOKS lately Printed for W. Whitwood, next to the Bible in Duck-lane.
1. M. Juniani Justini ex Trogi Pompeii Historiis Externis Libri 44. Omnia quam
diligentissime ex Variorum Exemplarium Collatione Recensita and Castigata in
usum Scholasticae Juventutis, cum Vita ejus ex Gerardi Johan. Vossii. Price One
shilling. This Book is now carefully Corrected, with Notes, by a
London-School-master.

2. The Wars of Hungary, since it was first invaded by the Turks, to this time,
viz. The Relief of Vienna, the Taking of Newheusel, Gran, Buda, with the
memorable overthrow of the Turks on the River Drove, the Taking of Esseck, and
the success of the Christian Arms to this present year 1688.

3. A Collection of Apophthegms or Sayings of the Ancients, out of Plutarch,
Diogenes Laertius, Elian, Erasmus, and others; wherein the Manners and Customs
of the Grecians, Romans, and Lacedaemonians, are represented.

4. The Spanish History or Relation of the difference between Don John of
Austria, and Cardinal Nitard, are represented, with Letters and Politic
Discourses between Persons of the highest Quality, relating to that Affair.

5. Ovid's Heroical Epistles, Englished by W. S. and illustrated with twenty
four Pictures curiously Engraven on Copper Plates.

6. An exact Survey of the Grand Affairs of France since the Treaty at
Nimiguen; but more especially what relates to Count Teckely and the Hungarian
Wars.

7. The Curiosities of Scurvy Grass, in which is exhibited to public Use the
Preparations of Meditines, both Galenical and Chemical, either for Internal or
External use, in which that Plant or any part thereof is employed; with Figures
of all the sorts of Scurvy Grass: By Dr. Sherley.

8. Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Philosophy, Treating of the Egyptians,
Arabians, Graecians, etc. in French, by the famous Monsieur Rapin; Englished by
Mr. Lovtil.

9. The Illustrious Lovers, or Princely Adventures in the Courts of England and
France, a Novel.

10. The Lives and Actions of several notorious Counterfeits, who from the most
abject of the People, have Usurped the Titles of Emperors, Kings, and
Sovereign Princes; in Twelve several Histories.

11. M. Juniani Justini ex Trogi Pompeii Histortis Externis Libri 44. Cum Notis
Vossn Thisii Bongarisi. Price Two Shillings.

12. The Fortunate, Deceived, and Unfortunate Lovers; three excellent new
Novels, containing many pleasant and delightful Histories.

13. The Worthies of England in Church and State, illustrated in the Lives and
Characters of the most Eminent Persons since the Conquest, being an Epitome of
Dr. Fuller.

14. A Phylosophical Essay, declaring the probable Causes whence Stones are
produced in the Greater World; from which is taken occasion to search into the
Origin of all Bodies, discovering them to proceed from Water and Seeds; by Dr.
Sherley.

15. The present State of Geneva, with a Description of that City, and the
several Changes and Alterations it has been subject to, from the first
Foundation thereof, to this time.

16. Curious Observations in that difficult part of Chyrurgery relating to the
Teeth; an account of their Cause, of Corruption, and Putrefaction, with proper
Remedies: Considerations on the Toothache, looseness of the Ieeth, the use of
the Polican or Instrument, with which they are drawn on all occasions.

17. A Treatise of Lithotomy, or of the Extracting the Stone out of the
Bladder; wherein an Account is given of the various Instruments used, and the
Method observed in that curious but difficult part of Chyrurgery; illustrated
with twenty Figures, curiously engraved on Copper Plates.

10. The History of the damnable Life and deserved Death of Dr. John Faustus,
the famous Conjurer of Germany; newly Printed from the Correct Copy from
Franckfort in Germany.

19. The History of Justin, Translated out of the Four and Forty Books of
Trogus Pompeius; Containing the Affairs of all Ages and Countries, both in
Peace and War, from the beginning of the World, to the Time of the Roman
Emperors; now Reprinted, with the Life of Justin, and the time when he
flourished; by Gerard John Vossius; Englished by Rob. Codrington, Master of
Arts.

PLAYS.
The Elder Brother. The Reformation. Pastor fido. Flora's Vagaries.
Mock-Tempest. Unfortunate Mother. Charles the Eight King of France. The Revenge
or Match at Newgate. Herod and Mariamne. Piso's Conspiracy. Imperiale. Settle's
Notes on Dryden's Plays.
Art's Treasury, or a profitable and pleasing Invitation to the Lovers of
Ingenuity, contained in many extraordinary Experiments, Rarieties, new, and
curious Inventions, etc.
PART I.
CHAP. I. The Art and Mystery of dying Silks, Stuffs, cloth, feathers, etc. In
the most curious and delightful Colors, with the manner of ordering, making
and preparing them, etc.
SO pleasing to the Eyes of mankind, are the various colors that we daily or
frequently behold, that they in a manner captivate and detain even the fancy it
self with Wonder and Delight. Wherefore, I have thought it highly convenient,
amongst the many stupendous Secrets and Curiosities this Book contains, as
well tending to profit, as pleasure, if duly practiced, to place the Art of
coloring, vulgarly called dying, in the beginning, as an Introduction to the
rest, it being much wanted, and frequently coveted by public and private
Persons, to be known, and rightly managed. Wherefore for its better
Improvement, take the following Rules and Directions.

To color or dye Wool, or Woollen Cloth a curious red.
Take a considerable quantity of Alum, and dissolve it in Water, wherein bran
has been boiled and strained out, putting the Cloth, Wool, or Yarn, to steep in
it, which being well steeped, put it into other clear water, heating it over a
gentle fire, putting thereto greening-Weed, two pounds, to four gallons of
water, stirring it about; but not suffering it to boil; add more, a handful of
unslaked Lime, and as much Wood-Ashes, stirring about the materials, adding yet
a like quantity of Lime, Ashes, and a pound of the Powder of Log-Wood, or
red-Wood, and the like of Braziel, and so in three or four hours time, a very
fair color to your satisfaction will be taken.

To dye Linen Thread, or Cloth red, etc.
Take a pound of Sam-fleure; and suffer it, for the space of twenty four hours,
to soak in two Gallons of water, heating over a gentle fire; then add, half a
pound of the powder of Braziel, two Ounces of Vermilion, and an Ounce of Alum,
dissolved in a pint of fair water.

To dye a clear, or pleasant light Red.
Take Wheat Bran, half a Peck, two Ounces of Alum, and boil them in four
gallons of fair water, then through a fine hair fieve, strain out the liquid
part, then dissolve in it half a pound of Alum, and the like quantiy of white
Tartar, and put in the Stuff, Cloth, etc. intended for coloring, adding three
pound of Madder, and perfect the color at a moderate heat without boiling.

To dye Silk a Sanguine Color.
Take a pound of Alum, and two pound of Greening weed, bruise them well and
pour upon them fair water, add then half a pound of Ground-Braziel, heat them
over the Fire, and put the silk in some part of the liquid matter, suffering it
to sees therein; and so renew it with the remainder, till you find your Color
take, and having so done three times, rinse it in Lee of Oak-bark, or Wood
ashes, and afterward in Water.

To dye a fair Blue.
Take white Silk, Stuff or Cloth that is white, and soak it in water, then
having wrung the water out, add two pound of Woold or Woad, a pound of Indico,
and three ounces of Alum, and then gently heat and dissolve them in the water,
and so dip your materials, till you perceive the Color has taken.

To dye a purple Color.
Take the Silk, Stuff or Cloth, that has already taken a blue, and dip it in
Braziel and Alumwater, at moderate heats; and you will soon perceive your
Color answer your Expectation.

To dye Carnation.
Take a dry purper, and soak it a night in Man's Urine; then take your Cloth,
that has been soaked in Alum-water, and dried again, and put it therein, suffer
the purper before hand to be twice seethed in fair water; then set another
Vessel by the Fire, and suffer the Cloth to take the dye therein.

To dye a deep red Carnation.
Take Linen and woollen white, Gall, and alum it well, and take the herb called
by the Dutch Foli, which is to be found on the banks of Ditches, to the
quantity of a pound well dried; Indian Lake, four ounces, Spanish red, two
ounces; make of these and Alum-water a hot Liquor, and dip your materials
therein, at gentle heats three or four times, and it will afford a curious
Color.

To dye silk Quoins a curious red.
Steep first your Silk in Alum-water, giving it a gentle heat, adding thereto
in the heating, Branwater; then take a pound and a half of greening weed, and
so heat it up, and put the Silk therein, but let it not sees, then take it out
and rinse it in Ley, and after that in water, adding some Powder of Log-wood;
and so heating it up a second time, the business will be perfected.

To dye a fair yellow.
Take the Stalks, Leaves and Seeds, etc. of Wood, the roots being cut off, and
lay them in soak in Ley of wood Ashes, for the space of three hours, after that
sees them, till you think they are sufficiently sodden; then put them into hot
water and Urine, and heat them up indifferent different well straining the
liquid part through a sieve, adding to every two pounds of woad, two pounds of
Verdigrease, with the Ley already sod, stirring and well mixing it together in
your Liquor, for the space of three hours, and so dip into it very hot at three
or four times what you intend to color.

Another way to dye a curious Purple, viz.
In case, it be silk you intend to dye, you must to one pound of it take four
ounces of Alum and a gallon of water, dissolving the Alum therein over a gentle
Fire; putting then the Silk therein, and suffering it to lie, for the space of
four hours; then take of Indian Lake and Indico, each a quarter of a pound, add
likewise a quart of Urine, and so heat them up into a dye, adding more about a
handful of Cochinele.

A curious green water to make.
Take half an ounce of Verdigrease, bruise it well, put thereto the yolk of an
Egg, and a few blades of Saffron; then take of the Leaves of Spurge half a
handful, bruise them with a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, straining the liquid
part through a cloth, and mingle it with the materials before mentioned, so
thin that it may take, either in dying or painting.

To make a black water to dye Silk Cloth, etc.
Take half a pound of Nut-galls, add to them a pottle of water, and an ounce of
Lamb-black, with a handful of the rust or filings of Iron, heat them up, adding
half a pound of coperas, sees them to a half Consumption, adding then a pint
of Gum-water, and so set it by for your use, etc. and it will prove excellent
good, the longer it is kept, it being the better.

To dye Linen or Silk a Rose red.
Take to every four yards and a half, a pound of Nut-galls, and sees them in
fair water unbrused, for the space of two hours, when pouring out the liquid
part into another Vessel or Fatt, put your Linen, etc. into it, and suffer it
to soak for the space of four hours; then wring it dry, and heat it again in
Alum and fair water, adding half a pound of Braziel powder, and a pound of
Greening-weed, and so by gentle heats make up your color to the height.

To dye a fair green.
Take Bran-water and Alum, a Gallon of the former, to a pound of the latter,
and sees them up, till the Alum is dissolved; then for about a quarter of an
hour, let your Silk or Cloth lie therein; then take more Bran-water and a few
handfuls of woad, and put it therein, till it become a dark yellow; then add
Verdigrease and Indico of each half a pound or more, or less of the one or the
other, as you would have it lighter or darker.

To dye a good black.
Take two pounds of Galls, and half a pound of Coperas, sees them in water
over a gentle Fire, putting your Silk, Stuff or Cloth therein, and stirring it
about; then hang it to dry, and prepare your dye in this manner, viz. Take a
large Fatt, and put therein three or four handfuls of Rye Meal, and half so
much of swarf of the Grind-stone or Smiths water, with two handfulls of elder
bark, and the like quantity of the rust of Iron, and having suffered it to
stand for the space of three days, heat it up and put your materials therein,
etc.

To make a thick water to work on yellow Silk the best way.
Take two quarts of the best Varnish, add to it an ounce of the Flower of
Sulphur, half an ounce of Camphire; then sees it a while, and suffer it to
cool, straining it through a Cloth, to take away the grosser part; and when you
use it, let it be mixed with a small quantity of Gum-Arabick water.

To make a curious red Water.
Take two quarts of fair water, four ounces of Gum-Arabick, a pound of faucet
Woad, sees them together, till half be consumed; and then taking it off, put
into the remainder half an ounce of Spanish green, and about thirty grains of
Cochinele, and so use it as you see convenient.

To make a curious blue Water for Silks, Stuffs, or Woollen.
Take three parts of Soap boilers Ashes, and one part of unquenched Lime, make
of them a Ley, and suffer it well to settle, then add to the thinner part taken
off, a pound of Boloemen, stirring them well together over a gentle fire,
adding a pound of Woad, and half a pound of Indico, dipping what you intend to
color therein when it is very hot.

To work on yellow Silk, white, gray, or Azure Color.
Take a pottle of fair water, and a fourth part of Gum-Arabick, and half a
pottle of faucet Woad, an ounce of Arshick, and the like quantity of Turmerick
ground small, and sees them over a gentle Fire, putting a small quantity of
Grains therein, and so apply it to your use, as you see convenient.

To make a red Water for white Silk or Wool, green, yellow, Violet or Azure.
Take two quarts of running water, and an ounce of Braziel, heat them up till
half be conlumed, then take it off the Fire, and put in an ounce of Grains, and
a quarter of an ounce of Gum Arabic, with a quarter of a pound of Alum Powder,
and suffering it to stand all night, in the Morning you may use it.

To make gray Florey.
Take Florey, and soak it twenty four hours, at the end of which, wring it
through a Cloth, then take the Ashes of the Vine, and make a Ley with them, and
spread the Florey for the space of two hours upon a Table, and having put the
Ley into three Vessels, take the Florey, and put it into one of the said
Vessels, and so shift it to the rest, putting before you dip your Linen, etc.
Vinegar to it, and your Color will be good.

To dye Linen with Crampmede.
Use in this a pound of Crampmede, to three Else of Linen, and put it to a
gallon and a half of water, or so proportionable to the quantity, and warm it
over the Fire, till it appears ready to sees; then add to it two ounces of
Galls, and so put your Linen into it, and as often as you take it out, which
must be frequent, wring it, when having a pot of fair water ready heated with
Alum dissolved in it, put the Linen well wrung into it; and so rub it over at
the taking out, and dry it; but if you would have it the darker Color; then is
it requisite to have a Ley made with Lime-Stones, or unslaked Chalk, etc.

To dye Velvet, or other things requiring it, the most curious of Blacks.
Take of Galls two pound, Coperas half a pound, Smiths water a G^llon, the
powder of burnt Ivory an ounce, and of Oak bark, and Shooe-makers black ground
to powder, the like quantity, and two gallons of fair water, mix them well
together, and suffer them to stand in the Sun or some other warm place for the
space of thirty days, with often stirring about, then put your materials
therein, and as often as you di^, hang them to dry, and your expectation will
be answered.

To make Bran water much used in dying, etc.
Take half a peck of Wheat Bran, and two gallons of fair water, set them on the
Fire, giving them a gentle heat, which being done, put half a pound of Alum
powder into it, and suffer it to stand a week or more, with sometimes stirring
it about before you use it.

To dye Wool or woollen Yarn.
Take four pound of Wool or yarn, two pound of Woad, putting the Woad into a
Kettle to two gallons of water; then throw in two handfuls of Wood-Ashes, and
when it seetheth, put your Wool or Yarn into it, and let it remain there about
half an hour, at what time take it out and wring it and put it in again, and
let it sees as long as before; and then if it be before a brown blue, it will
be a dark green, or if it was white, it will be a yellowish color. And thus
much at present, in relation to Colors for dying Silks, cloth, etc.

CHAP. II. The most curious Art and Method of coloring Skins, or any pieces or
parcels of Leather or Bristles; as also of gilding Leather with Gold, laying
with Silver or Lacquering, etc.
To color Skins green.
TAke the Leaves of Nightshade, bruise them in a Mortar, strain out the juice,
and dissolve in a pint two ounces of Alum, add half an ounce of Verdigrease,
and heat them gently over the Fire, and then suffering it to stand for twenty
four hours, strike over the Skin with it warm, and suffering it to dry, do it
again till it has taken the Color, which will be very lively.

To color black Leather after the Order in Germany, etc.
Take of the Bark of Elder two pounds, of the filings or rust of Iron the like
quantity, put to them two Gallons of Rainwater; and stop them up close in a
Cask or other Vessel, and so suffer them to stand for the space of two Months;
then put to the liquid part a pound of Nut-galls beaten to Powder, and a
quarter of a pound of Coperas, heating them over the Fire, and suffering them
to stand twenty four hours after, and so use them with a brush, till the Skin
has taken an excellent black.

To color white Leather the best way.
Having hung your Skins in Chalk, or Limewater, till they are grown supple,
that the Hair or Wool may be stripped off, stretch them on Tenters or by Lines,
and smooth them over; then take your coloring mixed, according to the Purport
of what you intend they shall take, and having first brushed them over with
Alum-water very warm, give them the Tincture, and dry them in the Sun or in
some warm house, and they will be useful on sundry occasions, without any
further trouble.

To make white Leather blue.
Take the Berries of Elder a quart, strain out the juice and boil it with an
ounce of the powder of Alum, and half an ounce of Indico, or smalt blue, and
brush over the Leather with a fine brush dipped therein three or four times,
suffering it to dry between whiles, and the business will be effected.

To color Leather a fair Red.
Having rubbed your Leather well with Alumwater or alumed it, take stale Urine,
sees it and scum it till half be wasted; put then to it an ounce of the finest
Lake with the like quantity of Braziel in Powder, an ounce of Alum, and half an
ounce of Sal-armoniac, mix them well and keep them stirring over a gentle Fire
about two hours, and so use the liquid part, and your expectation will be
answered.

To color your Leather a curious French yellow.
Take one part of Chalk, and another of Wood-Ashes, and make thereof a good
Ley; then strain out the fine or Liquid matter, put it into a Vessel over the
Fire, and put into it Turmerick in Powder, and a little quantity of Saffron,
and so suffer it to simper, till it becomes pretty thick; then set it to
cooling, and as you have occasion use it, as before mentioned.

To color Spanish Leather, etc.
Take that which the Dutch call Pomplemelch, warm it, and rub the Leather
therewith, then take of Venis tot Appelen, and having beaten it small, put a
considerable quantity of fair water to it, and let it soften over a gentle
Fire; then press out the water, and so in the liquid part rub or wash the Skin,
doing it so often; and after that, take Shoe makers black the sinest, and rub
over the Skin with it, having in the wetting added to it a little Vitriol or
Coperas, and suffering it to dry, take Goose or Hog's Grease in a Woollen Cloth,
and rub the Skin over for a good space, where there is a good Fire to supple it
in; and then rub it over with your hands, till it disappear, or instead of
Grease, Line-seed, or train Oil may be used, and so in case of any other
Color, according as the Colors are designed.

To dye Bristles a c^rious r^d for Br^shes.
Take an ounce of Braziel-Wood in Powder, half an ounce of Alum, a quarter of
an ounce of Vermilion, and a pint of Vinegar, boil them up to a moderate
thickness, and dip the Bristles in when it is very hot, suffering them to
continue or sometime in the Liquor, and they will be of a curious Red.

To dye Bristles or Feathers a curious green, etc.
Take of Verdigrease an ounce, Verditur the like quantity, Gum-water a pint,
mix them well together, and dip the Bristles or Feathers, they having been
first soaked in hot water into the said mixture.

To dye Bristles or Feathers blue.
Take an ounce of Indico, as much of Bisse, as much Alum as a Hazle-nut, put
them into Gum water, and dip the materials into it hot, hang them up to dry,
and clap them well, that they may open. And so changing the Colors, you may in
this manner dye the aforesaid materials of any Color, as for black use
Log-wood, and Galls for Purple, Lake and Indico; for Carnation. Vermilion and
Smalt, for yellow, yellow Berries and Saffion with a little Tartar mingled or
dissolved in your Gum-water.

To dye Ivory, Bone, or Hern a curious red.
Take the materials and soften them in water wherein Tartar has been dissolved;
then take Vermilion and Braziel, temper them well in water, boil them up in a
Liquor, and put your Horn, Ivory, or Bone into it, and suffer either of them to
be there, it being hot, for a convenient time, and taking them instantly, out
cast them into cold Alum-water; and if they have not taken the Tincture at
first, use them in the like manner a second time; and so proportioning the
Colors, you may in this manner proceed to make them take what Color you
please.

To marble Books or Paper the best way.
Take four ounces of Gum-Arabick, dissolve it in two quarts of fair water; then
provide several Colors mixed with water in pots or shells, and with peculiar
pencils to every Color, sprinkle them by way of inter-mixture upon the
Gum-water, which must be in a Trough, or some broad Vessel; then with a stick
curl them and draw them out in streaks, to as much variety as may be; which
done, hold your Book or Books close together, and only dip the Edges in on the
top of the water, and Colors, very lightly; which done, take them off, and the
plain Impression of the Colors in mixture will be upon the Leaves, doing as
well the ends as the Front of the Book in like manner: and in this case, you
may do paper by dipping it on the flat, as also Linen Cloth, etc.

To dye or color Horse hair, or any hair, etc.
Steep the water, wherein a small quantity of Turpentine has been boiled for
the space of two hours; then having prepared your Colors very hot, boil the
Hair therein, and any Color, black excepted, will take, but that will only
take a dark red or dark blue, etc. And after this manner with Colors cold, or
but like-warm, you may dye the feathers upon the backs of Poultry, wild fowl,
hair on Dogs, Horses, or the like, in as much varieties as your Fancy can
suggest.

Another fair red for Skins, etc.
Wet your Skins or Fells in Alum water, in which has been dissolved a like
quantity of Salt with half as much Lime, when being again stretched and dried,
take the last of Brewers drink a quart, put into it an ounce of Braziel powder,
a quarter of an ounce of Vermilion, and an ounce of Alum-powder, thicken them
over a gentle Fire, by continual stirring, and so with a brush or Cloth, rub
over the Skins at an evenness, not laying it thicker on one place than another,
and so do three times successively, suffering them only to dry the mean while,
and your expectation will be answered.

To dye Skins a crimson Color, etc.
Scrape hard soap three ounces, and dissolve it in fair water, add to that
three ounces of Alum, boil them over a gentle Fire; till the water grow clammy,
or a little inclining to thickish; then put in a few grains of Cochinele, half
an ounce of Lake, two ounces of red lead, and a quarter of an ounce of
Vermilion, and a small piece of Indico, mix them well by stirring together, and
keep them upon a gentle Fire, till they are about the thickness of the white of
an Egg; then having first rubbed your Skin over with Alum-water, and suffered
it to dry, apply this color, as has been directed in the former.

To color Skins a light blue or Turkey Color.
Take Smalt two ounces, red wine a quarter of a pint, Alum two ounces, Vinegar
half a Pint, and white starch half an ounce, put them over a gentle Fire, not
suffering them to become over thick; and then soaking the Skins with
Alum-water, and suffering them to dry as usually, add to this coloring half a
pint of Gumwater tolerably thick, and lay it on, glazing it over when dry with
a polisher.

To color a light green.
Take the Herb called Horse Tail, bruise it, and add to the juice a small
quantity of Verdgrease, Alum and Coperas, and over a gentle Fire, make it into
a color; which will prove very pleasant and delightful.

To dress, or cover Leather with Silver or Gold.
Take that which is called brown red, and grind, or move it on a stone with a
muller, adding water, and chalk, the latter being dissolved, and with it rub,
or lightly dawb the Skins over, till they look a little whitish; and then,
before they are quite dry, lay on your Leaf-Silver or Gold, placing the Leaves
a little over each other, that no Intermission be found; and when they have
well closed with the Leather, and are sufficiently dried on, rub them over with
a polisher made of smooth Ivory, or of a Horses Fore-tooth, and you will
perceive it very splendid.

Another way of gilding Leather more lasting than the former, viz.
Take Gleer made, or consisting of the whites of Eggs, or you may for want of
the former make Gum-water, and with a brush run over the Leather with either of
them; which done, lay on your Gold or Silver, and burnish it over as the former.

To make Leather shine without any Gold, etc.
Take whites of Eggs, Gum-water, and powder of Antimony, mix them well
together, by beating, and having your Skins well dried, lay the mixture on
them, and do it often, till the Leather be quite hid; which done, let the
mixtures dry; and then burnish them over; and for want of Antimony, you may use
black Lead.

CHAP. III. How to recover faded Colors in Cloth or Silk, to take Spots,
Stains, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Grease, Wax, Oil, etc. out of Silks, Stuffs, Woollen
or Linen, to preserve them from Damage of Worms, Moths, etc. and other matters,
etc.
To make Cloth that has lost its Color recover it and look fresh and bright.
TAke of unquenched Lime two ounces, of the Ashes of the Bark of Oak, the like
quantity, and put them into a quart of fair water, mixing them well, and
suffering a settlement for the space of an hour, drawing off the clear part,
and therewith wash or carry over with a hard brush the Cloth, and by twice or
thrice carrying it over, it will look fair and bright.

To wash Scarlet that is soiled or greasy.
Take two ounces of white Tartar, beat it finely, and heat it over a Fire in a
pint of fair water, till it be thoroughly dissolved and very hot, then
suffering it to cool a little, take an indifferent hard brush, and dip into it,
rubbing it ^ightly over with the same, and by so doing in a short time it will
return to its first Estate and Color.

To restore Silks of any Color in the like nature as the former.
Take an ounce of unslaked Lime, and the like quantity of the Ashes of Vine
Branches, and as much of Oak-Bark, mix them well together in fair water, and
make a kind of a Ley with them over a gentle Fire; which being settled, take the
clear part, and with a brush or sponge rub over the faded part, and it will in
a short time restore it.

To make a Soap to take Grease, Spots, or Stains out of Cloth, Stuffs, Silks,
etc.
Take a pound of Roch-Alum, burn it well, and beat it into Powder, add to it
the powder of the roots of Florence-flame, an herb so called, about half a
pound, and to these add a new laid Egg, and two pound and a half of Cake Soap,
make them up with fair water into round balls; and when you are desirous to
take out any Spot or Stain, wash well the place first with warm water, and then
lay a laying of this Soap upon it for three or four hours; and then wash it off
with other warm water, and in often so doing they will disappear.

An other excellent and approved way.
Take Wood Sorrel and distill it in an Alimbeck with Fumitory, and wash the
damaged place therewith, and it will in frequently so doing restore it.

A way to take Spots out of Linen or Woolen, if colored.
Take of the juice of a Limon, two spoonfulls, one Spoon full of the Juice of
an Onion, and warm them over the Fire, and with them often wash the Spots, and
they will no more appear.

How to make a good Ley to take out Spots and Stains, viz
Put into three pints of Water half a pound of Soap-boilers Ashes, and suffer
them with daily stirring, to remain in it for the space of four days, then pour
off the clear water; then mix it, as you see convenient with Fullers Earth, and
lay it hot on the place, and it will with often using effect your desire.

A very good way to take Spots of Oil out of Cloth.
Take Oil of Tartar, and mixing it with the powder of a burnt bone, apply it to
the spot, and hold over or upon it a spoon wherein is a live coal, and the heat
thereof will attract the grease and render the spot invisible.

To take Pitch, Tar, Ros^n or Bees wax out of any Stuff, Silk or Cloth.
Take Oil of Turpentine, warm it a little, and apply it to the place, suffering
it to soak in for the space of an hour; and then gently rub it, and you will
perceive the Rosin, etc. losened and instantly to crumble away.

A Soap water to take out any manner of spots, how to make it.
Boil Straw-berries, or the Leaves thereof in a quart of fair water, and a pint
of Vinegar; then add two pounds of Casteel Soap, and half a pound of Chalk
finely scraped, boil them till the moisture is consumed, and when you have
Occasion, wet the place with sharp Vinegar, and rub it over with this Soap,
drying it afterward against a Fire or in the Sun.

A speedy way to take all manner of Spots, or Stains, out of Scarlet, or out of
Velvet, of what Color soever, not changing it.
Take Soap-wort, an herb so called, strain out the Juice, it being bruised, add
to the Juice a small quantity of black Soap, if the Scarlet be ^^t dyed in
clear grain, and these being made ^^in, wash the place with the liquid part,
suf^^ring it to dry between whiles, and by this means in a day or two, you will
perceive the Spots to disappear.

To take Iron Moulds or Stains out of Linen.
Take the Juice of a Limon, warm it with a little Powder of Alum dissolved in
it, wet it, and as it is wet, dry it with a spoon, wherein is a live coal, and
so continue to do for the space of two hours, and the Spot or Iron-mould in a
washing or two will disappear. This likewise will take out Spots of Ink, etc.

To take out oily Spots out of parchment or oily Paper the manner.
Take the Powder of burnt Bone, finely fifted, and place between two boards,
pressing it hard, ^ome of the powder on either side the Spot, and ^n two days
it will be quite vanished.

An excellent way to take Spots or Stains out of Linen, viz.
Take fair water, and dissolve it in Bay Salt, and steep the Linen therein;
then take juice of ^^rrel and sharp Vinegar, and ^ub the Spot with them,
suffering it likewise to soak in, and in so often doing it will disappear.

To take away Ink-Stains, Stains with Fruit, etc.
Take the powder of Alum half an ounce, the juice of Housleek or Sengreen two
ounces, and apply them, the Alum being dissolved very hot, and the business
will be effected.

Instructions how to keep Silks from staining in the washing.
Heat rainwater, and when it is very hot, put into it casteel Soap, dissolve
it well; then suffer it to be almost cold, after which, sprinkle in a small
quantity of fulling Earth, and so scowre out your Silks; then suffer them not
to lie on heaps, but spread them, and clap them between clean dry Clothes, and
they will be fresh and fair.

Directions to keep Linen laid up without using from Damage for many Years.
Having washed, and well dried your Line^ the Sun, fold it up, and scatter in
the foldin^ the Powder of Cedar wood or Cedar sma^^ ground, having first
perfumed your Chest wi^^ storax; by which means, not only dampness (...)
prevented, but Worms or Moths, etc.

Further Directions, to keep Woollen or Linen sweet and pleasant, as likewise
from being damaged by Moths, Worms, etc.
Take Orange Peels, dry them in an Oven, and beat them to Powder, add to that
Powder of Elicampane roots, the Powder of Arras, and that of Juniper, and air
your Clothes, when you lay them up, over a Fire wherein Bayleaves are cast and
burnt.

A pleasant water to preserve Linen or any other thing a long time, g^ving it
moreover a curious scent.
Take of Spike flowers two pound, Costmary one pound, Balm an handful,
pennyroyal as much, Mace two ounces, Arras Powder an ounce, soak these in
White Wind, and distill them, and sprinkle your Clothes in a fair day, suffering
them afterward to dry, and then lay them up.

A good way to wash any Linen or Woollen inter woven with Gold or Silver, and
not to impair it.
Dip the part you design to favor in Urine and Alum, and suffer it well to be
soaked; then soap the rest, but not that place, and having washed it, hang it
to dry in the shade, and your expectation will be answered.

To remove stains occasioned by Wine or Vinegar.
Take new Milk, and steep the thing stained therein a night; then take Runnet,
and apply to the Stain, rubbing it in; and by so doing twice or thrice, you
will find it fair as at first.

To make Linen that is turned yellow, very white.
Heat Milk over the Fire, and add to a Gallon a pound of Cake soap scraped in,
so that it may dissolve, and when the Clothes have boiled therein, take them
out, and clap them into a Lather of hot water, and wash them out speedily.

To whiten Cloth the best way.
Take your Cloth, and buck it well; then spread it upon the Grass, and sprinkle
it with Alum-water, suffering it to continue abroad for three or four days;
then buck it again with Soap and fullers Earth, and use it as before, and so it
will be both thick and white.

CHAP. IV. Directions to scowre Silver and gold Lace, make Plate bright, and
look like new, take Spots and Stains out of it, to diaper Linen, whiten Ivory,
make Cement for broken Glasses, etc. Perfumes of diverse kinds, Musk-balls, and
many other things and matters, etc.
To scowre Silver, and Gold Lace, and to restore it to its first Luster, as
also Imboss, or Imbroid^ry.
TAke the Lace, and lay it as smooth as may be upon a dry Woollen Cloth; then
burn Alum, and beat it to Powder, sifting it afterward through a very fine
fieve; then with a brush, rub it gently over the Lace, and by so doing, and
often turning it, the business will come to Perfection. And thus,

To scowre, and take Stains out of any Silver Plate, etc.
Steep you Plate in Soap-leys for the space of four hours; then run it over
with whiting wet with Vinegar, so that it may stick thick upon it, and dry it
by a Fire; after which, rub off the whiting, and pass it over with dry bran,
and the Spots will not only disappear, but it will look exceeding bright.

To boil up Plate, that it may look like new.
Take of unslaked Lime a pound, of Alum the like quantity, Aqua vitae and
Vinegar of each a pint, and of Beer grounds two quarts, boil the P^ate in
these, and they will set a curious gloss upon it.

To make any Linen at the first appearance look like Diaper.
Take it when new washed, spread it upon a Table somewhat damp, and sprinkle it
over with a brush dipped in Alum and Rose Water, in form and manner, as best
shall suit with your fancy.

To whiten any piece of Ivory, that is turned yellow, as also Bone, etc.
Take a pound of Quicklime beat small, and place it on the Ivory, till it be
covered; then pour gently, and by degrees Vinegar thereon, and so suffering it
to lie for the space of twenty four hours, take it out, and rub it with
Alum-Powder, and the first whiteness will be restored and in the like manner
Bone may be used and ordered.

To cement broken Glass, or China ware a good way.
Take the whites of two Eggs, half an ounce of Quicklime beaten to Powder, a
dram of the Powder of burnt Flint, and the like quantity of Gum-sandrick,
temper them well together, and, add for the better moistening a little Lime
juice; then with a Feather anoint the edges of the broken Vessels, and clap the
pieces together by a warm Fire, and if your hand be light and steady in the
Performance, the Fracture will hardly be discerned.

To remove Spots and Stains out of very thin Silks, etc.
Take White Wind Vinegar a pint, make it indifferent warm, then dip a black
Cloth into it, and rub over the Stains, then scrape Fullers-Earth on it, and
clapping dry Woollen Clothes above and beneath, place an Iron indifferently hot
on the uppermost, and it will draw out the Spot, etc.

To make an excellent Perfume preventing pestilential Airs, etc.
Take Benjamin half an ounce, Storax the like quantity, as much of Galbanum,
temper them being bruised into Powder with the Oil of Myrrh, and burn them in a
Chasing-dish, or for want of these, take Rosemary, Balm and Bayleaves, heat
them in Wine and Sugar, and suffering the moisture to consume, let them
likewise burn by the heat of the pan, and they will cast a curious scent.

To perfume Cloths.
Take the best Cloves an ounce, dry them in an Oven, and beat them to Powder,
do the same by a like quantity of the Wood of Rheubarb and Cedar, and sprinkle
them in your Box or Chest, and they will not only cast a curious scent, but
likewise preserve them against Worms and Moths.

A curious Scent, or Perfume, to carry with one, when going abroad in damp
Airs, or to visit sick or infected Persons, and is wonderful good for all Pains
in the head.
Take Orange-flower Butter an ounce, Oil of Nutmeg, a quarter of an ounce,
Ambergrease a dram and Civet a scruple, mix them well together, and carry a
small box of it about you, smelling to it as you have occasion.

To make a sweet scented Powder very pleasant.
Take Rice-grounds, and the small of white ^^arch a like quantity, pound them
in a Mortar, and sift them well through a fine sieve, dry the dust in an Oven
or before the Fire; then infuse to each pound a grain of Civet, and half an
ounce of Rose scent, and keep it close looped up, till it be well infused; and
then use it for your Hair, or otherways at your discretion.

To make scented Wash-balls the best way to keep, etc.
Take Casteel Soap, scrape it into new milk, and heat it over the Fire, till it
melt and again become thick, then put a small quantity of Amber grease,
Lavender cotton flowers beaten, and dried, till they are as fine as Meal, and a
little Spirit of Cloves or Cinnamon, and so make them up into balls, and lay
them a drying in a warm place, but not in the Sun.

A Perfume to drive Vermin out of a House, etc.
Take Burgundia-Pitch an ounce, Brimstone half an ounce, Storax the like
quantity, the Powder of Mother-Amber a dram, beat and mix them well together,
and burn them upon a Chasing-dish, and where the scent comes, the Mice and Rats
will fly with much speed to avoid it.

An Ointment or Perfume to remove an evil scent that has tainted the brain, etc.
Ta^^ of the Oil of Bay Berries, half an ounce of the Powder of Frankincense a
dram; the Oil of Mace or Spirit a scruple, as much of the Oil of Turpe^tine,
mix them well together, and keep them in an Essence bottle.

An Essence that will immediately perfume the place. How to make i^.
Take Cinnamon an ounce, Camphora half an ounce, Opopanax a dram, Roses clean
picked a handful;, Rue and Rosemary flowers the like quantity, the Gum of Myrrh
a dram, bruise them well, and put them into a small Alembick or glass retort,
and take the Essential part in a Bottle, stopping it close, unless when
occasion requires it, and then by opening it, you will suddenly find the
Effects answer your Expectation.

CHAP. V. The curious Art of drawing in all its Perfection, as well humane
Bodies, as Birds, Beasts, Fish, Landskips, Building, and many other rare
Portraicts, by plain and easy Rules, in due proportion and manner.
SEeing limning or drawing is an Art very curious, much admired, and sought
after in all Ages, and especially in the present, I have thought it convenient
to lay down Methods and Rules for the Instruction of Learners especially,
thereby to enable them for greater acquirements, etc.

The first material thing to be known, is, the necessary Instruments requisite
to be used on this occasion, which are first Sallow-coals, or Sallow-wood burnt
to a Char-coal, that it may be sharpened in the form of a Pencil, to touch over
lightly the first draught. Secondly the out Feathers of a Duck's Wing, to wipe
off, as you see occasion, what is superfluous, or the matter designed to be
altered. Thirdly, black lead Pencils well pointed to go over your draught the
second time. Fourthly, Pens made of Ravens or Crows Quills, to finish the
design, by giving a more curious piece. Fifthly, a rule and a pair of Compasses
with three points to take in and out at pleasure, the one for black Lead, the
other for white chalk or red, or any other paste, and the use of the compass is
to be observed in most drawings, to mark out the equal distances after your
ou^-stroaks are drawn.

Having the forementioned things in a readiness proceed to practice, and in the
first part begin with a plain Geometrical Figure, such as are found to be the
Circle, Oval, square, cone, Cylinder, Triangle, which accordingly, you may mark
out with your rule and compass, till you can re^dily do it without them, for a
Circle well carried will much avail you in any orbicular Form; as the Sun,
Moon, Globe of the World, etc. The Oval is a direction for the Mouth, Face, the
Foot of a Wine or Beer Glass, etc. The square is very useful in confining the
Picture, you are to copy. The Triangle wonderfully assists you in making half a
face. The Cone will assist you in drawing Colosses Spires of Steeples, and the
like. The Cylinder assists you in drawing Pillars, pilasters, Colums, together
with their Ornaments proper to Architecture, etc.

Having considered the matters premised, proceed to draw Pears, Cherries,
Apples, Apricots, Peaches, Grapes, Straw-berries, Peasecods, but Terfles and
other Insects with Flowers and Branches of Trees in their proportion, and being
a little perfect at these, proceed to the third practice, which is usually
imitating Beasts, As.

1. Those that are more heavy and dull, viz. the Elephant, the Bear, Cow, Ox or
Bull, and sometimes Sheep and Goats; then those more nimble and fleet, as the
Horse, Stag, Heart, Unicorn, Tiger, Lion, etc. And for Birds, practice the
Eagle, the Swan, the Kings Fisher, the Parrot, the Partridge, the Pheasant, and
such like, then again, for Fish, the Whale, Salmon, Pike, Carp, Herring,
Mackrill, Lobster, and such other fishes, as are most in use, to adorn a
Chimney-piece, or any the like matter or business, and from these, proceed to
Mellions, Pumpkins, Ears of Corn, Cucumers, Parsnips, Carrots, Cabbages, etc.
when having practiced your hand in their proportion, and knowing the proper
Colors, of which I shall treat hereafter, you may easily form and illustrate
them, though the excellency of this Art consists in drawing a humane Body to
the life: And because it ought not rashly to be all drawn at once, I shall
proceed to these in order, especially as to the rules in general.

CHAP. VI. To draw the Face in diverse Postures and Proportions, the most exact
Rules, and what of variety is to be considered therein.
For drawing the face, general Rules, etc.
IN this case curiously observe the face in its motion, whether upward,
forward, downward, or side-ways, touching lightly the features, where the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth, and Chin ought to stand; then more perfectly go over them, for the
Circles, Squares and Triangles, that are used in this matter, may serve well
enough, to guide your Judgment where to place them. And in this case, observe
diligently the principal Muscles of a Face, appearing most in aged Men or
Women. And there is usual a threefold proportion observed in a Face, as first
from the top of the Forehead to the Eye brows. Secondly, from the Brows to the
bottom of the Nose, and Thirdly, from thence to the bottom of the Chin, but in
some the Forehead is lower, and in others the Nose longer.

The distances between the Eyes consist in a full Face of the length of one
Eye, but in a three quarter, or side-face, that distance is lessened answerable
to the proportion. As for the Nostril, it ought to be exactly placed against
the corner of the Eye. And in a fat face, you will perceive the cheeks to
swell, when on the contrary, in a lean face, the Jaw-bones stick out, and the
cheeks fall in.

You may discern a smiling countenance, by perceiving the corners of the Mouth
to turn up a little, and a frowning or sour countenance, by the Foreheads
bending and somewhat wrinkling on the top of the Nose.

To draw a fore-right Face, make the form of a perfect Oval, divided into three
equal parts, by two Lines. In the first part, place the Eyes: In the second,
the Nostrils: And in the third, the Mouth, observing to keep the Eyes distant
from each other, the length of one Eye, and that their inward corners be
perfectly over the out side of the Nostrils.

To draw an upright head, it must be made equal with three Lines, every way,
either upwards, downwards, higher or lower, and that must, as the former, be
divided into three equal parts.

To draw the Inclining, or fore-shortened face, observe how the Lines concord
or agree together, and with ease, you may draw, in their proper places, the
Nose, Mouth, and other parts, with a little Practice, and in these forms it is
requisite that you are very perfect as being rules of frequent use; for of the
many parts of Man's Body, the face is most difficult; but having got the true
proportion, with your measures, you will be capable, let the face turn which
way it will, to form it; and further note, that whatsoever proportion the Face
you are to imitate bears, your out strokes must be formed accordingly.

As for the Nose, it requires to its due proportion much care and diligence, as
being the most eminent part of the Face; in which, especially, observe the
hollowness, roundness, and indenting of the Nostrils, etc.

The next thing, especially where the body is to be covered, is to be
considered of the Hands, in their several postures and positions, as well by
measure, as without, as also Hands, and Arms of whose postures, as well as the
former, it would not be unnecessary for the Learner, to get draughts for his
better imitation, which may be had at most Picture Shops, for a small matter
ready done.

When you have practiced, and are a little expert in drawing the Hands and
Arms, etc. proceed to the drawing of Feet in their several Postures, as well
without, as with measure; which having attained separate, exercise your skill
in drawing Legs and Feet conjunct or joined together, that so understanding the
frame and particulars of the whole body, you may be the better understanding in
drawing the Figures in their due proportion and right Postures, in doing which
there is no small difficulty. And in this manner, having proceeded to form the
Members, draw the other parts of the body, as the Shoulders, Back, Breast,
Belly, Secrets, Thighs, and the like, and lastly take care in due proportion to
join them, that they may appear firm and complete.

Coming to practice upon an entire body the best way is to begin with those of
Children; and my reason is, because they are generally fat and plump, and
rounder than the Bodies of Men and Women, and consequently require so much
curiosity in the observation of Muscles and other Features, which render the
drawing less difficult.

As for your further Direction in drawing, observe ever to begin at the Head,
and so proceed by degrees, running the whole lightly over at the first, and
increasing more fully, as you see occasion, ever being careful to take notice,
that your parallel Joints, Muscles, Sinews, etc. be rightly proportioned, and
exactly opposite; also that the motions of the Body be answerable to each
other, and that the Parts and Limbs have a due Symmetry, not being faulty in
the indecency of having one great Arm or Leg, and another small one, nor a
great Finger upon a small Hand, neither further than the proportion requires,
suffer one Limb, or Member to be longer than another; and although it so
happen, which it frequently does, that at first you commit Errors of this
nature, yet be not discouraged, for frequent practice will redress them.

Having thus far proceeded with Success, and being indisterent perfect herein,
you must consider what it is to shadow; and in this case, observe the following
Rules, viz.

The out Lines of the draught of any Picture, give the symmetry or proportion,
which ought to be sufficient to a good Judgment, but the Lines and Shadows
produce to the less curious, the lively likeness in shadowing; therefore of any
Picture, you must take notice to cast your shadow always one way, viz. on which
side soever you begin to shadow your Figure, whether on the right or left Hand,
as in the Figure of a Man, if you first proceed to shadow his left Cheek, the
left side of his Neck, Body, and all other parts must be shadowed, unless the
light side of the Figure be dark, by reason of some other Body standing between
the Light and it, as suppose three men were standing together; then must the
Body, or Figure in the middle be darkened by the foremost, unless the light by
facing it come between them.

Further, note, that all shadows must consequently grow fainter, as they are
further removed from the opacous Body from whence they proceed. But in case of
Storms, where Clouds, or Waves, by contending Winds are driven one against
another, contrary shadows are allowed, as striving for Superiority, and so you
must be sure to supply the greatest first, and according to your Judgment,
supply from them the lesser.

All circular Bodies must have a circular shadow, as they have a circular form,
and as the object of Light which causes the shadow is circular.

And now for your further Information of this kind, observe that a Man standing
from the top of the head, to the bottom of the feet, is in due proportion eight
times the length of the Head. The Arm when it hangs straight down, reaches
within a span of the Knee; the Hand must be the length of the Face, and spread
broad, must cover it, and no more; and further note, that in drawing a Figure
standing, you must in the first place draw that Leg, which the Body stands firm
upon, or else your Figure will undecently decline one way more than another, as
if it were falling. The Arms of a Man extended are his full length; and so of a
Woman in the various particulars. Thus having directed you in the drawing and
proportioning naked Figures, I now proceed to give directions about Garments,
etc.

As in naked Figures, it is observed you draw the out-Lines first; so you must
do in Drapery or Clothing, leaving space within for your greater or lesser
folds; then first draw the greater folds, and break them into lesser contained
within them, and the closer the Garment sits to the Body, the narrower and
smaller must be the folds, and in shadowing, the innermost must be the harder,
and the outermost softer.

Continue always throughout your Garment the great folds, but as for the
lesser, break them off, as you see convenient, and the finer your drapery is,
the fuller, and sharper must your folds be, and the shadow the stronger, yet
more pleasant to the Eye, ever taking notice, that that part of any Garment
that sits close, as the body Coat of a Man, the Breasts of a Woman, and the
like, must not at all be folded, but rather with a sweet shadow represent that
part of the Body, that the Garment appears to cover, as Woman's Breasts, with a
sweet found shadow, etc. And thus much for the body of Man in drawing.

CHAP. VII. Land-skips, what they are, and what is required in the drawing, and
curious proportioning them pleasant to the Eye of Fancy, etc.
A Landscape is that which gives a pleasant prospect of Trees, Hills, Rivers,
Cattle, and other Rural delights, with Towns, Cities, Castles, Promontories,
Rocks, Ships, Boats, Barges, and whatever the fancy of that kind can form. To
express which, and make all truly appear naturally, as they ought, according to
the true proportion and distance, observe in every Landscape, to make a very
fair Horizon appear, the Sky either clear, or over-cast with Clouds, expressing
the rising or setting of the Sun, to issue as it were from or over some Hill,
Mountain or Rock; but in a fair Landscape, beware you express not the Moon or
Stars, which are only to be seen in a Night-piece; and in case, such a piece be
required, you may draw an Astronomer with his Quadrate, taking the height of
the Moon, another with his Crossstaff, taking the distance of certain Stars,
some standing with a dark Lanthorn far from them, to give them knowledge of
their degrees, an Owl flying in the Air, Men catching of Partridges with low
Bells, a Woolf worrying of Sheep and the like, being natural to such pieces.

If in any fair Landscape you express the Light of the Sun, ever observe, that
throughout your whole Piece, you cast the Light of your Trees, Buildings,
Rocks, Ruins, and all things mentioned, or expressed within the work
thither-ward: observe further to lessen your Bodies proportionably, according
to the nearness, or distance they should naturally appear, so that the further
the Landscape goes from your Eye, the fainter you must express any thing seen
at distance, till at last the Earth or Water, and Sky seem to meet, as do the
Colors in a Rain bow, wherefore when at any time you see good pieces of this
kind, take your observation more particularly from them, and imprint the fancy,
as well as may be in your mind.

CHAP. VIII. The curious and much esteemed Science of Painting or Limning in
Water Colors, and how exactly to proceed therein, either on Parchment, Glass
or Copper, with the mixture, and distinction of the sundry Colors, and other
rare Curiosities.
HAving gone over that which we may properly term limning, or as many will have
it drawing, I now come to that part, vulgarly known by the Appellation of
Limning, viz. laying in water Colors the most curious of all, and much
practiced by Persons of the best Quality.

To fit your self, and prepare for the practice of this, you must have Gums of
all sorts to make your waters as occasion requires; also a Marble flat stone, a
Muller, Colors of various forts, liquid Gold and Silver, Size to lay Gold,
etc. Parchment, of the finest pencils of sundry sorts, pots and Shells to put
your Colors in.

To make your Gum-water take Gum-arabick, white, clear, or transparent, for
that which is yellow, or of an Amber-Colour is insignificant; tie up a quantity
in a rag, and hang it in fair water, till it be dissolved; then the water being
stiff enough for your purpose, mix your Colors with it, always having two
sorts to make a weaker or stronger, as the matter requires.

Gum-lake is a compound Gum, made of whites of Eggs, finely beat, Honey, Gum,
of Ivy, strong wort, etc. which being well mingled and beat together, they will
run like Oil, and in the end harden, and this you may buy ready made, as the
former, observing only, that it be clear and transparent.

As for the Colors, there are simply six, viz. white, black, red, yellow,
green, and blue, to which some add browns, but they are generally compounded,
and of either of these, there are several sorts, as these, viz. Blacks the
best, are burnt Ivory, Cherry-stones, Lamp-black. The whites are Ceruss and
white Lead. The reds are red Lead and Lake. The Blews are Indico, Ultramarine,
Bise-smalt. The Greens are bise, Sap-green, Pink, Cedar-green. The yellows are
English Oker and Masticore. The Browns are Umber, Collens-earth, Spanish- brown.

These (though there are others) are the principal Colors in limning; and
therefore, I choose to speak of these only in this place, the others omitted,
being fit only to color Pictures or wash Maps, etc. and of these

The Colors to be washed are Bise-smak, Cedar, Ultramarine, Masticote, and red
Lead. The Sap-green is only to be steeped, and the rest I have meationed are to
be washed and ground.

To wash Colors, you must put a quantity of the Color intended into a clean
earthen dish, and pour water thereto very clear, stirring the Color and water
together, suffering it to stand a while, and perceiving the grease or scum to
rise, take it off, and pour out that water, putting other water to the Color,
etc. and so do, till the water become clear, and the Color at the bottom
remain fine; then pour away the water gently, and you will find the Color
sticking about the sides and edges of the dish, as also at the bottom, and if
it so happen, that you can get an ounce of pure Color out of a pound (tho the
rest is serviceable for many uses) it is sufficient.

In steeping Sap-Green, you must put it only into fair water, adding a fourth
part of Alumpowder to raise the Color, and at the end of twenty four hours it
will be a curious green.

As for the Colors that are to be washed and ground, take a small quantity of
either; and put it into a clean shell, adding a drop or two of Gum-water, and
work it about the sides of the shell with your finger, suffering it there to
stick, till it is dry; then draw over it your Finger, and if any come off; then
you must add more Gumwater, but being dry, if it glitter or shine, it is a
token there is too much Gum in it, which you must remedy, by tempering it up
with fair water only.

There are some Colors, as Umber and Lake, which parch and crack when they are
dry, and therefore to bind them, you must temper them with fine Sugar Candy
dissolved in fair water, and so you must do by other hard Colors subject to
this defect.

To burn the Color thereto appropriated, put them into a crucible, cover it
with a Lid of Clay, and set it on a hot fire, and suffer it to be red hot, and
when the Color is cold, you may wash or grind it, as the Nature requires, but
do neither before they be thoroughly burnt.

To grind the Colors, I have directed so to be used, take a quantity of any of
them cleansed from dirt and filth, and laying it upon your stone, bruise it a
little with your Muller; and then with fair water grind it, till the Color be
very fine, then have in readiness a large chalk stone with troughs, or furrows
in it, and pour your Color into it, and there suffer it to remain till it be
well dry, at what time take it out, and reserve it in Papers, or Boxes for your
use --

Of these six simple Colors, adding the brown, many may be compounded for
faces of all Complexions, Garments, Land-skips, Building, Rivers, Birds, Fish,
Beasts, etc. As thus,

To make Violet Color take Indico, white and Lake, and at pleasure, you may,
as you take more or less of a Color make it lighter, or darker at Pleasure.

Lead Color, you may make of Indico, and white mixed and tempered together.

Make Flame Color, or Color for flaming Fire of red Lead and Masticote
heightened with white.

To make a scarlet Color, take red Lead, Lake, and a small quantity of
Vermilion: For note, that the latter is not good in limning.

To make light green, take Pink, and Smalt with white, to make it lighter, as
occasion requires.

To make a purple Color, take Indico, Spanish brown, and white well tempered
and ^^ightned

To make a Bay Color, take only Spanish brown and white.

To make a Murrrey Color, take Lake and white.

Many other Colors are made by mixture, too tedious here to be recited;
wherefore, I leave them to the discretion of the Practitioner, to mix them
suitable to his work or fancy, and proceed to the practical part of this
curious Art, etc.

CHAP. IX. Instructions for the preparing your Tablets, and laying on your
Colors in their graceful Shadows and proportion, and what is to be observed,
as to the Lines in the Face, Complexion, and Procedure in drawing curious, and
many other matters.
WHen you have prepared your Colors, prepare likewise good Pencils, to know
them, draw them wet through your Mouth, and if they come to a hair, or sharp
point, they are good, but if they after that stand rough, or hairs stare, or
start out at the side, they are naught, and to be rejected.

The next thing is to prepare your Table; and in this case, get a fine
Paste-board sleeked as smooth as a Card; then fine Parchment or Vellum, and
starch it upon the board, as smooth and even, that no wrinkle, or rising may
appear; to perfect which, you must lay the Parchment side on your Stone rubbed
very clean, and polish the contrary side, and so let it dry in the shade.

Having thus prepared a Table, as big as you intend your Picture, choose a Light
fair and large, free from shadow, being if possible a Sky-light on the top of a
house, yet such a one, as the Sunbeams do not penetrate, or glance upon,
observing to begin and end your work by one and the same light, keeping the
room clean, that no dust may fly about to prejudice your work.

The next thing to be considered is your manner of sitting; and in this case,
let your Desk be so placed, that when you sit before it, your left Arm may be
placed toward your light, and your right Arm from it, that your light may
slaunt upon your work. And if you are to draw the Picture of any live Person,
the posture being agreed upon, suffer him or her to sit above two yards distant
from you, and as level with you as may be, marking well, that whenever the
Party moves, though never so little, for never so little motion of the Body or
Face, if not recalled, may occasion in a short time many Errors, and when you
undertake this, the following Materials are requisite to be near you, viz.

Two small dishes or sawcers with clean water, the one to wash your Pencils in
when foul, and the other to tamper your Colors withal; a fine large Pencil to
cleanse your work, called a Fitch-pencil; a sharp Penknife to take off hairs,
coming from your Pencil or Spots, that may fall upon your Card; a Paper having
holes cut therein, to lay upon your Card, to cover it from dust, and to rest
your Hand upon.

If your Carnation, or flesh Color be tempered up, it must be somewhat
lighter, than the Complexion of the Party you are to draw. If it be a fair
Complexion, you must have white Lead, and red Lead well tampered. If the
Complexion be swarthy or brown, add to your white and red Lead, Masticote, or
English Oker, or both, if occasion require it; but let the Complexion be what
it will, be sure to tamper your Flesh Color lighter than the Party to be
drawn; for if it be too sad, there is no remedy; and observe to place your
Shadows distinct from each other in a large shell: And note, that in all your
Shadows, you must use some white, wherefore in the first place, lay a
considerable quantity of white by it self, over and above what the shadows are
at first tempered withal. In the second place, for red usual to the cheeks, and
Lips, tamper Lake, and red Lead. In the third place, for your blue shadows, as
Veins, or under the Eyes, take Indico and white. In the fourth place, for your
faintish green shadow, take English Oker, White, and Indico, or sometimes
Masticote. In the fifth place, for a deep shadow, take white, and English Oker,
and Umber. Sixthly, for Dark shadows, in the Faces of Men, take Lake and Pink,
for they make an excellent fleshy shadow. And these being the chief shadows, I
leave what may further occurr of this kind to your discretion.

Having all things in readiness, the next thing you proceed to, is to draw the
face, in doing which; take the following method, viz. lay the ground, with the
Color answerable to the Complexion of the Party; and then begin the draught,
the Party sitting. Now to finish a Face three Operations of sitting are
required. At the first sitting, you must only lay the dead Color At the
second, go over the Face more curiously, nearly observing whatsoever may
conduce to the Grace, or Deformity of the Person to be drawn, considering it in
a sweet dispose, and well couching the Colors one within another. And in this
sitting, you perfect what only was rough before, by laying on the deep Colors,
so that at the third sitting, you may finish the Face, as in the Eyes,
Eyebrows, Hair, and Ears, which things are the last work, and not to be
perfected, till the Hair, Curtain, or Backside of the Picture, as also the
Drapery be finished. And of these sittings in their Order.

The Operation of the first sitting, etc.
Having laid your ground for the general Complexion, the next work must be to
draw the out Lines, which you must effect with Lake, and white mingled drawing
very faintly; so that if you chance to miss your proportion, you may alter it
with a deeper mixture of the same Color.

Having drawn the proportion of the Face, add to the former Color a small
proportion of red Lead, tempering it faintly to the Color of the Cheeks, and
Lips, at the tips of the Chin, and Ears, about the Eyes, and the roots of the
Hair, placing the red shadows, and as for the shadows, they must not be put in
with the flat of the Pencil, but with small touches after the manner of
hatching, and in this manner going over the Faces, you will cover your ground
with these and the like Shadows, and in these dead Colors, your curiosity need
not be great, only strive to imitate Nature, as near, as may be, for the
roughness of the Colors may be mended at the second Operation.

Having duly placed, and proportioned your red shadows; in the next place, put
in your faint blue shadows about the Corners of the Eyes, and Balls, etc and
your greyish blue under the Eyes, and about the Temples, working them sweetly
and faintly over by degrees, heightning the shadow, as the Light falls; as
likewise the hard shadows in the dark side of the Face under the Eye brows,
Nose, Chin, and Neck, with some stronger touches on those places, than on the
light side of the Face, and so bring all your work together to an equal
roundness, giving Perfection to no particular Part, at this time, but take a
full view of your object; and consider, how near you hit the Life, not only in
seeming likeness but roundness, boldness of Posture, coloring, and such like.
And having by this time wrought your fainter shadows into the red shadows, you
may venture to take a touch at the hair, disposing it in such curls, folds, and
forms, as you shall see convenient for Grace and Ornament, only drawing it with
some Color suitable to the Life, and fill up the empty space with Colors,
deepening it somewhat more strongly, than before in the deepest shadowed
places, and this may suffice for the first Operation.

The second Operation or sitting.
In this sitting, the party must take the same Place, and Posture, as before,
and then be curious to delineate with your Pencil, the particular varieties of
Nature; and as you drew them over but rudely before, you now must sweeten them
with the same Colors, by working, and driving them one into another; so that
no rough edge, nor lump of Color may appear, and this must be done, with a
Pencil sharper than the former, by which means the shadow may be soft and
smooth.

Thus having done, proceed to the backside of your Picture, and if there a
Curtain, as is the usual manner, be required, we will suppose it to be blue
Satin, and to do it, temper as much Bise in a shell, as will cover a small
Card, suffering it to be moist and well bound with Gum; then draw with your
Pencil the outlines of your Curtain, as also of your Picture, and so lay it
over very thin, and airy with a large Pencil, that it may be the whole ground,
you intend to do with blue; and then lay it over again with a substantial body
of the same Color; in doing which, you must be swift, keeping your Color
moist, and not suffering any part to be dry till all be covered.

If it happen that your Curtain is to be Crimson, you must trace it out with
Lake, and lay the ground with a thin Color, observing where your strong Lights
and Reflections fall, there lay the Lights with a thin, and waterish Color,
and the Ground being yet wet, lay the strong and hard shadows close by the
other Lights, with a dark Color tempered reasonably thick.

Thus having laid your backside, which in the same manner you may do with any
Color. Your next work is, to lay your Linen of a fair white, and your Drapery
flat with the Color you intend it. Then take another view of the Face, and
mark well what shadows are too light, or too deep, and endeavor to reduce each
shadow to its due Perfection; then shadow the entrance into the Ear, and draw
the Lines of the Eye lid, the deepness of the Eye brows, and all the most
eminent Notes and Marks in the Face, doing them with a very curious sharp
Pencil, and then heighten the Hair, deepening it, as it appears in the Life,
casting over the ground some loose Hairs, which will look very pleasant, and
make the Picture seem to stand at some distance from the Curtain.

In the shadowing your Linen, which ought to be very curious, use black, white,
a little yellow, and a small quantity of blue. The black being deepened with
Ivory-black; to which add a small quantity of lake, or Indico: And thus much
for the second Operation, from whence I proceed to the third and last.

The third Operation, etc.
In this, only observe to give strong touches, where you see Cause, or find any
Defect, taking more perfect observations for the rounding of the Face, which at
this sitting is better done than before, noting diligently, whatever may
conduce to similitude, which is the principal in the work; as Scars, Moles,
cast with the Eyes, drawing the Mouth, etc.

In case of Ornaments, as Garments, etc. the ground being laid with Bise; then
the deepening must be Lake, and Indico, the Lightning, white, very fine, faint
and fair; and in the extreme light places, let what has been said of the blue
Drapery suffice, and may be understood of all other Colors; and for the
greater Ornament, you may mix the Light with Gold, or Silver, etc.

If the Body is to be in Armor, lay liquid Silver for your ground, and when it
is well dried and burnished, shadow it with Silver, Umber, and Indico, and work
the shadow upon the Silver, as the life directs, etc.

For Gold Armor, lay liquid Gold for the ground, and shadow it with English
Oker, Lake, and a mixture of Gold.

For Pearls, or that color your ground must be Indico, and white, and the
shadow Pink, and black.

For Diamonds, lay a ground of liquid Silver deepened with Ivory and Cherry
stone-black. And thus much for the Face, Body, etc. as to the laying in water
Color, and the next that present themselves are Landskips.

Directions for laying Landskips, etc.
In this case, always begin with the Sun Beams and Sky, the lightest part
first; and then the yellow, which must be composed of Masticote, and white, the
next your blue Skies with Smalt only leaving no part of your ground at first
uncovered; but lay the Colors smooth all over, working the Sky downward toward
the Horison, still suffering it to grow faint, etc. as it draws nearer the
Earth, and work the tops of Mountains, and other objects very remote, so faint,
that they may appear, as lost in the Air, and as for your lowest and nearest
ground, it must be an Earth Color of dark brown, inclining a little to
yellowish, and green, as the matter requires, and the next a lighter green, and
so successively, as they lose in their distance, you must abate their Color,
nor must you make any thing, you see at a great distance, perfect, or absolute,
what it really is; because it is altogether conjecture, you cannot absolutely
discern it, but express it in Colors weakly, and faintly, as your Eye judges
it may be. And ever observe in this case to place the light against the dark;
and so consequently, the contrary, which is an excellent way, to extend the
Prospect far off, yet do it so, as the shadows may lose in their proportion of
distance, by degrees, their force, as they remove from the Eye, observing
further, that the strongest shadow must ever be nearest. And thus much may
suffice for limning in water Colors, which if duly observed, and practiced,
will wonderfully help the Learner: And in this manner, you may paint upon
Glass, by laying on the fairest Colors if it appear through the Glass first;
but if otherwise, lay first a ground, and especially upon Copper.

CHAP. X. Directions for the most curious Painting, or Limning in Oil, with the
various Colors, and materials required on that occasion, with their manner of
preparing, and ordering; as also Instructions to paint to the Life, etc.
wonderfully pleasing, and much profitable to be known, as well by the Gentry,
and others, as those that intend it for their Profession.
AS this Noble Science, in all Ages, has been held in much Esteem, and
Veneration among Men, in all Ages, it is now more especially covered to be
known, and practiced, by either Sex; wherefore for the better Instruction,
especially of the Learner, I have thought fit to lay down the following plain,
and easy rules, which being well observed, and practiced, may in time bring
him to be a great Master in the Science. But first, of the Colors to be used
on this occasion, without knowing which, the rest may prove ineffectual.

The blacks are Lamp-black. Sea coal-black, Char-coal black, Ivory-black, and
Earth of Collen. The white white Lead only The greens, Verdegrease, Terra-yert,
and Verditer. The yellows are Pink, Masticote, Orpiment, Spruce Oker, English
Oker. The blues are Bise, Smalt, Indico, and Ultramarine. The reds are
Vermilion, red Lead, Indian red, Lake, and Ornotto. The Colors indifferent are
Spanish brown, burnt Spruce, and Umber.

These are the principal Colors to be laid in Oil, and must for the greatest
part of them be ground upon your flat stone with a Muller, with Line-seed Oil,
though as for Ivory, Spruce, Oker, and Umber, they must be burnt before they
are ground. And as for Masticote, Ultramarine, Verditer, Vermilion, Lamp-black,
Smalt, and Orpiment, you may temper them upon your Pallet with Oil, saving your
self the labor of grinding, etc. and as for those, that are to be burnt you
must perform it in a Crucible, and though Line-seed Oil be common to all, yet
in case, with your white Lead; you are to lay Linen, you must mix it with Oil
of Wall nuts by reason the other will in a short time turn yellowish.

The next thing, you are to take care of, is to have good Pencils of all sizes,
a Pallet, or Board, to lay your Colors on, whilst you are using them, and an
Eysil to lay your Cloth upon, or against, and a straining Frame, to which it
must be nailed, and you must further have a Stay or Molestick, which is made of
Braziel, or such Wood, as will not easily bend, about a yard long, at one end
of which, tie a ball of Cotton in a piece of Leather; so that holding it in
your left hand against the work, you may support your right Arm with it, whilst
you are working; and being thus furnished, you may proceed to the work, etc.
And first of the Complexion.

For a fair Complexion.
Take a small quantity of white, and twice as much Vermilion, and Lake, temper
these with the flat of a Knife's Blade upon your Pallet, or Hand-board, and use
it for the deepest Carnation of the Face, adding moreover to a small part of it
more white, and reserve that for a lighter Carnation. And yet another part
being reserved, add more white to it, till it come to the lightest Color in
the Face: And then proceed to prepare the faint shadows, and in doing it.

Take Smalt, and mix it with a little white, which may conveniently serve for
the Eyes; then laying aside the greatest quantity, add to the rest a little
Pink, and these well tempered, will serve for the faint greenish shadow in the
Face; then proceed to prepare your deep shadows: And in order to it, take Lake,
Pink, and Ivory-black a like quantity of each, and temper them together. And if
the Face of the Party, or the Figure you are to copy require redder shadows,
than what you have tempered, add more Lake, if yellower, more Pink, if bluer,
or greyer, then add more black.

Thus having prepared your Pallet with Colors suitable to a fair Face;
consider again, in case the Complexion be more brown, or swarthy, you may
temper the Colors, as before, putting moreover a little quantity of burnt Oker
amongst your Lake, Vermilion, and White, that it may look somewhat tawny
amongst your heightened Colors: In this case, temper a little Oker, so much
only, as will just turn it, and for your very deep, and very faint shadows, you
may use the same, as for the former Complexion.

For a tawny Complexion, use the same, in the general, as before, only let the
shadows be prepared of burnt Oker, and Umber.

For an absolute black Complexion, your dark shadow must be as the fore going,
but as for your heightnings, you must take burnt Oker, Lake, with black and
white, yet but a little of the latter must be put in at first, that you may the
better work it up by degrees: And note, that the single Colors laid at first
upon your Pallet well tempe^ed, according to the foregoing Directions, serve
for shadows for all Complexions.

CHAP. XI. What Pencils are to be used in painting a Face, and how to dispose
them. Directions to paint a Face in Oil Color, and what mixtures are requisite
for Carments, etc.
YOur Pencils, how small soever, ought to have a stick about nine inches long,
cut, or sharpened at the farthest end into a point, and when you are to draw
any Face, lay together two Ducks Quills Fitch-Pencils, two Goose Quill fitch'd,
two pointed, and two bristled, the pairs being exactly alike; and when you are
to use them, having your Pallet in a readiness upon your thumb, take them in
your right Hand, and put the ends of your sticks into your left Hand, keeping
when you work the hairy ends, at a distance lest the Colors intermingle, and
so proceed to your work, viz. your Cloth being ready primed, and strained upon
your Frame, scrape it over with a Knifes edge, not very sharp, to take off the
knots, if any appear, and so set your Frame and Cloth upon your Eysel a
convenient height, so that you sitting upon a Stool level with the Party or
Copy you draw, may the better have the Picture equal, etc. placing it according
to your Light, as I have directed in Water-limning; then with a piece of Chalk
draw the proportion of the Face upon the Cloth, making the place for the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth, Ears, Hair, etc. Then take a Swans Quill pointed Pencil, and begin
with some of the lightest Colors in the lightest part of the Face (the Cloth
before being primed, or groundlaid) as the heightning of the Forehead,
Cheekbone, Nose, etc. on the lightest side, and when you have done that, next
proceed to the mean parts, viz. those not altogether so light, as the Cheek
bone of the fore-shortning, or dark side, the Chin and upper Lip and by degrees
come to the reddest part of all.

Having thus far proceeded, lay the greenish faint shadows in places
convenient, and where you see cause, to moderate the harder shadows; but have
especial regard not to place the green, where the red should be: And so, all
the faint, and light beginnings being put in, take a Ducks Quill fitch'd, and a
Goose-Quill pointed Pencil, and begin at the Eyes to shadow with Lake, and
trace out those parts of the Face therewith, that require it, as the Eyes,
Nose, Mouth, the compass of the Ears, etc. and do this before you lay on any
Color, lightly wiping it over with a linen rag, to prevent theovercoming of
other Colors.

Having now put in all the Colors, dark, and light, take a large fitched
Pencil, and sweeten the Colors: That is, go over the several shadows with a
clean, soft Pencil, which by a gentle, and dexterous handling, will force, or
drive the Colors into each other; so that they will represent the laying on at
once, and not at several times. This being done, begin again with your clean
Pencils of such bigness, as the work requires; then, the Party sitting in the
posture as before, take a curious view, and see what defects you find in the
work, and amend them; after that proceed to heighten, or deepen your shadows,
as the Nature of the piece requires, and if a Beard, or Hair be required, take
a Goose Quill bristle Pencil, and put in the Hair about the Face, and rub in
the greater Hair, with the greater Bristle, heightning it up with your
Goose-quill Pencil, and so your work is done.

If Garments are required, called by Artists Drapery, For a red Garment, lay
dead Color with Vermilion, glaze it over with Lake, and heighten it with
white. For Scarlet, Vermilion must be the lightest, deepened with Lake, or
Indian red. For a crimson Velvet, lay burnt Oker, Vermilion, or Indian red,
glaze it with Lake, and touch it up with Vermilion. For a sad red, heighten
Indian red with white, and let all your deepenings be with black, Pink, and
Lake well tempered. For green Garments, heighten Bise and Pink with Masticote,
and deepen it with Indico and Pink. For green Velvet, lay the dead Color with
white, and a little Lamp black, glaze it with Verdegrease, deepen it with
Indico and Pink, and heighten it with Pink and white. For yellow, take yellow
Oker, Masticote, and Umber, lay the dead Color with Masticote, and white, in
the highest Places, and with white, and Oker in the meanest, and with Umber in
the darkest, glazing it when dry with Pink.

For blue Garments, take Indico, and white, laying first the white in its due
Places; and then your mean Color, viz. Indico, and white well tempered in
their due places; then deepen it with Indico, and glaze it with Ultramarine
when dry, etc.

For purple Garments, take Oil small tempered with Lake, and white Lead, and
heighten it with the latter.

For black Garments, let the dead Color be Lamp-black, and a little
Verdegrease, and when it is dry, go over it with Ivory-black, and having
heightened it with white, go over it with Ivory black, and Verdegrease.

For Orange Color Garments, mix red Lead, and Lake, laying the lightest parts
with red Lead, and white; the mean parts with only red Lead, and the deeper
with Lake, and if need requires you may heighten it with white.

For Cloth colored Garments, for the ground, take Umber, and white, and for
the deeper shadows Umber and black, and for the mean Umber and Oker, and whiten
it with Oker, and white. And thus much may suffice for limning, and painting of
these kinds.

CHAP. XII. The curious and mysterious Art of etching, and ingraving in Gold,
Silver, Copper, Steel, etc. displayed, and made manifest in easy and plain
Rules, and Methods, by which an unexperienced Person, many attain to the
knowledge thereof, and the expert be wonderfully improved, etc.
TO introduce this curious Art, I think it highly convenient to begin with
etching, the better to give a light into what succeeds, etc. and first of the
Ground.

In this case, procure three parts of Virgins wax, and one of Asphaltum, one
part of Mastick, and one part of clarified Rosin, but all but the Wax, putting
that into a new glazed Pipkin, or Pan, and let it boil over a gentle Fire, at
what time, put the other Ingredients to it, which being melted, pour it out
into fair cold water, keeping back the dregs; and when it is cold, work it into
a ball; tie it then in a rag, so close, that no dregs may come through, and use
it upon your Copper, as you have occasion.

In preparing your Copper, observe that it be well polished, not lying higher
in one place than another, nor no where uneven, and if you espy and specks or
disorders in it, coal it over with a well burnt Char-coal, and fair water, and
set it aslope to dry, which done, scrape some very dry Chalk or Whitening upon
it, and rub it over with a woollen rag, not touching the Face of the Plate with
your finger, till the ground be laid, which must be done in this manner, viz.

Put lighted Small coal into a Chafing Dish, and lay the Plate on the wrong
side over it, that a gentle breathing of heat may come through; then take your
ground in the rag, and rub i^ gently up and down the Copper, till it coming
through the covering, by reason of the heat, may sufficiently cover the Plate,
not too thick, nor too thin; and then whilst it is warm, take a Duck's Feather,
and smooth it to an exact evenness, but beware the Copper be not too hot, for
if it smoke, the moisture of the ground is gone, and then in etching, it will
crack, and fly up; and when it is according to your mind, suffer the Plate to
cool; then grind a piece of white Lead in Gum-water, not very stiff, and make
the white of convenient stiffness to wash over the first ground of the Plate,
with a brush dippe^ therein, till you perceive it every way smooth, going over
it with another brush of soft Furs, and so let it dry.

The ground thus laid, take your draught, after which, you are to work, and
scrape on the backside of it some red Chalk, moving it all over, and scrape
over that some Small coal, very fine, suffering it to mingle with the Chalk;
and then with a Pencil, or Hand-brush, rub it up and down, till it be smooth,
and even, and so place your design upon the Plate, and with a blunt Needle, or
Steel Point, draw over the outstroaks; and then you must have several Needles,
according to the smallness, and largeness of your strokes in the Copy, and with
them in a ^in Pencil, frame, or stick according as bluntness, or sharpness
requires, take out all the black strokes, pressing so hard, that the needles
may pass through the ground, and make some small Impression on the Copper, ever
observing when ^ou lay by your Plate, to wrap it up in a Paper (...) prevent
scratches, or the Air spoiling the Ground, wiping away as you work the Ground
^^e needles brake up with a light Pencil, not suffering the ground to lie too
long on the Plate before you finish, for the Air drawing out the noisture of
the ground, the Etching will appear ^road and deep, working of black and
unseemly; (...) when sometimes you suppose it eaten sufficiently, you will find
it defective in many places, ^^d in frosty weather you must wrap the plate as
well in a blanket as in a Paper, for if the frost take the Copper, the ground
will start from it, and so the Aquafortis will spread under it, and keep no
certain form.

Having observed these directions, take green Wax, and melt it in a new Pan, or
Pipkin, and with a Pencil cover the edges of the Copper and stick the Wax round
about like a Wall, to keep in the Aquafortis; that done, which being firmly
stuck on, take the third part of an ounce of Aquafortis, and break it with
other Water of the same kind, that has been once, or twice used, taking at
least two parts of the old, to one part of new, and in case, you have no old
Aquafortis, then instead of it, use strong white wind Vinegar, as a mixture;
and for such Figures, or things, as you would have lie fine, and sweet, you
must pour out your Aquafortis into some Earthen Vessel; and then wash of what
remains with fair water, and suffer it to dry; then melt Candle-grease, with a
little ground, and with a Pencil cover the Places you would have ly^ faint;
then pour on again your Aquafortis, and so continue to do, as often, as you
can co^ceive it convenient, then melt off the ground over a gentle Fire, and
with a clean rag, wipe it off, and you will have the perfect impression of the
Copy on the Plate, which you may work of at the rolling Press, to serve your
occasions, and thus you may do upon any metal the wate^ will take, etc.

From etching, I proceed to the Art of engraving, and he that would be expert
herein, mus^ have a regard to true drawing; wherefore, I would advise the
unskilful well to consider what I have laid down of that kind, and so provide
himself with materials for the performance of this curious Art.

In the first place, be sure to choose a good Oil stone free from pin-holes, or
flaws, not too hard, nor too soft; and therefore the better to furnish your
self aright, you must consult, in what the stress of your business will lie;
for if you intend Picture, or Letter work, accounted more curious than Marks,
or Arms used by Goldsmiths, and Pewterers, you must have your Gravers
accordingly shaped, and tempered, for Goldsmiths, etc. Gravers are frequently
crooked, the better to come at hollow places, etc. but for Copper, or any
Plate, that may be easily come at, the strait Gravers are ever held the best,
and if you suspect their goodness, try whether, or not, they are file proof;
and if so, they will fit your purpose, though at first, by reason of their
temper, they may appear brittle, and sometimes break short, yet being ground
out, they will still grow better and better, and come in a little time to an
excellent temper.

As for the forms of Gravers, as to their use, the square one makes a broad
shadow stroke, or hatch and that which is, form Lozenge, a narrow deep one, the
one being appropriated to large, and the other to fine strokes, yet if your
work be curious, a middle size between these will the better accomodate you,
which will render your strokes, or hatches more graceful, and yet carry with
them sufficient force and vigor.

In case of whetting your Gravers, which is frequently required, pour a little
fine Olive Oil upon your stone, and laying that side, which you intend shall
cut the Copper flat upon it, whet it very flat, and even, and to that purpose,
carry your hand very steady, continuing an equal strength, and placing your
fore finger firm upon the contrary side, so that you may have more power to
guide it with exactness; then turn the unwhetted side, and use it in the same
form and manner, that there may be a very sharp edge; then turning uppermost
that edge, which in the former manner you have whetted, setting the end of your
Graver obliquely upon the stone, bear your hand with an exact evenness, to the
intent it may prove very flat, and s^oping in the form of a Lozenge; and in
this, you must take great care, for if your Graver be not well, and rightly
whetted, you can never grave well.

Observe, when you have a Graver, whose handle is a round, or oval knob, if you
would prevent it from running into the Copper, or other metal you grave,
further than is convenient; then must you cut off that part of the knob, which
lies in a Line with the point of the Graver, and make it as level as you can
with the point; nor then will it hinder your Hand from carrying an even stroke,
which otherwise it will do, especially in working a great Plate, by bearing too
much upon the Copper, and in holding it, place the knob-side, or that part of
the Ball not cut off in the hollow of your Hand, extending your forefinger
toward the point, and laying it opposite to the edge, that is to cut, and
place your other fingers on the one side of the handle, and your thumb on the
other side of the Graver, in such a manner, as with ease you may guide it flat
and parallel with the Plate, being ever very careful, that you fingers do not
interpose between the Plate, and Graver, lest it hinder you in carrying it
level with the Plate, hindering you from making your strokes with freedom, and
neatness.

Further to fix you in this affair, you must have a strong round Cushion of
Leather filled with fine Sand, about half a foot over, and four inches in the
Diameter, rising a little in the middle, and sloping toward the brims, but not
much, and this must be to lay your Plate on, that you may turn it at leisure;
and if you are to make straight strokes, hold your Graver in a direct Line: Or
in case you would have your strokes broader, and deeper in one place than in
another, you must lay more or less stress, as you see occasion, observing in
all straight strokes, to hold your Plate steady, and firm upon the Cushion, and
the Table, or Bank on which it stands well fixed: But in crooked, and winding
strokes, you must hold your Hand, and Graver steadfast, and only turn your
Plate, or otherways you cannot command your Hand to that neatness, as in many
cases is required, observing at the same time, for the more steadiness to keep
your Elbow fixed upon the Table, and your Eye on the Plate, scraping your work,
as you go with the edge of a burnisher to take off the roughness; yet be
careful that you make no scratches, and the better to see what you have done,
rub the place over with a piece of black felt dipped in Oil; and then if any
scratches appear, with your burnisher rub them out, and if any strokes be too
hard, in the same manner you may make them fainter. And in case your Graver
should happen to appear very hard, which by its excessive brittleness in often
breaking is known, lay it upon a burning Charcoal, till it grow yellow; and
then dip it in water, and it will by often so doing render it of a better
temper, but if it be blunt in a short time cutting, then it is too soft, and
you must heat it in the fire, and dip it in Lime juice, or Vinegar: And thus
much for the management of the Tools. etc. the which by a little practice will
soon grow natural.

Another material thing in Art is to be considered; which is, to take the
Impression you are to cut, or grave upon your Plate; and in this case, heat
your Plate over a fire of Small-coal, and having a piece of fine Beeswax tied
up in a fine rag, worked like a ball, that it may sit close, wipe the Plate
over with it, when it is hot enough, very lightly, till you perceive it is
covered with wax, very thin, and even, laying it with a feather, in which, at
first you may find some difficulty, but use will render it easy, and in this
case, if you are to imitate an exact Copy, it must be so ordered, that it may
stand the contrary way on the Plate; and therefore in consideration hereof,
your best way will be to track it over with a black Lead Pencil; especially in
case of a very old Picture, which being done, take a piece of polished Ivory,
and placing your Picture exactly on your Plate the Print fide downward, rub it
lightly, and you will perceive the exact proportion of the Print remaining upon
the Wax, or the Plate; then take a steel point, and go over each particular
Limb, etc. especially in the out strokes, and there will be but little
difficulty to mark the shadows which he before you, as you engrave the Work,
and the readier it will be, if so you note how far your shadows should be dark,
and how far light, with your black Lead before you rub it off.

The carrying of the hand in this kind, will at first seem difficult, as to the
depth of your strokes; but in general, observe ever to carry your hand with
such a slight, that you may end with the same faintness, or darkness you begin:
And in case, one part require more deepness, and blackness than another, you
must do that by degrees; and that you may the more expertly do it, observe that
your strokes be not too close, nor too wide; and therefore to bring your hand
in the better, practice at first by such Prints, as are but loosly shadowed,
least by attempting to imitate those more dark and close, you happen to be
puzzled where to begin, and where to end, but practice will inform you.

As for Letters; in case of Copies, the Letters must be gone over with ungumed
Ink, or with black Lead, and laid on the Plate when waxed as the former, unless
you are so dexterous at writing, that you can draw them by hand, or with a
steel point on the Plate in true Cut, etc.

But if a Map, or other Mathematical Instrument be required, every circle, or
perpendicular must be drawn over as before, or you cannot exactly imitate. But
in case of a face, or coat of Arms, or Instruments not to be printed; then you
may black over the backside, as in etching, but you must use for engraving a
wax ground only.

CHAP. XIII. The Mystery of cutting in Wood, laying Gold, or Silver, solid, or
liquid, preparing Colors for the painting of Pictures, or Prints, the way of
refreshing old Paintings, or Pictures; coloring Maps, Buildings, Landskips,
and many other curious things, and matters.
As for cutting in Wood, in relation to Pictures or the like.
YOU must prepare your Wood in the manner of a Plate, though an Inch thick, or
according as the design requires, either Box, or Pear Tree, rendering it by
plaining as smooth, and level as a piece of Paper; which done, having a d^aught
of your design, you must rub the Wood gently over with a ground of paste made
of the finest flower; and then fix your draught, or copy upon it, when
suffering it to dry, rub the back side of the paper, which must be uppermost,
with your wet finger, till you crumble it off so thin, that the Print plainly
appears upon the Wood, as if it had been pa nted, or drawn thereon with a p^n,
or pencil.

Having thus prepared your Wood, if it be small, fasten it up with coins, that
it move not, unless there be occasion, or as the strokes require and then
having a fine small knife in the nature of a Penknife, but much less and
thinner, especially for the fine strokes, cut out all the white strokes, and
ground, and suffer the black ones to stand, sharpening the fine strokes, and
bringing them to an edge, that they may not print black, or dull; and above
all, be sure to do it with so light, and curious a hand, that you break none of
them; for if so, you much deface, and injure the Work, they not being to be
repaired, and further observe to leave a good foundation to the strokes, though
never so fine at the top, least by the force of the Press, they break in
working.

You may have your Pattern, or Advice, if it be new drawn upon the Wood with
black, orred Lead, though the former way is the securest from being rubbed out,
or injured, etc.

To write, or gild with Gold, and Silv^r, an easec, and curious method, etc.
If you would have fair Letters appear in Gold, or Silver, take Gum-armoniack,
and grind it with a little juice of Garlic, and put thereto a few drops of the
weak water of Gum-arabick; and so make it to the thickness of Ink, that you may
conveniently write with it; and so write, or draw what you think convenient,
and suffer it to dry a little, but not too much, lest it take not the Gold, or
Silver, nor too little, lest it drown them. Then lay your Gold, or Silver in
Leaf upon a Leather Cushion, being a piece of Calves skin stuffed, with the
^ough side outward; and so with a sharp knife, cut it into what proportion you
will, suitable to what you have written, and taking it up with a loose piece of
Cotton Wool, on which you have breathed, cover with it the place intended,
pressing it down hard, and where the Gum-water is, it will take it; then brush
away with other Cotton, what it has not taken, and being dry, burnish it with a
piece of polished Ivory, and it will appear very splendid.

To write, or gild with liquid Gold, or Silver, etc.
Take shell Gold, which is made of the raggid edges, or c^ttings of Leaf Gold;
and when you are desirous to use it, put in a little fair water, tempering it
up with a clean Pencil, and lay it on with a Pen, or Pencil in what form you
please, either by way of writing, or gilding, and when it is dry, rub it over
with a Dog's, Call's, or Horse's Fore-tooth, and it will be very shining, and
pleasant. And of this, as of the former, you may lay on more, or less, either
for the gilding P^cture Frames, Coaches, Rooms, or the like. As for lacquering,
it only consists of carrying a Pencil dipped in rectified Spirits over Leaf
Silver, which changes it to a gold Color.

How to prepare Colors to color printed Pictures, and thereby render them
beautiful.
For a curious Violet Color, take Turnsole, being a dye infused into a piece
of a linen rag, heat it in Vinegar, and it will give you the Color desired,
after which dissolve in it some Gum-arabick, and use it, as you see occasion.

For a curious yellow, take Gum-booge, and dissolve it in fair Spring water
over a gentle fire.

To make a transparent red, take Braziel, grind it, and heat it over a Fire,
with small Beer, and Vinegar, put in a little Powder of Alum, and Gum-arabick,
and suffer it to boil, till it taste strong, etc.

For a transparent purple Color, grind Logwood, and boil it in all respects as
the former.

For a curious blue, take fine Litmos, and cut it into small pieces, lay it for
the space of twenty four hours in a weak Lake, Gum-water; to make which, you
have been before directed, and it will answer your expectations.

To make a curious green, take the juice of rue, and a little Verdigrease.

For a light green, take Sap green flower de Biss, or tawny green, and steep
them in fair water.

To shadow greens, sleep Indico, and yellow Berries.

To shadow blues, take Litmos, and Indico, steeping them in the Lees of Soap
ashes, and use them with Gum water.

To make a good brown, take Ceruse, red Lead, Pink, and English Oker, mixing
them, with Gum-water.

For an Orange Color, take red Lead, and yellow Berries, and mix them with
Gum-water.

For a curious flesh Color, take white Lead red Lead, and Lake with Gum-water.

To make a Color for precious stones, take Verdigrease, and Varnish for an
Emrald, Florence Lake, for a Ruby, and Ultramarine, for Sapphire.

How to color Map, and what is to be observed therein.
In this case as well as in other printed Pictures, is no more than to set them
out in their proper Colors, which you must accordingly consider, as the nature
of the thing requires, it being impossible to direct in particulars; however
observe that water must be a faint blue, Sky somewhat deeper, Trees green,
Houses in Maps are usually red and ways yellow, and green: And to these, and
the rest, suit any water Color, you think suitable mentioned in this Book.

Coloring for Landskips, and building at large, very proper.
In Landskips, for the saddost Hills, use burnt Umber, for the lightest, put
some yellow to it, and for other Hills, lay Copper green thickened on the Fire,
or in the Sun, and for those further off, mix with it some yellow Berries, and
let the fourth part be done with green Verditer; and the furthest, and faintest
Places with blue Bise, for the lightest places, use white, and shadow it with
blue, as for the High ways, do them with white, and red Lead, using for Variety
yellow Oker, shadowing it with burnt Umber; and it may likewise be used for
sandy Rocks, and Hills; and as for other Rocks, you may lay them with several
Colors; but at a distance, they must appear, blue, as in the Air; as for the
water, do it with black Verditer, and white shadowed with green, and with blue
Verditer, when the banks cast a green shadow upon the water; but when the water
is dark in the shadows, shadow it with Indico, blue Verditer, and green, etc.

How to color Building, etc.
In coloring Buildings, you must use much variety the better to set them off,
yet not so, as they may appear extravagantly adorned, or contrary to the use of
this kind; but for Walls, and Conduits, use a mixture of white, and black; as
likewise for other materials, but if a Brick-house, use red Lead, and white,
and where the Houses stand thick together, there use sundry Colors suitable to
the occasion.

T^ cleanse old Pictures, and render them fair and pleasing.
Take Wood-Ashes, the whitest that may be had, sift them through a fine lawn
sieve, and with a Sponge, and fair water, wash the Picture gently over not
rubbing it hard, least you impair the shadows, which being done, and the
Picture dry, take distilled Varnish, and rub it thin, and gently over, and it
will create a lasting freshness, or for want of this, you may do it with the
whites of Eggs exceeding well beaten, or with Gum-water: But note, the Pictures
to be thus used, must be such as are laid in Water-Colour Oil.

CHAP. XIV. Instructions for restoring Tapestry Hangings, Carpets, or Turkey
Chairs, that are faded, or decayed, to their lively Color; to prepare Flock
Cloth for Hangings; Spanish white, Size, Alum water, and Gum-arabick water, how
to make them; as also to thicken Cloth for Screens, etc.
To refresh Hangings, or Tapestry, Carpets, or Chairs,
BEat the dust out of them in a dry day, as clean as may be; then rub them over
well with a dry brush, and make a good Ladder of ^asteel, or Cake Soap, and rub
them well over with a hard brush; then take fair water, and with it wash off
the froth, and make a water with Alum, and wash them over with it, and you will
find, when dry most of the Colors restored in a short time; and those that are
yet too faint, you must touch up with a Pencil dipped in suitable Colors; and
indeed you may run over the whole piece in the same manner, with water Colors
mixed with weak Gum-water, and it will cause it, if well done, to look at a
distance like new.

To make Flock Cloth Hangings, etc.
To do this, take a course Canvas, spread it even upon a Flour, or Table; then
take flocks, or shreads of Woollen, grind them as small as dust, and having
sized over your Cloth with a good strong size, sift whilst it is wet the flocks
on through a sieve very fine, and having done it even in all places, run a
rowler of wood, or Iron over the piece to press them down close, and so suffer
them to dry in the shade, lest the Sun, or Fire parch, and make them crack, and
when dry, brush them lightly over with Alum-water; and so draw your design with
black Lead, red Lead, Char^coal black, or any other Color you fancy, and it
will at a distance look like Tapestry, and be very lasting in a room, where no
great Fires are made.

How to thicken Linen Cloth for Screens, Bed-teasters, and the like.
Grind whiting with size, and to prevent its cracking, add a little Honey to
it; then take a soft, and smooth brush, and lay it upon the Cloth, and so do
two, or three times, suffering it the mean while to dry between layings on, and
for the last laying, smooth it over with Spanish white laid with Line-seed Oil,
the Oil being first heated, and mixed with a small quantity of the Litharge of
Gold, the better to endure the weather, and so it will be lasting.

Spanish white, how to make it.
Take fine Chalk, with a tenth part of Alum, grind them with fair water, till
very soft; and then bring them to a thickness, and make them up into Balls, lay
them to dry leasurely; and then heat them well in the Fire; and so use them.

To make a very good Size useful upon sundry Occasions, etc.
Take glue a pound, steep it in four gallons of water, till it be dissolved;
then take a pound of the shreds, or cuttings of Gloves, or other the like
Leather, and boil them in the water, wherein the glue has been dissolved over a
gentle Fire, till it feel very clammy between your fingers, and when that is
done, strain the liquid part through a sieve, and keep it for your use.

To make Alum water the best way.
Take a pound of Alum, bruise it, and put it into two gallons of water, adding
a small piece of Gum; arabic; and having scumed it after a gentle heating from
the froth, or scurf strain the water, and keep it for your use; and especially,
to wash over printed Pictures lightly before you paint, or color them, by
which means, they being afterward suffered to dry, the Color will be prevented
from sinking, or soaking in unseemly.

To make Gum-arabick water for all Occasions.
Take of the transparent, or white Gum two ounces, half an ounce of Alum, and
two quarts of Spring water, dissolve the former in the latter over a gentle
Fire, scum it, and take away the dross; and so use it with Colors, or in
making Ink, or the like, and if you perceive it too strong, you must put more
water; but if too weak, then more Gum, taking out the dross as before.

And thus much may suffice for the first part of this Book, and past all
peradventure prove useful to the Reader, and Practitioner, in such a manner,
that I can scarcely believe he ever will, or at least will never have cause to
repent of, or repine at the cost, and labor so necessary a Treatise, filled
with so much variety puts him to.

The End of the First Part.
Art's Treasury, or a profitable, and pleasing Invitation to the Lovers of
Ingenuity, contained in many rare, and extraordinary Experiments, and
Inventions, etc.
CHAP. I. Metals, and Minerals, their Quality, and Generation, from what they
proceed, and how produced, the ^rt of transmuting, and making artificial
Metals, or Minerals, with other material matters.
IN case of Minerals, and all things inanimate, concentered, or contained in
the Bowels of the Earth, it is convenient to reduce them to four kinds of
Mixtures, viz. Metals, Stones, Earth, or Juices, Nature producing them with
mixture, and participation of each other, and here by Earth. I mean the simple
Element only, of which, as the Philosophers affirm, all sublunary Bodies are
compounded, and though the Earth, according to the situations of Countries, and
differences of Climes, differs in Scent, Color and Taste; yet that proceeds
from a mixture of some other part, or effect of the former; the pure Elementary
Earth being in all places one and the same; in which, and by the operation of
heat and moisture, the others are generated; and as there are more or less of
these, the Metals are finer or courser: But to come nearer to our purpose.

Gold is found in Grains, or Sand; and Silver in veins, and sometimes twisted,
and wreathed like the branches of a Vine, and at other times these Metals are
found in stones, with whose hardness, they have incorporated themselves, and
being broken, are with fining materials extracted. As for Gold; it is the most
perfect of all inanimate bodies, and has its Generation, as I have said from
heat, and moisture in the Original; but of Parts so well contracted, and
compacted by Concoction, that it is in a manner incorruptible, it being beyond
the Power of any Element to prejudice, or destroy it; for the Fire of the most
subtle, and piercing Quality, consuming all other Metals by long Application,
renders Gold more pure, nor can the Air, Water, or Earth diminish its luster;
but that it will again recover it, by which means, it has deserved the
Estimation the World affords it; and is so ductil, that being expanded, an
ounce of pure Gold will cover a place of twenty, or thirty feet square.

Silver as is hinted, carries a fineness next to Gold, wanting little more than
the Color, to be brought to its perfection; wherefore those that strongly
inveigh against the transmutation of Metals, have been convinced, that there is
a possibility to turn Silver into Gold, by reason Fire and artificial
concoctions may supply the defect, of which there have been many Experiments,
and from the even mixture, good temperature, and fineness of its parts, it is
not only ductil, and malleable, but endures the Fire with little waste, and
admirable it is, that an ounce of fine Silver may be drawn out into a thousand
four hundred yards, and that too, for the most part without breaking; and all
this extension may be gilded with six grains of Gold.

Copper is a metal to the composition whereof, a great quantity of Sulphur is
required, and from a distempered heat in the mixture, the fiery heat proceeds,
and being over burnt in its composition, it is therefore less subject to
Corruption, and is used about Engines of long continuance, because it rusteth
not, and is found in Mineral Stones of diverse colors, though the most
effectual Color is green, or blue, and so often is it engendered near Gold, and
Silver, that many times following a vein of it, much pure Gold, and oftener
Silver has been found; and such Veins of Copper, as make a superficial show,
are upon being dug, richer the deeper you go, and that is occasioned by the
moisture; and many times pure Silver is at the bottom, etc.

Iron though very common, which lessens its esteem, and may be termed the Wall,
and Bulwark of Kingdoms the Safeguard of private Persons and the Handy craft
Trads-man's only unum necessarium, for without it few Employments can subsist.
As for its extraordinary hardness from over much Earthy parts, or fixed Sulphur
in its composition; not, but it has a proportion of Quick silver in it, so that
it will not without a very violent heat be melted, nor will it break, but
expand by force of hammers, or other Violence, and receive an impression by
dilating it self; and although it is cold and dry, yet by reason it is more
porous than other Metals, it is of less weight; and consequently subject to be
consumed by rust.

Lead is frequently found in the Silver Mines, and indeed as often by it self,
nor scarcely is there any ore, but some quantity of Lead is found in its
mixture, as being by the abundance of its humidity serviceable to it; and
especially in the melting of Gold, and Silver, which cannot conveniently be
done without the help of Lead; for in this case, by reason of its moisture, it
does easily evaporate, carrying with it whatever is not Gold, or Silver, and in
its weight comes nearest to the former, viz. Gold, and in Color to Silver, not
being subject to Corruption, as Iron.

Tin is begotten, or generated by a grosser fore of indigested Quick silver,
though much finer than Lead, by which means, it becomes more white, and hard,
though from the ill mixture of its substance, it is accounted the Bane of
Metals making them brittle by never so small a mixture; and the reason is, that
by its incorporation, it hinders the ductility, and disorders its former equal
temperature; except in Lead, with which it better agrees, by reason of the
moisture, and softness; so that being incorporated they become ductil, and
malleable.

Quicksilver is of a liquid penetrating Substance, and greatly in use;
especially in refining Metals, agreeing with any sort, abounding with much
humidity; which gives it brightness and weight, and is held the principal of
the Generation of all Metals; nay its very substance is transmutable into
Metals, enduring as well, as those that come out of the Mines, the trial of the
Fire, and Hammer.

There are sundry Metals, called Artificial Metals, made by mixture of
Minerals. As from a mixture of Tin, and Copper, Brass, or Bell-metal is made;
as also for pieces of Ordnance, and sundry other uses: and in this case, a
pound of Tin must be put from four, to eight pound of Copper, according as you
expect it brittler, or tougher.

Latten is made of Plates of Copper, put into Crusibles, and covered with
Powder of J^lamina, or a kind of half Mineral Sulphur strewed over it, and upon
that, the Powder of beaten Glass, to which, Fire being put, and the steem, or
greatest force of it kept in, it alters the Color of the Copper to a brassy
quality, and adds in weight eight pound to the hundred.

Pewter, a mixture of Lead, and Tin, and has sometimes in it, for the better
hardening, and keeping it together, a small quantity of Brass, or Copper: And
thus much for the Generation, and Description of Metals, which the Earth so
abundantly produces for the use, and benefit of Man kind, from whence I proceed
to the hardening of Metals, for Handy-craft, and sundry other uses.

CHAP. II. Instructions for softening, and hardening Metals, and Minerals
suitable to sundry occasions, as using in Tools, Engraving, etc. The Art of
soldering, and gilding, burnishing, and the like, upon Metals, etc.
To soften Steel, or Crystal.
TAke of unquenched Lime a pound, and as much of Soap-boilers Ashes, and having
made a Ley therewith, put your Steel, or Crystal into it for the space of
twenty four hours, and it will easily be cut, or other ways ordered, etc.

To soften brittle, and stubborn Iron.
Take the juice of Coltsfoot, and Hemlock, and when your Iron is hot, steep it
therein, and it will become ductil, or you may do it by often quenching in
Line-seed Oil.

How to make a Powder to soften Metals.
Take your Metal, and heat it well; then take ground, or beaten Glass, common
Salt, and Brimstone, and sprinkle them upon your Metal, whilst it is red hot,
and afterward burn them off in the Fire.

To make Iron, or Steel, as soft as Copper the better to ingrave upon, etc.
Take Chalk, and Alum, bruise them well together, and being wet with the juice
of an Onion, dawb it over your Metal a finger thick, and thrust it into the
Fire, suffering it to burn, till it become clear, and it will answer your
expectation.

To make Iron, or Steel so soft, that you may t^is^ it at Pleasure.
Take the Gall of an Ox, mix it with Oil o^ Turpentine, and Urine, heat your
Metal, and strew upon it Powder of Vitriol; then wash it over with the
materials before mentioned, till it comes to be somewhat cool, and it will be
very flexible.

Instructions to harden soft Iron.
Take the concoction of Vervein, Housleek Juice, the juice of Horehound,
Radish, or Rue, dissolve in them some Alum-powder, and the business will be
effected, if you anoint your Metal when hot with the liquid part.

To harden all manner of Iron Tools, or Instruments.
Take the Leaves, or juice of Pentefole, or five leaved Grass, the juice of a
Limon, or White Wind Vinegar, and dip the pieces of Metal, or Tools in it, when
hot; and do so often, and you will find the advantage.

To make Iron as hard as Steel.
Take the juice of Roman Nigrel, and Mouse-ear, herbs so called, and strike
over the Metal being hot; and by this means Tools may be made of it that will
cut Iron.

To harden Metal, so that it shall not crack, nor flaw, etc.
Take Oil of Spike, and Mutton Suet, and dawb over the Metal hot; then plunge
it suddenly in cold water, and the business will be effected.

To harden Augres, Files, Chizels, Mattocks, etc. for use.
Take the Juice of Radish, or Cole-worts, mix it with Ley made of Soap-ashes,
heat it over the Fire, and when your Tools are well heated, or red hot in the
Fire, quench them in it.

To make Tools so hard, that they will cut Iron, Copper, etc.
Take Salt Peter, and Copperas, strew them in Powder upon the Tools, when red
hot; and then quench them in the destilled water of Shellsnails, and your
expectation will be answered.

To color, or varnish Tin, Copper, or the like metals.
Take half a pint of Line-seed Oil, warm it over the Fire, and scum it; then
put therein bruised Amber, and Aloepaticum, of each a quarter of an ounce, and
suffer them to boil up to the thickness of an Ointment; after that, set them in
a close earthen Vessel under ground for the space of four days, and when you
use it, strike over your Metal with a brush, or Pencil, it being at the same
time hot over a pan of Smallcoal, and it will be of a curious Amber, or golden
Color.

The manner of gilding upon Metals, viz.
Take Wine-stone, Verdigrease, and Sal-armoniack, sees them in White Wind with
some common Salt, strike over the Metal indifferent warm with the liquid part,
and suffering it to dry a little, take Water or Leaf Gold, and lay it on, which
by the Virtue of the washing will stick fast; so that with a burnisher of
Ivory, you may finish it in its proper Luster.

How to make a water for the gilding Metals.
Take three pints of Spring water, two pound of Roch Alum, an ounce of Roman
Vitriol, and as much Verdigrease, and Orpiment, boil, and deum them; and then
put in water of Tartar, and Bay Salt, of each two ounces; and when ^he
Ingredients are well dissolved, and come to a ^hickness, strike over your Metal
therewith, dry ^t against the Fire, and burnish it.

How to gild Iron, or Steel with Quicksilver, and Gold Foil.
Take Vitriol, and Sal-armoniack, of each an ounce, and of Alum two ounces,
beat them fine, and boil them to a thickness in fair water; add a dram of
Verdigrease, and half an ounce of Sublimatum, and sperce over your Metal with
it, when having mixed your Gold, and Quicksilver together, lay them on with a
Leather Spatula, as smooth, and even as may be, then suffer the Varnish to take
it, and burnish it over.

To make Iron, or the like, a curious blue, or Steel Color.
Burnish your Metal to a brightness, and take Cows-hools, burn them, and hold
the Metal over the smother, or smoke of it, and it will answer the end
designed, etc.

To make Copper, etc. a Silver Color.
Take Bay Salt, Alum, and Wine-stone, grin^ them to Powder, adding in your
grinding some leaves of Silver, and put them into an earthe^ pot, close stopped
with your Copper amongst it, and then taking it out, ru^ it over with some
(...) the Powder, and burnish it.

A very good way to burnish Iron, or other Metals.
Take of Aloepaticum, Citrinum, and Amber, each an ounce, make them into
Powder, and place them over a gentle Fire in a well glazed pot; and when you
perceive it melted, put to it a quantity of scalding Oil; and when the mixture
is well made, let it cool; and so your Metal being glowing hot, lay a little
piece upon it, and rub it over.

To make a good solder for Iron, or any hard Metal being cold.
Take of Sal-Armoniack two ounces, two ounces of common Salt; the like quantity
of Winestone in Powder, six ounces of thick ground Glass, two ounces of
Clock-spike, bruise and mingle them wall together, and so put them into a linen
Cloth, and suffer the Cloth to be laid a finger thick with soft Clay,
encompassing it on the outside, and put them in^o a well glazed earthen pot,
with a lid, or cover, and put that into another larger not of Earth well
covered, and suffer (...) to stand over a gentle Fire, that the heat may
e^creasie by degrees, to all be red hot, and r^^^; then suffer it to cool, and
break it small, and grind it to Powder: Then in case of soldering, make your
Iron, etc. fast, and the joints close laid, lay a paper under them, and upon it
some of the Powder; as also between the Joints; then wrap it round with Clay;
except the upper part, which you must leave open to solder at; then take the
Powder of Burras, and put it into Wine or Aqua-vitae, and suffer it to
dissolve, when dipping a feather therein, strike over the upper part of the
Joints, and it will begin to smoke and hiss; the which ended, you may uncase
it, and find it perfectly soldered.

A way to solder warm, or rather, hot on Iron, Steel, etc.
Take Gum-water, beat it up with green herbs of any kind, till it become a
Paste, or of that thickness, and strike it on your Metal, or lay it on the
Joint rubbing Soap over, at what time heat it, and it will prove a good Cement,
etc.

To solder on copper, etc.
Take of Copperas an ounce, half an ounce of Orpiment, or white Arsnick,
dividing it into two parts; and then make your Copperas run with Fire, then add
one part of the Arsenick, or Orpiment; and after you have spread it thin on a
fine stone, add the other part, then beat it into Powder, and use it as the
solder for Iron, etc.

To solder Latten, a Metal, or mixture of Metals so called.
Take a File, and make the parts to be joined very smooth; then put them
together, and being hot, scrape your Powder of Burras, and keep it close till
cool, and the Joints will be fastened, or fixed.

To varnish like Gold on Tin, Silver, or Copper, etc.
Take an earthen Pot well glazed with a close Lid to shut in; and put into it
six ounces, or half a pint of Lin-seed Oil, an Ounce of Aloe-paticum, and the
same quantity of Mastick, make them into a fine Powder, and put them into the
Oil, and cover the former pot with a bigger; the first having a small hole in
the top through both lids, the better to stir the materials, and having closed
the outward pot about with Clay, and suffer it to stand over the Fire, till it
boils up to the hole, then cool it; and when you would experiment it, polish
your Metal, and strike it over the Metal, being indifferently warm; and so do
it over twice, suffering it to dry between either time, and the business will
be effected.

To lay Gold on Iron, a brief and easy way.
Take liquid Varnish one pound, and of Oil of Lin-seed, and Turpentine, each an
ounce, mix them well together over a gentle Fire; and lay them as a ground
whereon to gild with Leaf Gold, etc. laying the Varnish very thin, and
suffering it to dry.

Another easy way to gild on Metal, etc.
Take of Gum-arabick, and Bole-armoniack, each an ounce, put them into an
earthen pot with a good close cover, set it over a gentle Fire; and when they
are warm, put in two ounces of Lin-seed Oil; and when they come to a Varnish
thickness, lay them for a ground as the former, and on them the Gold, etc.
observing for the better splendour, when it is dry to polish it.

CHAP. III. Valuable Metals, their fineness to be known by essay of Coins, and
how they are to be known in their true Value; and what is to be observed in
preventing your taking false moneys.
HAving briefly run over sundry matters relatting to Metals and Minerals, I now
proceed to come somewhat nearer their true value, as by the rules of Art, they
are laid down by curious Inquirers into those Affairs, etc. especially as to
what relates to Metals, used in Vessels of value, and current in Coins, etc.
the principal. I take to be Gold, and Silver; the rest being vulgarly known,
and therefore not requisite to be mentioned in this Place.

As for the weight used for these fine Metals, it is that of Troy, consisting
of twelve ounces; and the ounce of a hundred and fifty Carots, and may again
for the deciding of lesser values be divided into four hundred, and eighty
Grains; as for the Pound Troy weight of fine God, it is worth thirty six
pounds, and so lessens in proportion of Allay, in this manner, viz. an ounce of
fine Gold is valued at three pounds; and that of thirty three keys fine, at two
pounds seventeen shillings sixpence; and so lessening, viz. twenty two Keys,
at two pound fifteen shillings, twenty one Keys, at two pound twelve Shillings
six pence, at twenty Keys, two pound ten shillings, loosing two shillings six
peace per ounce, as a Key, or Carot is wanting in the fineness of twenty four.

In this case, to know the fineness, or defect, it must to prevent defraud be
found out by the allay, which upon the touchstone may be done by way of Essay
in this manner, viz. take Needles of Gold, and Silver, and Copper allay,
suitable to the several allays, and suffer these to be of four sorts, viz. the
first to be of fine Gold, and Silver: The second of Gold, and Copper. the third
of Gold, Silver, and Copper. And the fourth of Silver, and Copper only; the
first for the trial of Gold; and the latter for the trial of Silver, making of
these mixtures twenty four Needles of sundry finenesses. As first of fine Gold
of twenty four Carots without Allay. The second twenty three Carots of fine
Gold, and one of Silver. The third twenty two Carots of Gold, and two of
Silver; and so proceed to one Carot worse, till there remains but one Carot of
the fine Gold in mixture with the other Metals specified, etc. viz. twenty
three Carots of Silver, and by the same rule proceed to the Gold and Copper,
and Silver and Copper, marking each Needle for the better distinction upon
occasion of what fineness it is; and by this way, you may be satisfied of the
fineness of any Ingot, or piece of Gold or Silver in Coin or otherways by
comparing them on your Touchstone with the Needle, whose allay you already
know, or trying them, till they become equal or alike, which when wetted will
plainly appear. As for the value of Silver, that which is fine is accounted
five shillings two pence of our Money the ounce, though there is some that will
fall out in fineness, to be worth five and eight pence, and the like. But these
Essays not being to be done by every Person who receives Money, I shall by
other ways instruct them how they may detect counterfeit Coins.

Past doubt, few that have the handling of Money are ignorant, that Coins of
all sorts have been counterfeit, some by imbasing in mixture, others by corrupt
Metals, and other by way of plating; and to know these; in case of Guinneas or
broad Gold, First, weigh them, and try them by Essay as aforesaid; and then if
you further suspect them, try them by Fire, or by Aqua fortis; and if they be
of base Metal, or corrupted with is, they will soon grow dim, and their Luster
in a small time more and more impair; but if you suspect them plated,
especially Guinneas, throw them indifferent hard on the edge, and the
Imbossment will open, and you may discover the shell to rise. In case of gilded
Shillings, though they have the Scepters as Guinneas, which some Persons have
had the Art to place there with graving Tools; yet your best way is to try them
by racing with a Penknife point in any convenient Place; and although they are
double gilded, the Silver will appear.

The counterfeit Milled is washed over or plated; and to discover this, you
will find the Letters imperfect, or perhaps none upon the edges of Crowns or
half Crowns; the sound likewise will be flat and dull, and the Metal on the
outside may be easily raised to discover the defect.

As for old moneys, the worst size is the half Crowns with pieces of Copper
plated over; and these you may know by their rising in the middle falling
hollow, Mackle in the stamp, or better by raising the thin Plate on the edge,
and as for smaller money mostly mixed with Silver, your touch stone is the best
tryer.

CHAP. IV. Instructions for making black, red, white, green Inks, etc. for
sundry uses as well solid as liquid, with that of the late Invention in Powder;
Directions for mysterious writing, and other things, etc.
To make the best common or black Ink.
TAke a Gallon of Rainwater or clear Spring or running water, and put twelve
ounces of Nut galls bruised, or broken into it, and of Gum-arabick and Copperas
of each two ounces, suffer it with once a day stirring to stand for the space
of twelve days in a warm place; and so use it as you have occasion: And in this
manner you may make a greater or lesser quantity; but if you want Ink of this
kind for present occasion, you may boil your Ingredients in Vinegar and Water;
but the Ink will not prove as the former.

To make red Ink.
Take the Powder of Braziel an ounce, white Lead and Alum of each two drams,
Gum arabic a dram, put these into a pint of Urine, and stopped close in a
bottle, and often shake them together, and the business will be effected.

Another way for red Ink.
Take of Gum arabic half an ounce, Vermilion an ounce and a half, Lake a
quarter of an ounce, and Vinegar indifferent strong a quart, mix them well
together over a gentle Fire, and then suffer them to stand a while, shaking the
Vessel when you come to use it.

To make white Ink to write on Black Paper or the like: As in case of
Consolatory Letters to those whose Friends are deceased.
Take an ounce of chalk, as much Quicklime, and a quarter of an ounce of
Egg-shell with half an ounce of burnt Ising-glass, grind them well together,
and put them into Gum water of any kind to a thickness of writing, and the Ink
by Candlelight especially will appear like Silver.

To make Ink for the convenience of Carriage in Powder, etc.
Take Lamp-black half an ounce, the Powder of Galls an ounce, Vitriol or
Copper, as half an ounce, Gum-arabick a quarter of an ounce, Ivory black a
quarter of an ounce make them into balls with water, adding if they stick not
well together more Gum; and when you have occasion to use it, scrape a little
into a small quantity of Wine, Water and Vinegar, and stir it about, and it
will be exceeding black Ink immediately; and so you may be always provided with
it without fear of spilling, or want of it in places of traveling, where there
is none to be had, and instead of Lamp-black, you may use burnt Cherry-stones
ground to Powder.

To make a red Ink to carry to any Place as the former.
Take the Powder of Braziel finely ground or heaten one ounce, mix with it the
juice of Mulberries or Black berries, or for want of them, water, wherein a
little Lake has been dissolved, add Gum-arabick half an ounce, to two ounces of
the Powder, wet them to a thickness, and making them up in Balls, use them as
the former.

To make green Ink.
Take the filing of Copper an ounce, Verditer half an ounce, G^m-arabick half
an ounce, and Vinegar half a pint, put them together in a stove or warm Oven,
and suffer them to stand three or four days; then stir them together, and use
the liquid part.

To make Ink that will make an Impression, as that of Printers, etc.
Take of Lamp black an ounce, or for want of it Shooe-makers black, half an
ounce of Vitriol, an ounce of fine ground Char-coal; to these add a quart of
Line-seed Oil, boil them up with stirring over a gentle Fire, till they become
of a sufficient thickness; then take out the substance, and move it upon a
stone or on an Ink-block with your Muller, till it is very fine; and so it will
take the Impression as of Letters, etc. in the nature of Prints or Pictures,
etc.

Red Ink of the foregoing kind,
Is made with Vermilion and Line-seed Oil well tempered upon a stone with a
Muller.

To write Letters invisible but by Fire.
You must take the Juice of Limon and Onion, temper them well together, and let
your Paper be very dry; then write what you think convenient, and send it to
the Party you design, who knowing the Mystery beforehand shall no sooner hold
it to the Fire, but those Letters which were blank before will fairly appear.

To make Letters appear by water.
Take welld ried Paper, and having dissolved a quantity of Alum in Gum-water,
write thereon, and suffering the writing to dry, dip the whole Paper under
water, and the Letters will appear so much whiter than the rest, that they may
be plainly distinguished and read.

To make Letters that cannot be seen or read, but by reading them through the
Paper, etc.
Take white Lead finely ground with very weak Gum-water, and with it as thin as
the temperature of Ink, write upon exceeding white Paper, not very thick; and
by that means when it is dry, it cannot be discerned from the Paper, but by
looking at a light placed on the other side of the Paper; and then the Letters
will plainly appear by denying your Eyes to penetrate them, though the Paper be
transparent.

CHAP. V. Directions for cleansing, coloring Gloves, and perfuming them; the
way to scour Ribbands without much impairing the Color; the Method of washing,
starching, etc. Silks, as Lute-string, Lawns, Tiffanies, Sarcenets, etc. with
other matters of Curiosity.
Foul Gloves to cleanse without wetting.
TAke your Gloves, and lay them upon a clean board, and make a mixture of
Fullingearth and Powder of Alum very dry, and pass them over on every side with
an indifferent stiff brush; then sweep of that and sprinkle them with dried
bran and whiting a considerable time; and so dust them well, the which if they
be not extraordinary greasy, will render them clean as at first; but if they
be greasy, you must take out the grease with crumbs of toasted bread, and
powder of burnt bone; then pass them over with a woollen cloth dipped in
Fulling earth or Alumpowder; and so you may cleanse them without wetting, which
many times shrinks and spoils them.

To color Gloves.
Take your Colors suitable to your intention, if dark take Spanish brown and
black Earth, if lighter, yellow Oker and whiting; and so of the rest; mix them
with a moderate size, and daub the Gloves over with the Color wet, and so
suffer them to hang, till they dry by degrees; then beat out the superfluity of
the Color, and smooth them over with a stretching or sleeking stick, reducing
them to their proper shape.

To make an excellent Perfume for Gloves.
Take Amber-grease a dram, Civet the like quantity, Orange flower-Butter a
quarter of an ounce; and with these well mixed and ordered, daub them over
gently with fine Cotton-wool, and so press the Perfume into them.

Another good Persume on the like Occasion.
Take of Damask or Rose-scent half an ounce, the Spirit of Cloves and Mace of
each a dram, Frankincense a quarter of an ounce, mix them together, and lay
them in Papers between your Gloves, and being hard pressed, the Gloves will
take the scent in twenty four hours, and hardly lose it afterward.

To cleanse cast Bibbands, etc.
Take your Ribbands and smooth them out, having sprinkled them a little before
with fair water; then lay them on a Carpet or clean Cloth at full breadth, and
having made a thin Ladder of Casteel soap, go over them gently with a brush or
fine woollen Cloth; then having in readiness water, wherein a little Alum, and
white Tartar has been dissolved, go over them, till you see them clean; and so
they will not only be clean, but the Color will be fixed from further fading,
if you suffer them to dry in the shade, and then smooth them out with a Glass
Sleekstone.

To wash black and white Sarcenet the best and surest way.
Lay these smooth and even upon a Board, or Carpet, spreading a little Soap
over the dirty places; make a Ladder then with Casteel Soap, and having an
indifferent fine brush, dip it therein, and pass over the Silks the right way,
viz. longways, and repeat your so doing, till you perceive that side is
sufficiently scowred; and then turn the other, and use it in the same manner;
whereupon take it up, and put it into fair water scalding hot, suffering them
to lie, till such time as you have prepared cold water, wherein a small
quantity of Gum-arabick has been dissolved, as also, if for white Sarcinet,
Smalt, into which you must put them and rinse them well, that done, take them
out and fold them, clapping or pressing out the water with your hands on a
Carpet that is dry, keeping them under your hands in the like manner, till you
find them indifferent dry; at what time in case of the white, you must have
Brimstone ready to smoke or dry it over, till it is ready for smoothing, which
must be done on the right side with a moderate hot Iron.

To wash and starch Tissanies, etc.
In this case, the hems of your Tiffanies must in the first undertaking be only
soaped a little; as also the Lace if any be on them; then having a Ladder of
Soap, put them into it hot, and gently move them with squeezing them only, and
not too roughly rubbing them, lest they break or crumple over much; and when
you find they are pretty clean, rinse them in warm water, in which a little Gum
arabic has been dissolved, keeping them as much from the Air as possible; this
done, make Starch of a reasonable thickness, blewing it as you think
convenient, adding a little lump of Alum to be dissolved therein; and when it
is boiled to a convenient thickness, strain it, and during its being hot, wet
your Tiffanies therewith gently, doing it with a soft Linen rag, and fold them
up in a clean Linen cloth, pressing them therein, till they are somewhat dry,
after which, clap them between your hands near a good fire; and so finish the
drying them over Brimstone, and shape them to your purpose, and either sleek
them over, or gently Iron them.

Lawns may in the manner of the former be ordered. Only observe to Iron them on
the wrong side, and using Gum arabic water instead of Starch; and according to
what has been directed for black Sarcenet any colored Silks may be ordered
abating, or augmenting as you think fit, according to the stiffness or
limberness intended, your Gum-water.

To wash and starch Point-Lace.
Have a Tent prepared, fix the Lace in it, and draw it pretty straight; then
having a Ladder of Casteel soap pretty warm, and with a fine brush dipped
therein, rub over your point gently; and when you perceive it clean on the one
side, do the like on the other; then cast fair water, in which a little Alum
has been dissolved to take off the Suds; at what time having very thin Starch,
go over with the same on the wrong side, and on the same side Iron it when dry;
and so with a Bodkin open it, and set it in order.

To clean Point Lace, if not over dirty without washing, six it in a Tent as
the former, and go over with fine Bread, the Crust being pared off, and when it
is done, dust out the Crumbs, etc.

CHAP. VI. Instructions for ordering and framing curious Wax-work, Imbossing in
Silver, or other Metals, making Flowers of Silk, carving and casting Imagery in
sundry Figures, the Art of polishing, etc.
Wax work its Nature, and how to be managed and performed.
IN this case you must provide your self with the finest Virgin Wax, raresie it
by often melting over a fire, till it become exceeding pliable, and render it
the better, so put in a quantity of clarified Turpentine; and having considered
your Figure, you must work it in water a little Warm, and move it into a
curious flatness, then imboss it in Moulds, or as some will have you, cast it,
especially where a curious resemblance of a Head or Face is required, working
the rest of the Body proportionably upon sticks or wiers, ruffling as you see
convenient the Garments, or pleating them; then having your suitable Colors,
paint each part as the property with Water Colors prepared according to what
has been directed in painting or limning with those Colors, and with a small
Ivory Polisher go gently over those parts you would have to shine; and then
having prepared Glasses to cover them, which will give them the greater Luster,
place them where you please for Ornament.

As for Birds, Beasts, Trees, Fruits and the like, they must be tempered after
their former manner, and reduced in their sundry shapes, not forgetting every
one to have its proper and natural Color; and for the adornment of any
Landscape, represent of this kind the Ground, where Grass is required may be
Moss, which may in like manner serve for shrubs: But in case of the Leaves of
green Trees, they may be Paper or Horn, thin and finely colored, shaped and
wisted upon wiers; in order as you shall see convenient: But as to every
particular of this kind, it is only practice can perfect you.

To imboss Plate as Powter, Silver, or other Metal.
Having your device drawn upon the piece you intend to imboss, you must lay the
right side upon a Bed of Beeswax covered over with a fine Cloth; and so
proceed to punch out the Metal with punchers or tools for that purpose, going
over every stroke and Line as in case of etching or graving, which done, you
must turn the right side, and fill the imbessments with war, that the hollows
may bed close and not sink, then with your fine Tools and Graver polish and
work the shapes in their due order by correcting and amending the roughness
made by the punching out, and giving fine touches and strokes where you see it
needful, and the Figures will appear very pleasant, being a Performance of
great Antiquity.

To work Flowers, etc. in Silk or Silver.
Take raw or fleasy Silk of sundry Colors comb out the dross or ravel, laying
each Color, by it self; then twist and mingle the Colors by placing upon
wires, according to the natural form of the flower intended, then comb them
out, and fashion them more exactly with your scissors and Needle; then dip them
in Gum-water; and by drawing them through it, and whilst wet, open and shape
them with your Fingers; that done, set them to drying in the shade; and in that
form they will remain very pleasant and delightful: And thus you may perform
them single, or on Branches with the stalks suitable, etc. You may in this
manner form Fruits and other things very material.

Carving of Images, etc. what is to be materi^lly observed therein.
Resolving to carve any ^urious Rigure you must provide your self with a
si^ilitude or likeness* either in Statue, or Porctraiture; whether it be for
Wood, Ivory, or any thing tractable in this nature; and before you proceed to
your rough carving with a black or red Lead Pencil, or piece of Coal draw as
well as may be the true Proportion, Posture and Features, having before reduced
the Wood or Stone to some set form; then cut them out as you see it convenient,
or let them swell as curiously as may; then with smaller Tools proceed to
polish them yet finer; and so working by degrees, till you have brought your
matter to a proportion; and then remains the Curiosity of fashioning to the
Life, and in this you must be curious in eying your Copy, beginning with the
head or upper part; and so descend by degrees, running it over three or four
times before you come, either to washing or polishing, that no unseemly knob or
other deformity may appear, etc. And in case any Statue or Image, either cast
or carved require to be painted in lively Colors, the rule for painting in Oil
ought as well in the mixtures as laying on, to be observed.

In casting of Images or Figures, the curiosity lies in forming the Mould, and
bringing the stuff to a fineness, which if done in beaten Chalk, Terrace,
Plaster of Paris or the like, they must be mixed with Gum-water, the better to
strengthen them, but in case of Lime, etc. it needs not; and then no more is
required than bringing the stuff to a fit temper or stiffness of dough; and the
Mould being to clasp in the middle, and take asunder, fill it with the
Material, and squeeze it hard in a Vice, having rubbed the outside of the
Mould before with dry whiting or chalk finely beaten, to prevent the sticking,
then take it out, and set it to dry in a place where there is a stove; and when
it is thoroughly dry, you may glaze or color it at Pleasure.

If you design any Figure in Metal, and will not be at the trouble of imbossing
it in the expanse; and so soldering it together, thereby rendering it hollow as
in fine Metals it is often done; then must you make your Mould of Brick, Chalk,
fine Clay, or the like, and place it, when dry and firm in a Bed of Sand, or in
the Ground, keeping it close together; have then your Metal rarefied or purged
from dross by well refining, and a trough or spout laid from the Plug of your
Melter, and when the Metal is melted and skimmed, suffer it all at once to run
with what speed it may into the Mould, that every part taking hold of each
other whilst liquid, the whole Mass may the better incorporate and render the
thing designed without flaw or scaling; suffer it then to be thoroughly cold
before you take it out, which done, polish it by taking off the rough outside,
and proceed with your tools to rectify what is unseemly.

To polish Marble or any curious Stone.
Take fine Sand, and the Powder of Alabaster, polish it with a Polisher; and
then suffer it to be laid over for a time with Oil; after that calcine, or burn
Egg-shells, and with the calcination thereof, rub off the Oil and polish it,
and it will be of a lasting gloss, etc.

To make any Writing on Parchment or from Paper, decay and become unlegible in
a short time.
Take Quicklime, and mix with it the white of an Egg, and rub over with the
said mixture the Parchment or Paper, when you intend to write; and although the
writing for a time will seem fair, it will in a short time decay, and look so
faint, that it can by no means be read.

To make new writing look old, and of a long standing.
Take a dram of Saffron, and infuse it into half a pint of Ink, and suffer it
to warm over a gentle fire, and it will cause whatever is written with it to
turn yellowish and appear as if of many years standing.

To make a curious Purple Ink.
Take a quarter of an ounce of Lake and half an ounce of Indico, and bruise
them small; which done, warm half a pint of water, and infuse into it an ounce
of Gum-arabick; then put the Color in, and shake them well together.

Take Blots, or Letters out of Paper or Parchment.
Take an ounce of Alum, dissolve it in a quarter of a pint of water over a
gentle Fire, and drop a drop of it warm as you see occasion upon the spot, and
suffering it to lie for a time, take it up again with clean Cotton Wool on
which you have breached to moisten it, and the business in once or twice doing
will be effected.

To render Writing very fair.
Take Gum sandrick, bruise and sift it very fine, dip into it Cotton-Wool, and
gently rub therewith your Paper or Parchment, and this is called the pouncing
it, and is often used by School Masters to set of their Copies to advantage.

To write Letters like Gold without the help of Gold.
Take of Vermilion half an ounce, Gum-armoniack the like quantity, bruise and
mix then with the whites of a couple of Eggs, and temper them in water to a
thinness, that you may write therewith; and then your writing being dry, glaze
it over with a Polisher.

To write Letters that will appear like Silver, without any Silver.
Take of Block-tin, Quicksilver, and the whites of Eggs, each an ounce, melt
the two former, and having ground them fine and small, put them to the latter,
and mix them with Gamwater to the thinness of Ink; and so proceed to write,
polishing your writing, when dry.

How to prepare your Shell-Gold, and write with it.
Take the ragged cuttings of Leaf Gold, grind them upon a curious smooth and
clean stone with Gum-water, and a little Alum Powder; and when they are well
incorporated, drop of the substance into small shells; and when you use it,
temper a little fair water to bring it to a thinness; and having written with
it your Pleasure, suffer it to dry, and then polish the writing, etc.

To make a good red sealing wax.
Take of Beeswax a pound, fine Turpentine three ounces, red Lead, or Vermilion
finely ground an ounce and a half, Olive Oil an ounce, melt well the Wax and
Turpentine, adding an ounce of Rosin fine in Powder; and when they ^re well
melted, and the dross taken off, put in ^he Lead or Vermilion, and stir them
well together her, till they are well incorporated; and so make them into what
form you please for your use.

To make black Wax.
Take of Lamp-black or black Earth an ounce and a half, Turpentine and Rosin of
each four ounces, of Beeswax a pound, incorporate them as the former with Oil.

To make green wax.
Take Verdegrease an ounce, and all the other Ingredients, except the coloring
as the former, ordering it in the like manner.

To make golden or transparent Wax.
Take clarified Rosin four ounces, Turpentine two ounces, Beeswax four ounces,
Olive Oil two ounces, melt them well together; and scatter in the melting
disordered or shattered Lea^ Gold, and suffer it to mix and incorporate; the^
polish it over, when made into form, and the Gold will appear in the
transparency.

Scaling Wafers to make them.
Take fine Flour fifted or boulted, that (...) bran remain therein, mix with it
the Glare (...) Eggs, a quantity of Ising glass so called, an^ a little Yest,
mingle the materials, beat them well together, spread the batter, being made
thin with Gum-water on even Tin Plates, and dried in a Stove, cut them out for
your use.

CHAP. VII. Artificial Vinegar, how to make it; Fire in Chimneys, how suddenly
to extinguish it, blowing up Ships under Water, blowing up Houses, and weighing
of Vessels that are sunk, how to effect them with Directions for Dyalling and
Gauging, etc.
A way always to be provided with Vinegar for Sauce wherever you travel.
TAke the blades of green Corn, when young, beat them exceeding small in a
wooden Vessel; then strain out the juice, and take the remaining substance, and
steep it in strong White wine-vinegar, or the juice of Limons, and suffer it
gently to warm over the Fire; and so let it stand in a warm place, till the
Vinegar be consumed; and then make the matter up into balls, and put them into
a box and dry them; and so coming into any place where Vinegar is not to be
had, scrape a little of the Powder into a little water, and it will afford you,
when heat over the Fire, or stirred well together, a very good Sauce.

In case of the firing of a Chimney, the means whereby it may presently be
extinguished.
Take an ounce of Gun Powder, and a quarter of an ounce of Brimstone fine
beaten, wet them with water, and make wildfire thereof, and throw it in small
pieces into a small pan of Char-coal or Coal fire, that the smoke may go
directly up the Chimney, and it will cause the Sout the Fire has taken
instantly to fall by parcels, till there be none left.

To break, or blow up a Ship or Vessel that is sunk, though lying some Fathoms
under Water.
To do this, you must find how the Vessel lies; and if you can conveniently let
down a Barrel, or more of Powder in a stench Cask with a Cane or Leather Pipe
let into it, and pitched round, so that it may, when the Barrel is funk to the
lowest, appear with the uppermost part above water; then having a Boat ready,
and a red hot bolt of Iron with a pair of long Pincers, drop it into the Cane
or Spout, so that it may fall into the Powder, at what time, make off as fast
as may be, and you will perceive immediately a trembling of the water, and
after that a Smoke to burst out; at what time, Planks, Goods, or any thing
capable of floating will rise, the Vessel being broke by the force of the
Powder.

To weigh any Vessel that is sunk the best way.
Lash a couple of Vessels together, and grapple the Vessel sunk, fastening the
grapples, a Pole lying across the two Vessels, the said Vessels being filled
and low sunk by their weight, then empty them that they may rise, and they will
cause the sunk Vessel to rise with them as far as they rise; then tow them as
near to the shore as you can at high water, and at low water the sunk Vessel
will appear above it, and you may empty it at your pleasure: And in this case
twenty Tun of Vessels, Floats or empty Casks above water will raise a hundred
Tuns under water.

To blow up Houses to prevent the Progress of a Fire the bast and safest way.
If so it happen the House be Timber, and you would throw it off from the fire,
place your Barrel of Powder under the main Girder on the contrary side you
intend to turn it, and over it a Beam or piece of Timber, and fix in that
another uprigh^ scotch the Barrel, on either side lay a train upon boards
covering it with Cloth to prevent its taking Fire before you intend it; and
then having a piece of March fastened upon a Lin-stock, give Fire to your Wild
fire at the end of the Train, and so retire.

If you would take a Timber or Brick-house upright, place the Powder in the
Cellar under the main beam in the manner aforesaid, just in the middle; or if
there be no Cellar, bed it about as much as may be, and it will take it
directly up from the Foundation; and then suffering it to fall directly down,
it will break in pieces; at what time the Timber may be drawn away to prevent
the Fires overrunning it; and so by that means creep to the next building, and
render your undertaking fruitless.

To make a Sun-dyal upon the Ceeling of a Room, and convey the beams of the Sun
to it.
Prepare the Ceeling exactly level by raifing it with fresh Plaster, if there
be any defect; draw your Dyal according to the form of a horizonial Dyal,
making the Lines and distance of equal Frame, set up your Gnomen or shadower,
so that you may move it and leave blanks for the Figures; this done,
conveniently place a Looking-glass, or burnished piece of Iron or Steel; so
that it may reflect the light of the Sun upon the Dyal intended; then make it
by another Dyal, how the Light moves, which it will do with the Sun; and
according to that, b^^ng a true one, place your Figures; then take off the
Gnomen or shadower, and lay it aside, fixing the Glass or burnished Steel, that
it may remain unsubject to be removed or shaken; and you may at any time
without stirring out of the room, know whilst the Sun is upon the Dyal what it
is a-Clock.

To make a Dyal in the Glass of any Window, that has the benefit of the Sun.
Take a curious, square, smooth Pane or Quarey of Glass, fix it even with
strong Borders of Lead in the Window, and set up the Gnomen, siding, slaunting,
or direct, according as the Sun has power upon it. Then by a Watch-Clock or
other true Dyal, mark how the shadow moves to the time of the day with the
point of a Diamond, and accordingly draw the Lines from the Center, and frame
the Figures in due proportion and distance.

Directions to Measure or Gauge any Round Cark or Vessel, etc.
In the first place multiply the half of the thickness in inches, by half the
circumference, and that product by the length in the inches; the last product
for Ale divide by 288, and the quotient shows the number of Gallons in the
Barrel; and to bring these Gallons into Barrels, divide the quotient by 36, for
so many in case of Beer a Barrel contains. But in case the Vessel very much
bellies in the middle, measure but half of it to the Bung, and work as before;
and adding the products together, you will have the true account.

CHAP. VIII. Another Treatise of making sundry Inks.
To make a Powder upon which you may write with Water, etc.
BRuise to Powder a handful of Galls, half an ounce of Vitriol, and the like
quantity of Gum-Arabick, and Gum-Sandrick; mingle them finely sisted together,
and when you have occasion to write, rub over your Paper with a little of it
laid upon Cotton-Wool; and then having sufficiently smoothed it, take water and
write upon the said Paper; when suffering it to dry, it will take a black
impression, occasioned by the Powder, as if it had been written with Ink.

Another curious Powder Ink, fit for Travelers, etc. or the London Powder-Ink.
Take ten ounces of Nut-Galls, bruise them well, three ounces of Roman Vitriol,
Gum-Arabick and Roch-Alum, of each an ounce, make them into fine powder, sift
and dry them; at which time put the Powder up in close Boxes or Papers, and
when you have occasion to use it, put a little quantity into a good quantity of
water, and shake it well about, and it will instantly change the color of the
water, and at length become good Ink; that is, in less than two hours space; by
which means any person without giving himself considerable trouble of carriage,
may be furnished at all times.

Another curious Powder of the like efficacy, how to make, and lately known by
the white Powder-Ink so much coveted of late, etc.
Take Gum-Sand^ick two ounces, beat it well to Powder, and sift it through a
fine sieve, and as much of Chalcanth^, so called by the Latins, of which you
may furnish your self at the Druggists; mix them well beaten and pulverized;
and a quarter of an ounce of this, or little more, will turn a pint of Water or
Vinegar, into a curious writing Ink in a very short time.

Mathoilus 's Direction for making a curious and lasting Ink, etc.
Take five ounces of Galls well bruised, Roman Vitriol three ounces,
Gum-Arabick two ounces, Bay-falt a dram, or instead of it a quantity of Alum;
mix them well together in a new glazed earthen pot, and pour upon the mixture
Whitewine, very strong and hot, about five pints, and suffer it, the weather
being hot, to stand in the Sun for the space of fisteen days; or it may be done
in a stove Oven, or in the Chimney-corner, frequently stirring it about; and so
pouring out the dross, an excellent Ink will be had, not subject to change by
time, nor alter its color.

Two excellent ways of speedily making Ink, etc.
1. Take Vitriol and Gum-Arabick of each an ounce, of Galls well broken a like
quantity, of sharp Wine or Wine-Vinegar ten ounces, and suffer them to stand
together for an hour, sometimes shaking them, they will turn the liquid part
exceeding black, and render it fit for your use.

2. Take of Galls half an ounce well bruised, mingle with it a like quantity of
Gum Arabic, and of Roman Vitriol eight drachms; put these into eight ounces of
White wine pretty hot, and in as short a time as the former, a perfect Ink will
be made.

How to make a Black that will not only serve for Engrossing, but Painting, etc.
Take Copperas half an ounce, bruised Galls an ounce, Lamp-black an ounce,
Gum-Arabick half in ounce mix them with a pint of Wine or Vinegar, set them
over a gentle fire, and suffer them to simper till a half part be consumed, and
what remains will render an excellent thick and black Ink.

The famous George Machijus 's Receipt for curious Writing-Ink, etc.
Take of Galls three ounces, R^man Vitriol two ounces, Gum-Arabick half an
ounce, and having well bruised them, infuse the Galls in two quarts of White
wine, for the space of eight days, stirring them well about each day; and three
days after the putting in the Galls, put the Gum in, dissolved in a little Wine
by it self, before it be put in, three days after the Galls and the Vitriol, as
long after that, stirring them at sundry times; and at the termination of eight
days, the Ink will come to a full and curious perfection.

To make a kind of Ink to write obscurely, and not to be read, unless the Paper
whereon the Writing is, be held to the Fire.
Take that which is vulgarly called Sal-Armoniack, and Nitre, of each half an
ounce, mingle them with the Juice of Limon over a gentle fire; and having
refined the liquid part from the dross, use it when cold; and so holding the
Paper when it is written on to the fire, the Letters will fairly appear, or
otherwise it will not, etc.

To take away spots or defects out of Writing, either on Paper or Parchment.
Take Roch-Alum burnt half an ounce, as much of the Flour of Brimstone; and
being finely in Powder, wet the Paper a little, and put a small quantity of the
Powder upon the place, rubbing it gently with your finger, and the Maculation
will disappear. And thus much for the Treating of Inks, etc. wonderful
necessary and useful on all occasions, and profitable to those that will
undertake to make them for Sale.

CHAP. IX. The Art of making Washes, and other Beautifying Materials, for
taking away Sunburn, Morphew, Freckles, Roughness of the Skin, and restoring a
curious Complexion; as also Whitening the Teeth, Enlivening the Eyes, Curling
and Coloring the Hair, etc.
A Water to restore a faded Complexion.
TAke the Flowers of Rosemary, Comfrey, and Cammomile, boil them in White Wind,
and wash your face and hands therewith mornning and evening.

To create a very fair Complexion.
Take two ounces of white Tartar, burn or calcine it, then quench it in the
destilled Water of Roses, and wash the face with it.

To render a fresh and comely Complexion.
Take an ounce of the Oil of Sweet Almonds, the like quantity of the Oil of
Myrrh, bruise in them of the Powder of Gum-Sandrick a grain, and with the whole
mixture, rub and anoint the face.

To render the Skin clear, and of a very fair Complexion.
Take Bean blossoms, and the Water that destilis from the Vine, with the
Flowers of Fumitory, distill them, and make a Wash with what proceeds
therefrom.

To make the Skin smonth and shining.
Take of the Marrow of Swines-feet an ounce, Oil of Nutmegs a quarter of an
ounce, Dears suet half an ounce, Oil of Bay berries two ounces, make them into
an Ointment over a gentle fire, and anoint the face, hands, or any part of the
body therewith.

To remove Freckles, Tan, or Sun-burn.
Take the Juice of Burdock leaves and Limons, of each a like quantity, mix them
together, and add half as much Oil of Chammomile, a little Ryemeal, and the
Gall of a Cock or Capon, make them into an Ointment, and anoint the place
therewith, and in a short time the defect will be removed.

To remove Pimples or Redness.
Take an Egg and roast it hard, then take out the Yolk at the top, and fill it
with Copperas, and put it close covered in the Embers, till the Copperas is
melted or become water; then pour out the water and bath the face with it; but
if it be too sharp, you may allay it with the water or juice of Celandine; and
in often using it, your Expectations will be answered.

To remove the Redness in a face, etc. occasioned by Scalding, Blasting, etc.
Take a handful of the Bark of Elder, as much Rue and the roots of Scabeous,
with an ounce of the Flowers of Chammomile; bruise them together, and boil them
in a pint of Milk, half a pint of Olive-Oyl, and adding a quarter of a pint of
Verjuice, till the liquid part become thick as an Ointment, and then strein it
out; which being cooled, anoint the place therewith morning and evening.

To take away unseemly Warts or Moles not too deep impressed.
Take Rhubarb a dram, Camphora the like quantity, the Oil of Petrolium half
as much, and an ounce of the juice of Housleek, bruise and beat these in a
quarter of a pint of Vinegar over a gentle fire, and anoint the place or part
therewith, and in often so doing, you will find your desire effected.

To make a swarthy Complexion fair and clear.
Take the Liver of a Goat, dry it to powder in a Stove or Oven, then steep the
Powder in White Wind, adding a quarter of a pint of the Juice of Celandine, an
ounce of Coriander-seeds; and as much of Fennel, decoct or boil them over a
gentle fire, and with the liquid part anoint or bathe the face, etc. and so
continue to do often, and it will remove the choleric humor occasioning
swarthiness.

To brighten and enliven the Eyes.
Take Vervein; Pelitory of the Wall, Smalage, and Betony, with the Flowers of
Eyebright, destil them and wash the Eyes with the water morning and evening,
and it will not only render them bright and clear, but give a true prospect and
dimension to the decayed sight.

To make Bloom-water, an excellent Beautifier upon all occasions.
Take the Blossoms of Peaches, Baum, Lavender, Cotton, and Rosemary, steep them
in White Wind, and destil them, and the Water will prove an excellent
Beautifier.

To make an excellent Pomatum for the hands and face.
Take Sheeps marrow an ounce, Oil of Sweet Almonds the like quantity, the Juice
of Smalage a quarter of a pint, Bean flour half an ounce, make them up into an
Ointment, and anoint the hands and face warm therewith, and it will make them
plump, soft, and free them from cracks, chops, or roughness.

An excellent Paste for the Hands.
Take the Flour of sweet Almonds an ounce, Rye-meal two ounces, white Starch an
ounce, and Milk half a pint, with which make these beforementioned into a
Paste, and that Paste into Balls for your use.

To soften the Skin, and render it fresh, an Oil, etc.
Take of the Oil of Nutmegs an ounce, Ambergrease a dram, Oil of Chammomile
an ounce, the Juice of Comfrey half a quarter of a pint, make them into an Oil
or Ointment, over a gentle fire, and supple them into the Skin very hot, and in
often so doing, it will wonderfully beautify and cause an excellent flavor,
etc.

An excellent way to sweeten the Breath.
Take Sal Armoniack a dram, beaten Ginger two drachms, the Spirit of Cloves a
dram, Coriander-seeds in fine powder a quarter of an ounce, Oil of Mastick a
dram, bruise them together, and make them up into a Ball, and each morning
scrape about the quantity of a large pea into a glass of Wine or Beer, and
drink it off.

To make Hair grow.
Take of the powder of Bithwort-roots a dram, of the Juice of Fennel half an
ounce, Ivy-berries dried and beaten into powder an ounce, the Juice of Housleek
half a quarter of a pint, and of White Wind a pint, boil these over a gentle
fire to a half consumption of the liquid part, and wash the place deficient,
and in a short time if that part be subject to Hair, it will cause it to grow
and increase.

To take away Hair.
Take the Juice of Hellebore or Bears-foot half an ounce, as much of that of
Burdock roots and the roots of Cuckowpintles, and anoint the place with it
warm, and by often so doing, the Hair will fall off.

To make any colored Hair black, or of a dark Color.
Take burnt Ivory ground to powder a quarter of an ounce, Soulters Ink the like
quantity, the Juice of Hemlock a quarter of a pint, incorporate them over a
gentle fire till the moisture be near consumed; then add Black lead powder to
dry up the rest, and with this rub your Hair or powder it, and it will be a
curious black, as likewise lasting, if before you wash your head with
White Wind wherein Plantane-roots have been sod.

To make Hair Curl.
Take the Powder of Elecampane-roots well dried, and as much of Alum in fine
Powder, wet your Hair a little with water wherein Raisins have been steeped,
and so sprinkle on the Powder with a fine Sprinkler, that it may be all over,
then with a pair of Curling-Irons somewhat hot, turn it up in ringlets under a
Cap, etc. and so let it dry, as likewise continue for the space of a night, and
next morning comb it out, and the Powder that remains will not only fly away,
b^^ the Hair will fall into curious Curls, and so continue without any further
trouble for a very long time.

A way speedily to take away the Spots occasioned by the Smallpox.
Take half an ounce of Copperas, and dissolve it in the Juice of Limons, and
anoint the Spots with it when warm, and their redness will soon disappear.

To prevent Pittings.
When the Distemper begins to appear, rub the face over gently with Honey, Oil
of Roses, and a little Alum dissolved and well mixed together over a moderate
fire, and in so doing every other day, the pits will be prevented if the Party
uses no violence to himself by scratching, etc.

To whiten Teeth.
Take a piece of fine Pumice-stone, grind it to powder, adding to that powder a
little quantity of Alum-powder, and by often rubbing the Teeth with it, they
will if sound be as white as Ivory.

CHAP. X. Miscellany of rare and curious Secrets not yet touched upon.
How to separate Gold and Silver from other Metals.
TAke Mercury and put it in a Melting or Refining-pot on the fire, adding some
Varnish-Glass beaten to powder, and being finely mixed, lay it in powder upon
the Metal that is gilded with Gold or Silver, and set some hot coals under it,
and it will take off the gilding, and render the Metal as if it had never been
gilt; and in this case you may save the Gold and Silver; if of value, by
putting to it Quicksilver, which will attract it into a body.

To kill or allay Mercury or Quicksilver.
Put which of these you design in a Mortar of Iron or Brass, adding some
Olive-Oyl, mix them together as well as may be over a gentle fire, adding more
when it begins to bubble strong Wine-vinegar; and in so using the aforesaid
Materials, they will become so hard as easily to endure the Hammer.

To boil Gold and Silver in the way of Cleansing.
Take Tartar bruised to powder, put to it a considerable quantity of
Spring Water; and so being boiled up over a quick fire, put in the Plate, and
let it continue for a considerable time.

To soften Gold or Silver.
Take sublimate Mercury, Sal-Armoniack, of each a like quantity, and when the
Metal of either sort is melted, put a small quantity of the phwder into it, and
so suffer it to operate thereon; if Gold put more; if Silver less.

To soften Bone or Ivory.
Take Bone or Ivory that is hollow, and take the Juyces of Alexand. Milfoyl,
Radish roots, Hore-hound, and sharp Wine-vinegar, and fill the cavity; after
which, lay it near a gentle fire, that the heat may infuse; and in suffering it
so to do, in a little time it will mollify the hard quality.

Experiments of other Natures, viz. How to keep Grapes fresh all the year.
Cather the Grapes in a fair day; when no wet or moisture is upon them, cleanse
them from those that are any ways perished, and let them steep a while in white
Muscadine a little warm; after which dry them and stop them up in new earthen
bottles, setting them in a cool place free from the Sun or too much Air, and
they keep without perishing.

To make Mellons, Cucumbers, or suchlike Fruit ripen by Art.
Boil Wheat bran in Water and a little fine Mould, and water the roots of the
Plants with it morning and evening, setting them in hot beds, and covering them
from cold and blasts with pots, glasses, etc.

To make Trees bear Fruits of any Color.
Bore a hole in the body of the Tree, at such time as the Sap begins to rise,
and plug it up close, and you will perceive what liquid Color you put in, the
same will tincture the Fruit, and give it a participation of its hue.

To kill or drive away Fleas or Buggs.
Take the Juice of Rue and the Gall of an Ox, mix them together, and anoint the
post and frame therewith, and strew in the Mat Powder of Southern-wood and
Wormwood.

To make one that is very boarse or speaks inwardly, have a very clear Voice.
Take the Flowers of Elder, dry them in the Sun, and so order it that without
taking wet they may be beaten to powder; which done, keep the Powder in a
glass, and when you would use it, put as much as will lie upon a sixpence,
into a glass of Wine pretty warm, and drink it off.

To make Letters that will soon vanish.
Take Aqua-vitae, dissolve a little Camphire in it, and put to them the Ashes
of burnt Straw well mingled or tempered together, which for a time will produce
a fair Writing, but at your pleasure you may wipe it off the Paper or Tablet,
nor will it be long ere it decays of it self.

To renew Letters decayed.
Boil a few Galls in Wine, and wipe over the faint Letters with a Sponge dipped
in the Juice, and they will appear fresh and in full luster as when written.

To renew the Marks in ^nives that are in a manner worn.
Polish them well with Powder of Emeril and Oil; after that, cleanse them with
chalk to a brightness, then wet the Blades in Lime Juyc^ and Tanners water made
with Vitriol, and they will cause the marks to appear exact and fair, and this
way you may damask them.

How to Grave a Porphory-Marble without an Iron tool.
Take a small quantity of sublimate Mercury, a like quantity of Sal-Armoniacum,
with as much Verdigrease, destil them in a Retort of Glass, calcine a small
weight of Tin and Fire-stone, and some Sal-Gem, destilling them over three
times in sharp Vinegar, and so making a ground of Wax, Rosin, and Turpentine,
lay it on the stone as in the case of Etching; and when you have drawn with an
Iron point what you intend, pour on the water, and suffer it to continue till
it has corroded the stone according to what you drew upon it.

How to make Water rise by heat, etc.
Let there be a Vessel above, either of Brass, Clay, or Tin, and a pipe in the
middle of it, that may descend into the Water below, so fastened that it takes
not Air; then let the Vessel above be made hot, and it will by means of the
Air's being rarefied by the heat attract the water to it.

CHAP. XI. Another Miscellany of rare and eurious Experiments, useful,
profitable, and altogether pleasant, etc.
To cause Water (contrary to the nature thereof) to ascend.
PRepare a Basin with a pint of Water in it, or thereabouts, then take an
earthen Pot or Jug with a round belly (fitted for this service) and light a
piece of Paper, cast it into the Jug flaming, then turn quickly the mouth of
the Jug downward, and set it on the midst of the Basin of water, it will suck
up all the water, if it be not more than it can receive and contain within the
belly thereof.

To carry a Jug or earthen Pot, sticking without any thing, unto the palm of
the hand.
Take a piece of Paper, set it on fire, and cast it flaming into the mouth of
the Jug, presently clap the palm of your hand on the mouth of the said Jug or
Pot, not hollow, but plain and smooth, the Jug will not fall from your hand,
but you may walk many paces, and carry the same sticking unto the palm of your
hand, unless by violence you pluck it away.

To break a Stick placed upon the brims of two Glasses, and not break the
Glasses.
Place the Glasses on a smooth stone of an equal height, and put the stick upon
them; then take a battoon or cudgel, and therewith strike upon the midst of the
stick perpendicularly, or downright; so may you break the stick, and not hurt
the Glasses.

To take the impression of any Seal.
Melt a little Brimstone, casting in some Ceruse or white Lead, put this
mixture on the Seal, strengthening it with a small piece of Paper, a little
bigger than the impression is; being cold, take it off, and you will find the
print of the Seal thereon.

How to write a Letter secretly, that cannot easily be discovered or suspected.
1. Write your mind at large on one side of the Paper with common Ink, and on
the other side with milk, that which you would have secret; and when you would
make the same legible, hold that side which is written with Ink to the fire,
and the milky Letters will show bluish on the other side.

2. Rule two Papers of one bigness with lines of an equal distance, make the
one full of Glass windows, through which you must write your mind upon the
second Paper, then fill up the spaces with other words at your pleasure; but if
all were made to hang together in good sense, it would carry the less
suspicion. Each friend must have one of these cut Papers to read all such
Letters, for without the Paper it will trouble a good Decypherer to read the
Letter.

Of the Dyal upon the Fingers and the Hand.
Is not a commodity very agreeable, when one is in the field, or in some
Village; without any other Dyal, to see only by the hand what of the clock it
is, which gives it very near, and may be practiced by the left hand in this
manner.

Take a straw, or like thing, of the length of the Index, or the second finger,
hold this straw very right between the thumb and the right finger, then stretch
forth the hand, and turn your back and the palm of your hand toward the Sun,
so that the shadow of the muscle which is under the thumb touch the line of
life, which is between the middle of the two other great lines, which is seen
in the palm of the hand; this done, the end of the shadow will show what of the
clock it is; for at the end of the great finger it is 7 in the morning, or 5 in
the evening; at (...) of the ring finger it is 8 in the morning, (...) the
evening; at the end of the little finger, or first joint, it is 9 in the
morning, or 3 in the afternoon; 10 and 2 at the second joint, 11 and 1 at the
third joint, and midday in the line following, which comes from the end of the
Inder.

How to make Water boil and sparkle.
Take a glass near full of Water, or other liquor, and setting one hand upon
the foot of it to hold it fast, turn slightly one of the fingers of your other
hand upon the brim or edge of the glass, having before privately wet your
finger, and so passing softly on with your finger in pressing a little; for
then first the glass will begin to make a noise. Secondly; the parts of the
glass will sensibly appear to tremble, with notable rarification and
condensation: Thirdly, the Water will shake, seem to boil: Fourthly, it will
cast it self out of the glass, and leap out by small drops, with great
astonishment to the standers-by, if they be ignorant of the cause of it, which
is only in the rarification of the parts of the glass, occasioned by the motion
and pressure of the finger.

Of the Play at Nine-Pins.
You will scarce believe, that with one Bowl, and at one blow, playing freely,
one may strike down all the nine Pins at once; yet from Mathematical Principles
it is easy to be demonstrated, that if the hand of him that plays was so well
assured by Experience, as Reason induces one thereto, one might at one blow
strike down all the nine Pins, or at least 7 or 8, or such a number as one
pleases.

For they are but 9 in all, disposed or placed in a perfect square, having
three every way: Let us suppose then that a good Player beginning to play at 1,
somewhat low, should so strike it, that it should strike down the Pins 2 and 5,
and these might in their violence strike down the Pins 3, 6, and 9, and the
Bowl being in motion, may strike down the Pins 4 and 7, which 4 Pin may strike
down Pin 8, and so all the nine Pins may be stricken down at once.

Any Numbers under 10 being thought upon, to find what Numbers they were.
Let the first Number be doubled, and unto it added 5, and multiply that sum by
5, and add to it 10, and the next number thought upon: Multiply the same again
by 10, and add to it the next number, and so proceed.

Now if the last sum be told, mark if one number was thought upon, then
substract 35 from it, and the first figure in the place of Tens is the Number
thought upon. If he thought upon two figures, then substract 35 also, and the 2
also, the said 35 from the last sum, and the 2 figures that remain, are the
numbers thought upon. If he thought upon 3 figures, then substract 350, and
then the 3 first figures are the numbers thought upon, etc.

Example.
If one thought upon these figures, 5, 7, 9, 6.

Double the first, which is 5, and it makes 10, to which add 5, it makes 15;
This 15 multiplied by 5, makes 75. To this 75 add 10, it makes 85. To this 85
add the next number, viz. 7, it makes 92. This 92 multiplied by 20, makes 920,
to which add the next figure, viz. 9, it makes 929. This multiplied by 10,
makes 9290. To which add 6, being the last number, it makes 9296. From which
substract 3500, and there rests 5796, the four numbers thought upon.

Now because in the figures 9296, the two last numbers are like the two thought
upon; to avoid suspicion, bid him add 12, or any number to it, and then it will
not be so open: As for example, the 12 being added to 9296, it makes 9308; from
which if you substract 3512, there will remain 5796, the four figures thought
upon, as before.

Two persons thinking two numbers, the one an even number, and the other an odd
number, to divine and tell who thought the one, and who the other.
Bid the first Man to double his Thought, and the second Man to treble his,
then to add both numbers together. Then bid the one of them cast away half;
which if he can do, the total is even, otherwise odd.

1 Even.
The Total being Even, The first Man thought odd, The second Man even.
2 Odd.
The Total being odd; The first Man thought even, The second Man thought odd.

Example.
1 Man. 2 Man. Thought 15 24 Doubled, is 30 Trebled, is 72

30 and 72 added together, is 102

The Total is even, because half may be cast away.

The total being even, the conclusion is, the first Man thought odd, and the
second Man thought even, etc.

1 Man. 2 Man. Thought 34. Thought 45 Doubled, is 68. Trebled, is 135

Add 68, and the Total of both is 203

Cast away half. Answer, I cannot.

The Total therefore is odd. The Total being odd, the Conclusion is, the first
Man thought Even, the second Man thought odd.

Four Men thinking on four Digit numbers, (which are from 1 to 9) to tell what
the first, second, third, and fourth Man thought.

This conclusion finds out any number thought, under 10000.

Four persons standing in rank, admit the first think 8, the second 7, the
third 6, and the fourth 5.

Let the first Man double the number of his thought, and add 5 thereto, then
multiply the whole by 5, and add 10 to the product, noting the Total.

Bid the second Man demand of the first Man his total number, which being given
him, let him add unto the same his Thought, and give the Total to the third Man.

Then bid the third Man to affix or set his Thought by the number given him,
and put it one place toward the right hand, and give the total thereof to the
fourth Man.

Last of all, bid the fourth Man set his Thought thereby, a place yet to the
right hand, in the first place, and add the number of 25 unto it; that done,
demand of him the total number, which being given you, substract out of it 3525
the number remaining will discover the four Men's Thoughts.

The Digit on the left hand shows the first Man's Thought; the next Digit
toward the right hand is for the second Man's Thought; the figure in the second
place represents the third Man's Thought, and the figure in the first place
gives the fourth Man's Thought.

Example.
1. The first Man's Thought 8, which being doubled is 16, and 5 added thereto is
21, which multiplied by 5 is 105. Whereunto add 10, the whole is 115

2. Secondly, let the second Man add in 7 (his Thought) it stands thus, 122

3. Let the third Man set his Thought a place to the right hand thus. 122. 6

4. Let the fourth Man place his Thought a place yet to the right hand thus:
1226. 5

Also bid him add in 25, and it makes 12290

Demand the Total, it is 12290

Which being given you, deduct 3525

The remains will be 8765

Ans. The first Man thought 8, the second Man thought 7, the third Man thought
6, the fourth Man 5.

Example.
First Man's Thought 8

Doubled, is 16. and 5 added 21. Multiplied by 5, is 105, and 10 added in is 115

Second Man's Thought added in, is 7

The total is 122

Third and fourth Man's Thought set thereby, 122. 6. 5

25 Added, makes 12290

Substract 3525

Particular Thought, 8. 7. 6. 5

Of the 4 Men, 1. 2. 3. 4

FINIS.

