THE VVHIG CABALL.
THe sullen night worn thredbare, when I lay,
Expecting the approach of early day:
Such Loyal thoughts did in my bosom rage,
As drew my curses on this factious Age:
With tears I mourned our sinking Countrey's fate,
And shadowed glory of the royal State.
Till slumbring at the last, a glim'ring light,
Methought was shown to my mysterious sight.
When I descried a Treas'nous damned Cabal,
Hells mounting Engines that would sink us all,
And rise upon our King's and Countries fall:
Dark were their looks, and knowingly I saw,
Villains they were, and such as fled the Law;
Printers, and those who had abused the times,
Religion was their Cloak to hide their Crimes.
Envious as Fiends, like Hells Divan they sat;
What would Hell more? to ruin Church and State:
So vile as these, it never could appear,
Had the great Whig-land Lucifer been there.
When in an abrupt voice I heard one cry,
Romes Idol-York shall not gorge our Liberty.
Rowze up my Friends, our Ruin's more than feared,
Their Bulls do roar so loud we cannot be heard.
With that he paused -- then said with much distress
What shall we do? The Tide of our Success,
Now seems to Ebb, nor can we hope for less:
For even those, will now believe no more
Our Shams, who judged them Miracles before.
Interest's our Hook, and Freedom is the Bait,
Bondage but named, you will see Rebellion strait.
Each weak Pretense deceives the easy crowd;
With them it is Law, what is by us allowed.
But shallow are our Plots to searching eyes,
They see what mischief at the bottom lies:
Our Shrieffs and Jurys for their Ends-applause,
With Ignoramus, Riots, prop our Cause;
They doubt of Peace from those that break the Laws;
There our designs are desperate, and so crossed,
Bold the attempt must be to gain what is lost:
Zealous Rebellion must secure us all;
We cannot fail while we pretend a Call,
With that like Fiends they Vanished and I woke,
Whilst all amazed and troubled, thus I spoke*
O Wretched Land! how proved thy curing Vain?
Sine thy old Wound is breaking out again,
The whole's endangered by the infected part,
But Heaven instruct our great Physician's art.
There Is one way left to heal this desperate wound;
Cut off the rotten for to save the sound.
Were there no cause for this now needful blow,
Religious Peace then through the Land would flow,
So Jehu Sion purged, and Faith did grow.
But let us Unite with pious joy to sing,
Health to the Best -- to Englands gracious King.
Blessed may he be, his Queen and Royal Bed;
And blessed great James, whilst all their Foes lie dead,
So we at last shall bruise the Serpents head.
LONDON, Printed for Walter Davis in Amen-Corner, 1682.


