FOR THE Sacred Law OF THE LAND.

By Francis White.

(...).

LONDON, Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at
their shops in Fleetstreet. 1652.

To the Reader.
I Have spoke a little in some of the leafes beneath, of the fullness of cur
Saxon English Tongue, of its goodness and worth; I will show here, (that I may
not seem to talk only) how easily we may utter our thoughts and wills, the
drift of our minds, without borrowing of our neighbors, and without going
about, nay, and often without waking the sleepie grave, and breathing life
again into words hundreds of years agone dead and forgotten. We need not delue
for buried gold, nor look back for words frightfully old (as they may go at
the first sight) such as would be dreadful in their rising: Were we but ready
in the speeches of the sundry Shires, Towns, Boroughs, and Thorps of our Land,
of the West and North, (from whose broad mouths (as they are thought) we may
gather enough, though what we gather thus is wronged in them every day more
then other;) if all these were brought into one heap, and rightly laid
together, we should find our selves rich within our selves, without taking up
on trust. The most learned of the wise men heretofore, Aristot. de gener.
animal. l. 4.
tells us, that he that is not like those who begot him, like one or other of
his house before him, is to be wondered at as a thing against the kind. There
are those froward ones now, who, as if the blood of their Forefathers were more
foul then the sin of our birth, and its guilt, hate nothing more then them;
not their outside only, but their goodness (which never any breasts were
fuller off) is loathed by them, as are loathed, not only their speech,
understanding, and lives, but their laws and belief; sleighting all things
before themselves, as if nothing were well laid hitherto, but we were to begin
the world from the bottom, upon another groundworke: like some sons of
another adders teeth, or of our mother earth, lately sprung up, sons of the
warmer Sun, and slime, risen but yesterday. As to the Laws of our Saxon
English, that I may deal within my own reach only, (For from those as from
springs of wholesome waters, the streams of our later Laws spread;) Whosoever will
read them ore with a steadfast eye, will not meet the work or hands of
highlanders, but all things as far otherwise, as Heaven and Hell are asunder.
When he shall look on the strength and height of the walls, the smoothness of
the walks, the goodness of the whole building, he must see God has been there,
or men of heavenly offspring, the sons of God. A worshipful Bishop amongst
our greatest for all kinds of knowledge, but no friend to the Halle, bewailes
us in this- That of the coming in of the Saxons hither, of their first
workmanship, of the setting up and frame of their Kingdoms, the wisdom which
upheld them, of their deeds of the field, and their home Laws, worthy to be
everlastingly kept in mind, to outlive the day, so little is now in being to be
found. It cannot be withsaid, that through the retchlesnesse of men (to say no
worse) in the great earthquake of King Henry the eighth, stones did not fall
alone, many of our English Writers were overwhelmed in the breaches, hid in
their dust, and the mists and darkness must be the thicker after. This is
true, and we cannot be enough sorry for it; yet besides the hoords of books now
left, those which have not seen the light, (and likely never shall) and which
have, and are in every man's hands, can teach us, not sparingly, no small deal
of that which is bewailed as lost forever. And if there were less (which I
hope shall not be) the skill of a cunning hand may be seen by the shortest
stroke. But bless me, I am got abroad in open sight, and must make a stand;
The Readers leave (this cannot be helped) must be asked to go on. I am told
this is looked for from men unknown and untrusted (how ever from such as come
out alone, such as want their throngs of wits, making room before them, and
bespeaking heartily the meinies smiles, who must be taught how to like, and
whom.) I ask my leave then: but come ont what can, I will not buy it too
dearly; I will not sell my freedom for it; I wish the good will of all men, and
that this child of mine might have a fair welcome into the World; but I will
not throw my self at any man's feet, nor lick up his spittle for the
kindness. He whose end is nothing else but the good of others, should not
fear himself, he ought to stand upright above this lowness, as indeed he is;
yet am I not so idle to think my self some merry Knight of the Book, and
that my over loving Witch by her mighty spells has kept these fields for my
wonders, that this inthralled Queen cannot be freed but by my arm, and that I
was born for the hit. If some great undertaker, such as the World would freely
and willingly follow, had fallen on here, (which every Englishman is bound to,
how learned soever) I had not stirred, I had stood still somewhat more in the
shade. Now all that I shall get by this light, will be the loosing of other
men's tongues upon me, if I come off with a few short blows of dullness,
heaviness, or weakness, I am well; the best of men, such as the wildest
Heathens would stick amongst the Stars, are stung by some; what is the most
unmanly unthankfulness, the hallowed ashes of the dead are cursed and torn
up, of the dead who living held the Heavens up with their shoulders, made the
Sun shine, and the clouds rain: so far is this bitterness from being ill
thought of; backbiting is the token of a good man: he that would not be ill
spoken of, must fly from men. He alone who hides himself, never shoued up and
down in the streets, is wise. But we live not only for our selves, something
we owe to mankind, more to our own blood, to our mother England. And as many
other men easily outgoe me, so there may be those who may make but slowly up,
who may be left behind; in so many houses of flesh there may be undersoules to
mine. It is not any overweening which has thrust me thus far: The undertaking
fairly to heal the unbelief of some weak ones (for I am not so brainlesse to
think that those who side, and hate for their own sakes will be shaken with
words, that such a stubbornness can be ore come) who without any ill within,
any unsoundnesse of their own are led blindfolded by others, whom they (it may
be) have trusted too unwisely, who would drive on to the utmost that hatred) is
not heady boldness to be chidden by any. I would show these forlorn ones, how
sadly they lose themselves, how good and even the old rode is, how dark and
uneven their own bypath; how in the first they may find the holy footsteps
of their forefathers, and the wary steadiness of their treading: in the last
nothing but winding and giddiness, nothing but everlasting weariness; where,
as is said of the old Ghosts below, they shall wander for ever, more flitting
then smoke, and sparks of fire, which however hindered by the winds, striking
them down, climb upward on wings unseen, and at last are swallowed up, and
taken in to their own home. If these be as willing to hear others, as they are
empty themselves, he who says least may win them; and so be, that they will
bow at all, they may meet with stronger leaders, of the highest worthiness,
such as it will be no shame to them were they more, and better then they are,
to yield to, if yielding it self be not a shame) (where we run heedlesly upon
things forbidden, which we should shun, where we scorn to own, and as it
behooves us forsake our oversights) which now with too many it is. If nothing
else will take here, this may; I bring a mind free from love or hatred, I am
sworn to no man's words, I am bound to no man; I may say it, and believed; there
is not the least tie upon me which might sway me fowly from the truth, if I
stood not so fast as I should do. So then, as I am not worth the sin (nor any
man else) I am not bought, I have no wicked, no unrighteous score to be wiped
out; Nothing but dearest truth has drawn me forth, and that without the
trimming or gilding of any man's hand or wit, has its kindly loveliness; like
Heaven above, it shines bright from its own beams.

Faults of the print.
LIteral faults in words where there may be a mistake of one letter for
another, a letter out of rank, too much, or too little, I leave to the mercy of
the reader; where a word is left out, or too much, or changed, and disorders
the sense, there I restore the place. Of the first kind, are p. 72. Cafariae
for Caefaria, p. 118. Souldierie for Soldur^^. p. 120. (...) for (...), p. 126
Rdnerret for Banneret p. 85. srotera for sno tera. p. 87. and 137 the Saxon in
words should be r p. 146. has gae andul for gaful. gethtnege for gepitenege. p.
217. Aerenrdac for Aerendrac. gegmired for gesmired p. 147. Caute for Cunte. p.
133. l. 15. has Inland for Jnland. p. 187. ARIS for AERIS, DVCTIO for DVCITO p.
219. Comicas varco for Comic (as Varro.) p. 220. si is left out, p. 269, has
Bribeing for Bribed etc. of the second kind, p. 17. l. 7. blot out or, p. 79,
l. 12. for which read what. p. 87. l. 1. after p^acr (add) has. p. 99. l. 6.
after Aelfred (add) this. l. 10. for our read one, 114 l. 20, blot out unto
128. l. 23. wherein l. 15.17. for it read them. p. 134. after Charter (add)
to. 171. l. 9. Tenth read True. l. 12. read we will. p. 178. l 1. place and
(after) uncle. 181. after Conflicts (add) are there 187. l. 9. Many read May.
194. l. ult blot out not only. 260. l. 27. after is (add) in. 191. after Rome
(add) which was. 176. l. 17. for a, read as a. 146. in the Margin to Saxon is
(add) Mancus. 131. in the marg. to Cheding (add) Ley. 117. with cast read
with a cast, p. 110. l. 3. blot out cast away.

The Preface.
I Take not upon me to censure this age by the wisdom and constancy of those
which have gone before, perhaps when we have attained to the perfection of
things, it is not easy to make a stay, naturally where we cannot proceed, we
must go back; there may be an unhappy weakness of men not to love long, be the
object never so excellent, a weakness born with us, and which Nature only is
to be blamed for. I should think so, if the Nation were a weary of their old
Laws and this were a disaffection of the whole body. We know the five thousand
of Athens, those who would be called so, go for so many, were but four hundred.
The full enemies here, whose hatred to the Laws is as ancient as their name,
and being, are the dregs of the basest of the people, neither considerable for
number, nor worth: No more the body of the Nation, then the smallest rotten
part is the whole; made up chiefly of Anabaptism or Levelling, referring all
things to themselves, willing to embroil every where, of restless spirits, and
not likely to be satisfied with any form of Government, nor with any Laws, it
being Order, and Law, of what kind soever they strike at and undermine,
Breakers of all Laws, and enemies of the league of mankind, whose fanatic
giddiness is such, Homine imperito nunquam quidquam injustius.

Qui nisi quod ipse facit nihil rectum putat.


they will like nothing they do not set up, and will ruin every thing they do
not like, with whom Lex una legem nolle, whose principle of Anabaptism it is,
That there shall be no principle; who would live as they list Vid. Sleid l. 10.
But should these men's discontents prevail, what would become of the next age,
there being the same dominion of inconstancy still, the same irresolution must
pursue the posterity. If we be more just, and righteous then our forefathers it
will appear by our actions, but if they be irregular, we must be bounded by
rules. Yet to these wicked heads who abhor all Law, Sleid. ubi sup.
condemn Magistracy, deny propriety, and are pleased with nothing but that
communion which beasts enjoy in their wildness. It is as great an absurdity as
any of theirs to talk of Law, unless it be first made plain, That there is any
dominion, or propriety which may make that Law of use. For if according to
these Brethren (whose dreams are Oracles) there be none, then are we always in
the state of war, (unles all men will be contented to gather crumbs under a King
John of Leyden's table) and the strongest arm carries all. For the Leveller a
near kinsman, either we know not yet (which is the most likly) his full meaning,
Or he is not got past the old Agrarian Gauel-kind, so often contended for,
almost to the destruction of the then but budding Rome, by the Tribunes there.
Where it was the great reward of seditions, that all distinction being taken
away, no man might know himself nor his. (So Livie in that speech made for the
Consuls M. Genutius, and P. Curtius, Lib. 4.
against Canuleius the Tribune and his Laws.) However, our Leveller is too
unreasonable to fancy such equality of Lands, and Honors, it being against the
Law of Nature, which made some, more wise and ingenuous, more resolute and
adventurous, others, blockish, dull, and stupid; some (as if of purpose) fit to
command, others to obey. It is highly injust too, that the frugal painful man
should gain nothing by his honest industry, nor the riotous disordered sot,
lose by his debosh dissolutenes. Republ. 939.
Il n'y eut jamais de Republique ou ceste equalite de biens, et d'honeurs fust
gardee, says the French Bodin. This equality could no where be kept: with it
there can be neither Magistrate nor Laws. As to the pretended fantastical
communion of these Arreptitious ones, so much admired by Poets, lactantius will
not allow it in the first ages. He puts this construction upon those Poets who
are so much for it. Not that we imagine nothing then (says he) to have been
private, but after the manner of Poets figured, that we may understand men then
to have been so free, not to enclose their fruits, that alone they might sit
over things hidden, but admit the poor to the communion of their own labor De
jnstit. c. 5.
. Which the famous golden age should be, when the earth and all things else for
the use of man, were as common as the light of the Sun, Ceu Lumina solis and
aurae, I cannot find. Adam as is observed, was the universal Lord of things by
donation from God, and not without a private dominion, Genesis 1.28.
or propriety excluding his children without his Cession or assignment, by
which they had their Territories distinct in his life time in their own right
D. Seld. Ma. claus. 13.
. (which proves this home) Abel who is a feeder of sheep, had his Cattle and
Pastures; Hence is Cain called a tiller of the ground, and had his Corn and
Cornfields. His place Nod, where he built his City Enoch, and seated himself.
That the earth was divided soon after the flood appears by these Texts. The
name of the one was Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided. These are
the sons of Shem after their fathers, after their tongues, in their lands,
after their nations. Again, These are the families of the sons of Noah, after
their generations, in their Nations, and by these were the Nations divided in
the earth after the flood Gen 10.25.31, 32.
. Cham had the south, Sem the east, as Josephus, Eusebius, The Chronicle of
Alexandria, etc.

Grotius speaks thus; Things came into propriety, not by the only act of the
mind (for how could some know what others would have to be theirs, and abstain
from it, and many might desire the same thing) but by a certain pacte
expressed, as by division or tacit, as by occupation, for as soon as communion
displeased, nor was any division instituted, it ought to be thought that all
agreed, that what any one occupied he should have it for his own De jure
Belli. etc. l. 2. c. 2. sec. 2.
. Now though humane will is made to bring in the dominion, or propriety now in
use, which may fall short of the full title, yet he adds, That introduced, it
is unlawful for me to take that from thee against thy will which thou have a
propriety in. Natural law it self shows, that long or continual occupation
or possession, and lawful taking the profits is sufficient title. D. Seld. ma.
claus. 1.
That trick of the Spaniards to color their invasions in America, that the
people there abused what they had, and might be justly forced to quit it to
those who could use things better, was condemned more justly, though not as
theirs: Council. Trid. 402.
more for the first occupant, the ancient owner, having perhaps not only
improved what he found not possessed by any other, but by his labor made it
delightfully habitable for man: what reason is there, a stranger of another
clime, who has consumed what he had there, should claim a share in the
possession; nay what adventurer, who shall at his own charges bring others
with him, (as in the first rudeness of the world, And since, when the first
homes were too much crowded, the descendents of the Patriarchs and others, as
Captains of Colonies, fought out new places for themselves, and those who ran
their fortune:) I say, what such adventurer has not good right to plant
himself upon the best soil of his new discoveries, and assign his followers
their proportions, which no second commer ought to beat them out of? Every man
we know in the first ages made wells his own by occupation. Genesis 21
It is plain this propriety was amongst the Jews, and allowed by them; besides
that command from God, Thou shall not steal. Abraham their father tells the
King of Sodom, I have lifted up my hand to the Lord, etc. from a thread to a
shoe latchet, that I will not take any thing that is thine Genesis 14.
. God by a Covenant gives Canaan to his seed Genesis c. 15.
. The same Abraham purchases the Cave of Machpelab, he gives all he has to
Isaac Genesis 23.25,
. Jacob buys a parcel of a field where he had spread his tent, at the hand of
the children of Hamor, Sichems father, for one hundred pieces of money or
Lambs Cap. 33.
. Moses and Joshua divided the Holy land amongst the Israelites; It is said,
And Moses gave inheritance unto the half Tribe of Manasseth, and these are the
Countries which Moses did distribute for inheritance Josh. 13.
: But this distribution made not the Tribes inter-commoners, the Families had
their distinct inheritances; Hebron (as the Holy Book) became the inheritance
of Caleb, etc. to this day Josh. 14.
. This was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by their families Cap.
15.
. Ruth gleanes in the fields of Boaz. Naboth had his vineyard, the Shunamite is
restored to her field again by King Jehoram. The nations were for propriety,
Abimelech the King of Gerar is reproved by Abraham in these words. Because of a
well of water which his servants had violently taken away; He answers, I heard
not of it, but to day; Gen 21.
Joseph (as we read) bought all the land of Egypt for Pharach, only the land
of the Priests bought he not Cap, 47.
. Nor did our Savior, who was no judge (as himself speaks) of inheritances,
take away the law of propriety, more then any civil law else; but the law of
Moses only, and that partition wall which separated the Jews from other
Nations. Ephesians. 2.
That after, of the possessors of lands who sold them, and laid the prices at
the Apostles feet; and of Ananias, who seld, etc. can make nothing against
this, being a voluntary act, an huge trial of a rich converts piety, still as
Saint Peter to Ananias; Whiles it remained, was it not thine own, and after it
was sold, was it not in thine own power. This is more plain by our Savior in
three of the Evangelists, where he tries the faith of a rich man, sell all
(says he) which is liked well enough by them; But then follows, And give to
the poor, which will not please much. These meek ones are merely for taking
away, neither has this Communion been faithfully observed by themselves. The
successor of the great Prophet at Munster (their stie, or kennell,) not only
claiming the throne of his father David (as they speak) but the Empire of the
whole Earth. So only power, and riches in others are abominable and unlawful;
Sleid. l. x.
And in the siege of that place their mock-King had his private storehouses,
for himself, his phrenetic apron Peers and whores, whom he feasted daily,
while the racaille, the rascallity of the herd drop down on heaps starved in
the streets. But although we cannot imagine Adam the most wise, and most
excellent of men, and the Patriarchs of the new world, (who outlived the ages
of Kingdoms, and Commonwealths, who had lives as long as the arts are said to
be) so rude, to live on prey and the snatch, with as little honesty, and
civility as we find amongst the Alarbes, or those of Florida, whose character
is, that they are barbarous sordid and inhumane; although I say we cannot
imagine this, and it is demonstrated that there was dominion and propriety in
the Golden Age, as men love to call the first time; yet there was no such great
need then as since to make division either of cattle or pasture, (for gold and
silver were then of no use, and in Mexico and the West, served only of late
for arms and common utensils) the number of men being small, and not divided
perhaps so much as into large families, when dens and woods are fancied houses,
and coverts, and skins of beasts clothes; when (to omit fancies) men were more
civilly bred, and knew more from the instructions of the Patriarchs then (as it
is likely) any since, whom they obeyed, and reverenced willingly, more out of
piety then fear, as in a paternall government, where the Father as chief of
the house, was the Prince and Priest of the Family, and every wrong was done to
a brother, an uncle or a kinseman. But when men began to spread into Families,
Tribes, and Nations, not contented with the homeliness and simplicity of their
Fathers, nor with things freely growing, and at hand, every man employed
himself to get those things which he conceived necessary, either for his
subsistence or pleasure, which no man would have done, if like Virgils Bees, or
Oxen, he had not toyled to his own benefit. This made Noah plant his Vineyard,
and others busy themselves to find out all those arts, which might either
make the earth fruitful, or delight and profit themselves; so that (as we
find it in all Histories) there was a necessity for propriety then. And as
with great reason, and I may say of divine right, propriety came in, without
great wrong, and universal confusion it cannot be taken away: the least
concession, the least slackning of this law of propriety must be fatal; a huge
license and deluge of injuries would follow, when our experience makes it
manifest, that laws in force, and all the Courts of Judicature cannot reftrein
the injustice of wicked men, from griping the just and lawful inheritance of
others: kill, and possess, would be familiar. Our own advantage would be the
measure of right, we should return to, or rather set up that state which is
called merely natural, in which it is said every man might do what he listed,
and against any man, in which every man might possess and enjoy what he would
and could wrest and force from another. Those who removed the Terminall stones,
or boundary marks were punishable by the Civil Law; Modest. l. 2. de term. ^
moto.
which certainly as many others in the twelve tables might be taken out of the
Jewish Laws given by God; By whom Cursed is he that removes the mark of his
Neighbors land: a plain grant of propriety, if any thing can be plain at all.
As is observed: This has been generally received amongst all Nations, if we
except some few, such as the Canibals of Guadalupea, who yet devour not one
the other; Pet. Mer. Dec.
or such savages living ever upon spoil and inhumane robbery, whom no civil
eye will take to be reasonable, nor manly, not by the outside. Cicero in the
case of hunger would not take bread from another who deserved it not; my life,
says he, is not more worthy then such affection of mind, not to hurt or
wrong any man for my own sake Offic. 111.
. Zenophon tells those of Sinope, that either amongst the Greeks or Barbarians,
where the market was denied him, his manner was to take what he wanted by
force, yet out of necessity Cir. min. exped. 463.
. Armatus leges ut cogitem, this was the Philosophy of the field. That of
Curtius has more justice in it; Melior est causa suum non tradentis, quam
poscentis alienum. His cause is better who yields not up his own, then his who
demands that which is another man's. If this violence were common law, and
allowed, one hour of our greatest peace (if any peace could be) would be less
secure, more pernicious then the plunder and sack of unruly war, which how
boisterous soever it be, like rivers overswolne, returns often into its own
channel, and leaves the harrassed Citizen, or naked Peasant, to begin sadly
the world again, to lay the foundation of a new fortune which may be more
firm, which at least for a while he may enjoy alone; in the other case our
own unworthy sloth, would be Zenophons necessity. The Scythians (as Arian)
having no certain seats, nor possessing any thing, the love of which might
restrein them, continually are in war, disquieting themselves and others
Arrian. 202.
: Whatsoever can be said for necessity, it is impious and unreasonable to frame
pretenses of injustice upon necessity of our own making. Piety too, upon which
in all our distresses before our own industry we are to rely, would be no more
thought of, Nemo tamen armatus opem a diis petere sustinuit. The fancy that
there could be any continual justice in such communion, were all men's desires
and appetites more alike and equal, then we can look they should be; and the
supposition that after the manner of a few Spartans, and their Phiditia
(whither yet every man brought his own proportion of meat) all mankind, nay
the herd of these meek ones who are only to inherit the earth, could
incorporate into an universal Utopian communion and agreement; where the Lamb
and the Wolf should reconcile, all dispositions and tempers, mix freely, and
sympathise, would be as impossible as monstrous, as that new and more then
African generation, or Common wealth, where the damned are allowed procreation,
and shall beget others to be damned. This alone may condemn these Commoners,
and their Communion: It was never known, that any of them who cry up division,
had any thing to divide. Other heretics there are to serve their turn at Rome
(if no where else) who allow dominion or propriety, but (so heavenly are the
Nephews of Loyola and their allies) It must be founded in grace. Iac. rex.
Cont. Card. Perren. Tor. Tort. wid. Apolo. Barcl.
These have been sufficiently answered by some noble Pens of our side, and of
their own. Doubtless if there were any such thing, Saint Paul either knew not
of it, or forgot it in his appeal. Had this been Primitive Apostolical truth,
our Saviors blessed legacy of peace charged upon his successors with so much
earnestness could not have been kept two days; the waters of baptism had
quickly been discolored with blood; and although the piety and glorious
devotion of some of the first converts, was so forward to give every thing to
the Church, that by the Imperial Edicts of amortization, after it was thought
fit to be restreined; Yet all were not of the same spirit, some would
willingly have made this advantage of their faith, and ere faith it self could
be settled, have raised those troubles upon this color in the beginning, which
perhaps had not only given a check, and stop to the happy progress of the
first planters, but with the general offense and scandal of the most moderate
in opposition have swallowed up all rights, divine and humane together.
Farther, if this were authenticke, the condition of Christians would be more
hard and unhappy, then that of their infidelity before; And that of our
Savior, Seek the Kingdom of heaven first, and all things else shall be added
to you, more specious then true, (and which were most horribly blasphemous)
merely a show of words; whereas in truth it should be, seek the kingdom of
heaven first, and all things else shall be taken away. As we have a right to
our propriety by nature, grace which follows it cannot weaken it, not destroy
it, but perfect it rather: This has been long since received in the Schools
of Divines Tert. Tert. 203:
. For the author of both laws of nature and grace being the same, what he has
established in the one, he takes not away in the other; nor does he
superinduce grace, that he may untie the bond of nature, but that he may bind
it the more: And amongst no men (I will not say are) ought to be so sacred the
duties of nature, as amongst Christians. And although the friends of this
paradox may pretend, there is full propriety still with, or at least a
condition annexed; let them show how such propriety can be full, and how it
came to be so settled. In the Pontificate of Gregory the seventh, the Vice god
according to the stilo novo: This error began, as some of their own Historians
confesses ingenuously Godf. Viterb. in Hen. 1. Otho Frisi^g. l. 2. H^st. c. 35.
l. 1. de gest. Frid. ez 1.
. Painful discoveries to accomplish arts and sciences are highly honorable,
but in these last days to start new articles of faith never heard of in the
first, and purest ages, to serve the design, to extend the Papal power
(called omnipotency) so far, that that which in its own nature is evil, by
it shall not be evil at all, is an intolerable wickedness, enough to make
all men avoid them. And since the best arguments now for laws are from the
Estate, those who either by their own providence, or the frugality of their
ancestors are full and of considerable fortunes, must know they cannot be safe
without laws; the fangles of these desperate fanatics who every day arraigne
these sacred tables, nor can nor will preserve them, by the just and wholesome
sanction of the laws obeyed and reverenced, not by the charms of Sybils
leafes, or Numa's shield did the Roman Common wealth advance her lofty head.
Major haereditas venit vnicuique nostrum a jure and legibus quam a par^rs^ibus.
No man is assured, He shall either keeps his estate or transinit it to his
posterity, but by the laws; let the inheritance be what it can be, there is
more taken from the laws which direct and fix the descent and wall it in, then
from our parents. The poorest necessitated man, amidst the calamities of this
wretched life, were not the law his sanctuary, would yet be more unhappy,
whatsoever his loathing his present condition may make him imagine; oppression
the heaviest of all miseries would crush him to pieces, and break the repose of
his shortest slumber: without law, (as it is observed) neither could the
merchant pass the seas, nor the traveller the highway. The malice of the
clown, the fraud and dark arts of the City would surround us, and what most we
prize, though we want the comforts of it, no man's life cold be safe a minute;
nothing would be sure, nothing certain without law; There could be no
commerce, no conversation amongst men, Kingdoms and states (as Sir John
Davies) would be dissolved; this protects the orphan, the widow, and the
stranger See Sir I. Dav. Preface.
: this is a pillar of fire, a glorious star guiding all men through the
darkness of humane actions. I know there are those will tell us, that though
this be true, these pains may be saved, that where there is no transgression,
law is in vain, and a caution too much, that there is a succession of men
entered, or ready to enter with the Chiliasts, if there be room then, non vox
hominem sonat, as the Donatists used to brag of themselves, where every one
shall be good, and just, so clean so pure and angelical, that they may say
beyond the Gnostics not only that they like not the laws of nature or men,
but that they were not needed, they could live innocently and righteously
without them; I wish it, but I hope no man will think me a Timon, a man hater,
if I cannot believe all this; I have not found it so: I should think it more
safe to trust laws then men, he who would shake off the laws, will hardly be
bound by conscience. I cannot conceive otherwise, but if things were come to
that, that Laws and Chancery were to be seated in every man's breast, there
would be much more dishonesty then there is, our own interest would be the
principal mover: There has been much foul play, much deceit under the shadow
of goodness, there may be a sanctity merely of the face, that of the
Pharisees was no deeper; Mat. 23.
They devoured widows houses, and for a pretense made long prayer. It will be
time now to show what law is, then to descend as orderly as I can to our own
laws, (and to make it visible, that there is nothing singular in them, from
other the most ancient laws of Christendom. But wherethey excel them in justice
mercy and certainty, and in antiquity too; if we look upon the fundamentals,
and back to the first rise.) Next to remove those false calumnies which the
rash lightness or malicious ignorance of the adversaries, (as malignant clouds
betwixt the sun and us) has cast upon them. Vt quisque est imperitior
administrationis and necessitatum publicarum tanto plus sibi arrogat in legibus
interpretandis, we may say, abolendis; The more unskilful any man is of
government, and the public affairs, the more will he arrogate to himself in
interpreting or abolishing laws. The pride and self conceitednesse of an
ignorant as it is commonly the greatest pride, so it is the most dangerous;
whose suppositions at the most are the great arguments, and whose imagination,
not demonstration, if it must prevail, no foundation can be so fast but it
must be shaken: a weather beaten ship in a winter sea may be our emblem, every
day tossed and bruised betwixt shelfes and rocks without an anchor, and where
never any unhappy lost men could find a haven.

For the sacred Laws of the Land.
CHAP. I.
Of Law what it is. It Is Antiquity and necessity, of Liberty.

LAw is defined by our Authors and others, to be, that which commands those
things which are to be done, Grot. de jubel. Sir Hen. Finch 1.
and forbids their contraries; To be the rule of moral acts, obliging to what
is right; An art of well ordering a civil society; It is the conservation of
justice, which is, A constant and perpetual will to give every man his own.
Bract. l. 1. c. 4. Just. instit.
Therefore Cotta well denies Justice to be there where there is no right. The
precepts of Law are (as Bracton) to live honestly, wrong no man, De not. Deo. 1.
give every man his own, These were the words of Justinian Instit. l 1. tit. 1.
long before. The Law (says the Gloss) intends only this, That humane
society, and that conjuncton without which men cannot live together, may most
commodiously be conserved. This is its end. These precepts, or Laws commanding,
our Savior comprehends in one rule. Do as you would be done to. Jus is a Jovis
nomine, Presidents have only so much of Law, as they have of Justice Chapter Just.
Hub. 270.
. Those, and Laws are built upon reason and Justice, Law and Justice are
insepable. Force then, which is said to be, when any thing is done injustly,
with no right, against the free will of another When a man requires his own,
prosecutes his right, but not before the Judge, is not Law Bract. l. 4. c. 4.
, Force, and Law are opposites In Orot. pro P. Sextio.
. Horace notes the fierceness of Aebilles thus, See chap 2.137. here.
Iura negat sibi nata, nihil non arrogat armis.

By these two contraries (it is said) is humane life a great way distinguished
from the life of beasis Cicero ubi supra. l. 4.
. Arrians speaking of the Macedon kings say, non vi sed lege regnum tenuerant.
The illustrious Viscount S. Alba^ meant as much in his first Aphorism where he
says in civil society either Law or force prevails. In his judgment mere
force (those are his words) is the fountain of in justice Augmtnt. scient. 690.
. This of the Barbarian, That is most just in prosperous fortune, which is most
forcible, is not so barbarous and abominable as another of a Pope Bulla
Clement. 13.
, sentencing the Templars thus, Although of right and Law we cannot, yet
according to the fullness of our power, we condemn the said Order. As one,
although you may with force rule your country and parents, and reform things
amiss, yet is it unseasonable, especially when all changes portend slaughter,
flight, and what else is histile Salust. 48
. In our Law, Force is said to be (as before) when one demands that which he
thinks due to him not by a Judge, sometimes armed, sometimes not Bract. l. 4.
c. 4.
. We may read in our old Laws. In the times of the Danish kings, right was
buried in the realm (such are the words) the Laws and customs slept together;
in their time, wicked will, force, and violence rather reigned then judgment
in the Land Ll. Edv. con^^ss c. 16 de invenri^^e murdri.
. I would not be understood to speak against public force, such as arms the
lawful Magistrate to act legally in the execution of the Laws, Thou shall not
kill, and that other Text, Whosoever shall shed the blood of man, do not tie up
the hand of Justice. By several Statutes, which it would be tedious to repeat,
I might show what opinion our Lawmakers had of injust force which only
deserves the name of force. The Statute forbidding Armor l. 7. E. 1.
, has these words, and all other force against our peace; Peace the contrary to
force is the only darling of the Law: another Statute speaks thus, No man
shall come before the Justices, or other of the Kings Ministers doing their
Office with force, etc. Except etc. and upon a cry made for arms to keep the
peace 2 E. 3.
. Power ought to follow the Law, not to go before it 3 Inst. 160.
. As Britton. We will that all men rather use judgment then force Britt. 116
; judgment and Peace go together. Fleta upon that command of the Statute
Westminster. the 1. That the peace of holy Church and of the Land be well kept, goes
on in the words of the Statute (and it is a good consequence) That so common
justice or right may be done to every man Fleta. l. 1. c. 29.
. Britton unites Peace and Law (in another place) as fully, Peace says be
cannot well be without Law fol. 1.
. And indeed where force gets the authority and reputation of a Law, it is like
the unnatural blaze of comets, whatsoever the height be, the effects are
commonly fatal, more fear then love is given it. And as force cannot, as
little can the Arbitrary will of man be Law, Laws cannot be just unless they
be certain. It is the best Law (says the illustrious Viscount) which leaves
least to the arbitrarinesse of the Judge Aphorism 8.
. We are Judges our selves of our own inconstancy, how often we disagree with
our selves, what repugnancies there are daily within us, how we are carried
away after any thing that is new, and which we have not at all experienced, not
seldom without repentance enough, commonly our wits being but afterwits, every
man is his own Phaeton, his passions and affections never so disorderly, oftener
command then his reason, so that sometimes he is rather a Geryon or Chymaera
then one man. The first act of our understanding, which is a pure and simple
apprehension, may want reason, it being not yet raised, and the soul as it is
clogged, taking the beginning of it is understanding from the senses, it takes
such impressions as are offered to them, and is not it self, rushes furiously
and rashly upon things ill represented, and as ill understood, without any
reflection upon Reason (which we call Judgment) or deliberation. And not
seldom where the will is thus impetuous, force and violence are seconds to it.
This made Aristotle say, That those who would have Law to rule the City, seem
as if they would have God, and the Laws to rule, but those who would have man
to rule, give the command to a beast. Not that he condemns Magistracy, which he
often much magnifies, but that he would not attribute all things to men. By Law
is understood natural Reason divinely infused, upon which is framed a certain
form of living. By man, humane Authority. Such is my will, my pleasure, my
affection, are words might become Ket's Camp, and his company of Governors,
They would sound horribly in a Judges mouth. Therefore Rinalde protests in
Machiavel, That he would not esteem it worth much to live in that City, where
men were of more power then the Laws. Bragging of our own subtleties and
contrivances is nothing to the purpose to make this invalid, too often we have
our ends, and designs in them, which the Law does not allow, and hence grows
our distaste, how often has the case of perpetuities been over ruled, it being
against God and Nature, that things here should continue without change, where
the change is just; and against reason that an estate should continue in one
family to the worlds end, in such manner that no owner at any time could either
advance his younger issues, or pay debts out of it, but that those of the
descendents capable, never so disobedient, and unnatural should take all; yet
as if every man might make Laws for his own patrimony, how lawless soever,
and exploded, this perverseness will not be given over, although according to
the rule of that Reverend Chief Justice upon this case, Men's Policies are to be
fitted to the Laws, not the Laws to their Policies; Sir Hen. Hub. 134.
This writhing the Laws Pigh. controv. Ratis. l. 3.
as the Papists deal with the Scriptures which they make a nose of wax, is an
impiety which Livies remembers with the neglect of the Gods, next it. lib. 2:
A most reverend Bishop tells a Roman Adversary, (as ill satisfied with our
Laws, as this State which made them was with the Treasons of his Order) That
he is unworthy to be endured in a Commonwealth held with Laws, who departs
from them. Tort. Tort. 145.
We read, That is lawful which the Law of the twelve Tables and the Julian Law
permits, Well. 7. si paciscat Dr etc. li. 1. D. de Just. and jur.
and in the same Civil Law we say, That is lawful which by the Laws the
custom of our Ancestors and institutions is allowed. Every thing we may or can
do is not lawful, Cicero Philip. 13.
in which sense Vlpian interprets that clause of the Edict Quod eius Licebit.
And again, that is lawful which is permitted by the Laws, to which is
opposed unlawful, and that is unlawfully done, which is done against the
Laws, Customs, etc. de legate. l. 3.
Although the Romans, as the Spartanes from whom they are borrowers had their
Customs unwritten which was Law approved only by use; Quibus saepenumero,
says a Civilian, Gliscentibae perniciosissime (Lacones) errabant; Lexic. Ju.
Ciu. tit. Lex.
Yet to the end that neither favor nor hatred might approach the tribunal,
nor judgment be left to the arbitrary will of man, and that the Laws might be
made certain and notorious, the greatest part of the Roman Laws were written,
that no one (as is said) might do and undo, bind and loose at his pleasure;
because of humane frailty, all men being liers, it is not safe to trust the
Magistrate without a written rule as another. ibid.
The Jewish Laws of the Decalogue by Gods command were written, the Laws of
the Athenians were written, by which they are said to excel those of Sparta.
ibid.
The Republique commends highly the publishing the twelve Tables, then (as
that) the Magistrates were constrained to govern the Subjects following these
Laws, so that Equity and arbitrarines had not any place. Bod. de la Rep. Liver
fixieme.
Charendos chosen the Lawgiver of those of old Sybaris, or new Thurium in
Lucania now Bafilicata, chosen (so Diodorus) to prescribe them the manner how
to live, having diligently looked over the Laws of other Nations, and digested
the best into one body, commands in no sort to dipart from the words of the
Law, or from the writing, a legis scripto; Biblioth. Li. xii.
his reason is from the absurdity that private men should meddle (for this he
reserves to the supreme power) though things be amiss. He speaks not more to
Magistrates in his prohibition then to any others, but generally; nor of
equity, both which Bodin would seem to prove by this place. Republ. L. sixieme
And although in a Court proper a Judge of Equity is to be allowed, yet if it
were allowed to all other Courts to expound the Law against the Letter, and
perhaps meaning of the maker according to conscience as w^ speak. Equity
would, as more plausible, be every where cried up, like Caesar's consulship, the
Law suspected in every case, as unjust (in time being lost in opinion) would
wear out, and fall insensibly as useless; and in all Courts there would be
nothing but equity left, which aequum and bonum, or equity is in plain terms
nothing else but absolute and arbitrary power. King Francis the first of France
having subdued Savoy, and driven out Charles the second, the Duke; the new
Magistrates substituted by him gave judgment according to equity, and often
against the Customs and Law written: the Estates of the Country were quickly
weary of this equity, they could find no justice in it, and therefore
Petition the King, That those Judges might no more judge according to equity,
which was nothing else (as the reporter) but to tie them, to fasten them to the
Laws without any variation ny sa, ny la, neither here nor there, a thing quite
contrary to the passions (says Bodin) of favorable Judges. Vbi supra.
The mischiefs and oppressures done by Emps^n and Dudley are imputed to the
Statute of King Henry the seventh, authorizing to hear etc. offenses committed
against poenall Statutes, etc. According to discretion (not according to Law
and Custom of England) which the Lord Cook seems to dislike, 4. Just c. l.
p. 40.
yet which is the same, discretion is (so he) thus to be described -- To
discern by Law what is Justice. ibid 41.
When a Jurie doubting the Law, has found the special matter the entry is,
and upon the whole matter, etc. They pray the discretion of the Judges, or the
advice and discretion of the Justices in the premises, etc. The Statute 3. of
King Henry the eight of Sewers, allows to make Statutes according to their
own wisdom and discretions, etc. which words are to be to be intended and
interpreted according to Law and Justice. r. w. Kighleys c.
It was resolved by all the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas, where a new
Court was erected as in the 31. of King Henry the eight, To hear and determine
according to Law and Custom, etc. or otherwise according to their sound
discretions. That clause was against Law. 6. Jac. B. C. 4. Jnsti. 245. Miser
scrauitus ubi jus vagum, etc.
Where Laws are written, the Magistrate knows what to command, the people to
obey; where it is otherwise, the Law must necessarily be Law errant, wandering,
uncertain, and unknown, (which is a miserable, nay, the most miserable
slavery) and become nothing but shadow and name. Cicero makes it Justice to
obey Laws. de leg. 1.
Vlpian will have Antiquity to be instead of a law, or as a law, instead of a
constitution, instead of consent. Dictum. l. 1. sec. ult de aquae pluae arcend.
Pliny Secundus writing to Trajane, (as the manner was when the case exceeded
the terms of equity resulting from the law, to have recourse to the Emperor
for advice) upon the Honourary, usually given by the Buleutae or Decurions at
their admittance into the Court. The Emperor answers him, (out of his
religious as I may call it observation of the law) Whether all the Decurions
chosen for every City of Bithynia should give it or no, generally he could not
set down. But (says he) what I think to be most safe, is to follow the law
of every City. Lib. 10. Epist. 13.14
To Pliny next question, whether the Censours might choose into the Senate of
one City, Citizens of other Cities, yet of the same Province; The Emperor
writes back, Ibid. Epist. 116.
The authority of the law, and long custom usurped against the law, might draw
thee diverse ways: This temper pleases me, that for what is past we innovate
in nothing, but that the Citizens of what Cities soever, although against the
law taken in, continue, but for the time to come the Pompeian law be observed.
Bracton with us would have that which use has approved to be law: The Statute
of Merton says of the laws of England, Hitherto used, and approved. The Court
in the Lord Cook uses that of the Emperors Honorius and Arcadius. The usage,
or manner of most faithful antiquity is to be kept, Rep. 4. Epist. and 78.
there is the edict in Suetonius recited. This Edict was against the
Rethoricians by the Censours. Gell. l. 15. c. 11. vide Sueton. de Retor.
Those things which are done besides the manner and custom of our forefathers
neither please nor seem right. But to make it more visible that antiquity ought
to beget a reverence toward laws. Let all Histories be searched, you will
meet with them wheresoever you find men civilized. Nay this as it shows the
antiquity beyond all exception, so it makes the necessity of law apparent; That
notwithstanding the often intercourse of angels, and the daily and continual
messages by Prophets the watchmen of the Jews, the great wisdom did not
think it fit to leave them without laws writ with the divine singer, and
published by God himself, in which, as well as in their circumcision and rites
of religion, they were preferred as in another glorious prerogative before all
other nations. It is observed before the law of God, there is no mention of
law, nor in any before Moses, nor in Orpheus, and Homer since; the Greeks long
after borrowed many things from the laws of Moses, as the Romans again from
them ten of their tables, (the other themselves added, who could scarcely live
twenty years without a certain law. Li. 2. sec. ex actis deinde legibus. de
orig jur.
Solon cotemporary with Craesus and Gyrus, is said to be the borrower, and
Diodorus Siculus the authority vouched, Lexi. ju. civ. lit. Lex.
who names Moses, l. 2. c. 5.
but not as if he knew him much; he speaks of his laws which, says he, he
pretended to be given by Abiao Jao as the Greek, whom they call God; he tells us
Solon traveled for the laws of his Commonwealth; nay, and the most renowned
of Greece for wisdom and learning, as Orpheus, Musaeus, Daedalus, Homer,
Lycurgus, Piato, and Pythagoras; but into Egypt Li. 2. c. 6.
, and again Lycurgus, Plato, and Solon brought many laws taken from the
Egyptians to their Commonwealths, by the most ancient friendship and mutual
traffic betwixt the Athenians the most ancient of the Ionians, and the
Phaenicians, (from whom Linus and Orpheus are said to have received much Vid.
Grot. Annot. in lib. de verit. 23.38.
;) Nay by the affinity betwixt the Ionians and Phaenicians, from whom the
Ionians had their letters, as the others theirs from the Jews, whose tongue
and dialect was the same with the old Hebrew Voss. G^ammat. l. 1. c. 10. Grot.
dc. ver. annot. 15.16.
: (besides there might be Proselytes amongst these Phaenicians; nay, some
intermixture of Jews especially near Sidon, and Tire.) The Greeks might easily
come to the knowledge of many things in the Jewish laws, (as Herodotus In
Terpsichore. 135.
.) The Phaenicians who came with Cadmus into Baeotia, brought into Greece, much
learning, as also letters, the Ionians having learnt those letters of the
Phaenicians used them with a little change. I have seen, says the Historian,
at Thebes of Baeotia in the Temple of Ismenius Apollo Cadmean letters cut in
certain Tripodes very like the Ionians. The Egyptians had their learning from
the Patriarchs after Noah, chiefly from Abraham, Joseph, Moses, etc. who
conversed with them as their posterity did after Vid. Mentac Eccles. c. 3.
. Before Ptolomy Philadelphus, and the translation by the Septuagint, it is
reported that Theopompus an Historian inserted something of the sacred
Scriptures into his story, for which he was distracted, and continued so till
it was spunged out Vt. Eusebius. de p^aepar. Evang. c. 5. Hesi^d. in Theogon.
Ovid. An^xagor as Epicharm. Plutarch.
. The Greeks and the Romans in imitation of them, writ plainly of the chaos,
creation, of God, whom they called the supreme mind, or divine understanding,
that all things were made by his word, nay, and of the Dove sent out of the
Arc, V. Grot. ib. sup. in li. 1.
more directly to the purpose whence the Greeks had their Laws. The most
ancient Attick Laws had their original from the Laws of Moses, as appears by
the Law of killing the night-Theefe. Gell. l. 20 c. 1.
By that of the Heirs Females. Thus in Terence his Phormio Act. 1. Seac. 2.
Exo. 21.24 Levit. 24.19, 20. de Talione in Tabvlis.
.

Lex est, ut srbae, qui, qui sint genere proximi,
Iis nubant, Et illos ducere eadem haec lex jubet.
He that will search for it (says Grotius) shall find more, as the (...) from
the Feast of the Tabernacles, that, that the High Priest should marry only a
Virgin -- That after Sisters the next kinsmen were to inherit. Antiquity is a
notion considerable, and makes thus much; that laws under which people for many
ages flourished, which use and experience have by a long prescription beyond
all memory of men approved, may be thought essential parts, and we may say
of them, as is said in Curtius of the Macedons, and their Alexander, Amisso
rege, nec volebant salvi esse, nec poterant. But some there are whose reason is
implicit, though their faith be not, which here might be more tolerable, still
calling for reason (which I wish they knew when it stood before them) ready
without more ado, where they do not understand, where they find not the
reason of things, to revile the Law, and cry out, it is without reason. It may
be thought we are claiming the Liberty of the Quodlibets, where what we please
may be disputed without any imputation of slander or impictie, though never so
absurd, foolish, or blasphemous, where the disputant used to be safe being
armed with this title, and I conceive it ought now to be allowed to some. But
to proceed, the wise and modest cannot but know and consider it; that at this
distance, and after so many ages, the reasons of constitutions ought not to be
enquired after, otherwise many of those things which now are certain would be
subverted, as Suarez, The reason of the Legislator cannot always be known.
This I say of all Laws, L. 2. de Legib. c. 14.
all have certain principles and foundamentals to be granted, not now to be
disputed; humane Laws are nothing else but rules by which Justice is taught;
yet why this particular way of remedy should be laid for that part, or such a
rule for another mischief (for no doubt they would desire remedies for
mischiefs) which might have been and as properly (for there may be several
means to one end) supplied another way, would be a very vain thing now to
seek into; This is the opinion of those of the Civil Law, though they cannot
as (they say) give a reason of all their fiore Fathers Institutions, Leg. non
omzium.
yet they will tell you, as they have cause for it, that there is reason enough
in their Law, and that, obvious enough, to those that take pains to find it in
their books; It has reason everywhere (says Gentilis) l. 2. Epist. c 2.
but not every where conspicuous, Alciat blames Bartolus for denying reason to
be the essence of the Law, Alciat l. 1. de verb signif.
what is said by Diodorus upon that Law of Charondas for the gardianship,
protection, and education of Orphans, may be said of all Laws (when understood
by long study; for Revelation can do nothing here) The Law (of Orphans says
he) is full of grace and favor; but if any shall weigh, and interpret it, by
the superficies and bark of the words, be will think but meanly of it; but
whosoever looks profoundly and diligently into it, he that searches to the bonc and
marrow, will judge it to be made by the wisest counsel, worthy singular
admiration. Biblioth. l. xii.
The age of the Law of the Land, shows its reasonableness; Curtius did not
speak at random where he says, nothing can be lasting which is not propped
up by reason; the ground of the Law is as Saint German reason; the Petition of
right has these words against reason, and the Franchises of the Land. The fifth
of Rich. the 2. wills that the Barons of the Exchequer Do right according as
Law and Reason demands, the fourth of Edward the third has Right and Reason.
The mischief or danger attending and going along with this prying and
disquisition into the Laws, is commonly a change of the Laws, which is
followed by a change of manners at least if that be all. Those busy
Libertines, Extravagants, Newfangled Fantasticks, whose conceptions are so
admirable, and who can so easily over-doe that which by the testimonies of all
orders of Englishmen, of all ages (as I shall show in my next Chapters) has
been concluded to be most excellent, would serve their Country better, and
show more care of its quiet and peace, if they would obey these Laws already
settled, then by troubling themselves and others in that which very likely
neither themselves nor others shall be happy in, if it take effect; and how
ever, ere this Goal be reached, too much must be ventured in the way, the
multitude is not to be let lose for it, the rabble ignobile vulgus, either in
the City or Country have their Trades, their Husbandry to attend to busy
themselves in, those are their Arts, Laws, and Government, and policy are
above them, Nan est consilium in vulgo, Mount Sinai where the Law was given, was
sanctified; God appointed bounds to be set about it, the people were not to
touch the border of it, nor to come near it. If this sweet and beautiful
garden be overgrown with a few weeds, it would be no discretion to turn Herds
of unclean Swine in, to root them out. Some Chariotiers drive not easily, let
the House be foul as Augeus Stables, we should not open the floodgates of
the deep; strike like Aeolus the den of the Winds, and pray in aid of the
storms and tempests, and the Sea it self to cleanse it, rather then the
precious Pallas of their brains should not be brought forth; Some new Lusinia
or Vtopia might be found out, where with more innocence their new Commonwealth
might be set up. He that will judge, says Aristotle, 2 Top.
It is better to judge according to the Laws, then out of a man's own
knowledge and sentence, (although a man out of knowledge may see clearly) yet I
may say the Laws have more eyes then Argus, they see with the eyes of many
ages, with the eyes of all the most noble, most wise, and most learned
Counselors of State, and Judges of all the most judicious, pious, and
peaceable Citizens of this our Country; The ignorance of the Judge is the
calamity of the innocent, 2 Just. 30
So it must be here of the Law: I speak not of polishing, refining, or ading to
the Laws to complete them, where they are not full, and may be overreached by
the cunning of injust men, had not this been often done, the Laws had not
gained the perfection they have now attained; but I say, this is not to be
expected, not to be pretended to in the street, where nothing but noise and
clamor can be had, nor can he who removes the angular stones be said to
repair. Aristotle thought that Laws received were not to be changed, although
there were some incommodiousnesse in in them. Pol. 2.
And Cleon speaks thus in Thucydides his sense and words, A City with the
worst Laws immovable, is better then one with good Laws not binding, (or as
I may say, subject to to the capricious humors of every peevish, shallow
tradesman, of every paultry Chafferer for small Wares) and a plain wit with
modesty, is more profitable to the government then arrogant dexterity. Thucyd.
l. 3.
In the gloss upon Justinians Institutions; to set up Laws and pluck them
down is called a most pernicious custom, in many places as there declared so
by Plato and Demosthenes f. 28.
The Lord Cook his judgment of the Laws of England is; That having been
used, and approved from time to time, by men of most singular wisdom,
understanding, and experience to be good and profitable for the Commonwealth
(as is there implied) they are not to be changed; P^af. to the 4. rep.
To which purpose he recites there the resolution of all the Barons of England
in the Statute of Merton, refusing (as the King and his Counsel do, which the
Lord Cook 2 Just. 98.
collects of them out of the 26 Epistle of Robert Bishop of Lincoln, to the
Archbishop of Canterbury) to legitimate the antenate or bastard eigne borne
before marriage, with this reply in these terms; And all the Earls and
Barons, with one voice answered, That they will not change the Laws of England
which hitherto are used and approved, Stat. Mert c. 9.
what is less then change? the same Lord Cook likes not correction of the
Laws; It is an old rule in Policy and Law, (so he) that correction of Law be
avoided, 4. rep. Pres.
which some will think is overdone a streine too high, yet it has its reason:
Laws are the walls of Cities to be defended as walls, andno caution can be
too much; like the Sovereign of Mexico, they are not to be touched: But had
our Laws or others been composed not only as they are by the most solid wisest
heads of all the ages past, but by immediate conveiance from God himself,
pronounced with his own voice, or delivered by an Angel to us; One word
Liberty, specious Liberty, more admired then understood, (with which of late
Laws are idely imagined inconsistent) were enough to cancel and blot them all:
I am unwilling to show here how much and often, but how seldom to an honest
end, (for the most part in the head of a mischief) this word, this found, or
handsome title (for it is no more) has been used: It is most true, all Laws
are inconsistent with this Liberty, as that is inconsistent with any Government
whatsoever. The eminent Patron of it was a Jew, Judas of Galiles, author of the
Sect who (as Josephus) L. 18. c. 2.
agreed with the Pharisees in other things, but on fire with the most constant
Love of Liberty; they believe God is only to be taken for their Lord and
Prince, and will more easily endure the most exquisit kinds of torments,
together with the most dear to them, then to call any mortal Lord. If it
might have been permitted, they would have been free enough, no Tax, Tribute,
Custumes, nor Imposition would they pay, but not out of that authority of
Deutoronomy which is pretended, but no where to be seen, Non erit pendent
vectigale, There shall not be any paying Tribute amongst the Sons of Israel.
There are no such words, nor any to that sense, in any of the received
languages (...)? are the Greek words, as our English amongst the Daughters,
and (...) in the place signifies, not one who pays Tribute, but one initiated
in the mysteries of the Paganes, by them called sacred; Orig. Eccl. Tom. 1.1317.
yet had this Heretic, as all others ever brag of it, Scripture authority from
this Book; Deuteronomy. 6.
and with the words, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve, he was fortified, which conclude nothing, Tribute being paid under
the Law, as the price of redemption of the first borne, and in many other
respects dispersed over the Law. To men too, and in relation to government,
manifest by that in Samuel, 1 Samuel 17
The man who kills (Goliath) the King will make his fathers house free in
Israel. This the Georim, and Epimicti, the Posterity of the Cananites, and of
those which came up with them from Egypt did not only pay, but the Israelites
also, as is clear by that text, and this, That Solomon made Jeroboam ruler
over all the tribute, or burden of the house of Joseph. 1 Reg. 11
As others were over the rest of the Tribes, Adomiram being said generally to
be over the Tribute. c. 4.6.
Though Judas inturning the people after him and his Liberty, as it is called,
with his Sons perished, yet the dregs of his sedition were gathred together
in the Castle of Massada, by Eliazar the Nephew of this Galilaean, with the
same obstinacy not to call any man Lord; they had their beastly kennel fired
about their cares, and after some exhortations to one another, not to esteem
their lives above their dear Liberty, they fall upon their own swords. Joseph
l. 7. c. 28.
The Jews of late have made some change with their borderers, with their next
marchers, this as before is become Anabaptisme now, of which some of those of
Rome, who will be any thing rather then stand out, where they may do mischief
fall not much shorter. Christ, as Cardinal Bellarmine, freed his Apostles from
all earthly subjection; So that therefore they were subject of fact, not of
right. To pass by all these, there is not that fulness in the word Liberty
which is expected. Cicero makes it a power to live as we list, In Paradox.
which cannot be in any government or society, nor in any the most retired
exile of our selves from mankind, if at any time we have the shortest commerce
or conversation with others. The institutions define liberty to be the natural
faculty of any man to do what he pleases Justin. J^stit. 31.
, unless by force, or Law, he be forbidden, which (as the gloss renders it)
is a power given by nature, to do what we will, unless one more potent hinder
us. As Scipio hindered Hannibal, yet was Hannibal free still, Or that the civil
Law of our country forbid us Et libertas.
. Which last is explained thus: Cicero sees his destruction contrived by
Clodius, and hanging over his head, he desires to preserve himself by
prevention, and to kill Clodius, that he may free himself from the danger, but
dares not (as I may say either reverencing the Laws as a good and a just man,
for he is injust who does justly because of the penalty annexed to the Law) or
fearing that penalty (as the words) yet is Cicero free; It goes on, We call
that liberty which is just and consentaneous to the Laws, and therefore is
subjoyned in the definition, Unless any thing be forbidden by the Law In lib.
1. tit. 111.
. So that plainly there he is a free man, who may do those things which the
Laws permit him, which we cannot say of servants, meaning servants by the Civil
Law, or Law of Nations, (after their conversion enjoined by St. Paul strictly
to obey Ephesians. 6. Coloss. 3.
) Liberi free men are called so from Liberty, as servants from servitude, being
opposites; Liberty in the proper, and strict sense, being spoke of the one, as
servitude of the other; though now improperly other kinds of things may, and do
come under those appellations. Such liberty then, as may be suffered by Laws,
and amongst men incorporated in a government, is sufficient, (and whosoever
will be displeased at it,) all that can be had Living under such a law (as ours
shall be shown to be) where men's persons are free, and their estates (in which
they have a propriety) unless in such cases whereby their public offenses,
that freedom according to the plain words of known Law, is justly forfeited (as
where the Jury in attaint are sentenced to lose their Frank Law 46. E. 3.22.
) or in such cases where all the parts are to contribute to the good of the
whole, as either to the maintenance of a war undertaken by the public and
supreme power, or to the splendor of their home peace, which as it must
certainly be of value, out of gratitude for the benefits enjoyed under it, all
are bound to, is Liberty, as the Magna Charta c 29.
. No Freeman (so here is this liberty) shall be taken, or imprisoned, or
disseised of his freehold, liberties or free Customs, nor be outlawed,
banished, nor in any manner destroyed, etc. but by lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by Law of the Land. Which is not waging of Law as a most learned
Author would have it Tit. of Honor 1. edit. 344.
This chapter of the Magna Charta is partly repeated in a later Statute 25. E.
3, 4 v. 5 E. 3.9 21. E. 3.3. v. V^^. Abb. S. Alb. 143
. and there Law of the Land is expounded, Indictment, Process by Writ
Original, and course of the Law; another Statute recites it, and instead of the
words Law of the Land, puts in Process of the Law, as equivalent, and
Synonyma, signifying the same thing 37. E. 3.18.
, and again a Statute of that King says, No man shall answer without
presentment, before the Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process and
Writ Original according to the old Law of the Land 42. E. 3.3.
. So we see the free man hemmed in with all his liberties and free customs, if
he abuse them, if he be found guilty of a public crime, or of any injustice,
or wrong done to his neighbor, for which, according to the Law of the Land,
and the judgment of his Peers, or equals, such liberty ought no longer to be
his Sanctuary, then as having forfeited his birthright of the Law, he becomes a
servant, and (as the Statute) may be taken, imprisoned, disseised of his free
hold or liberties, Outlawd, or in any wised stroyed. The same Magna Charta wills
c. 14.
, That no Freeman be amerced for a small offense, but according to the manner
of that offense, etc. The Statute of Merton provides c. 10.
That every Free man (which is legally free) who owes suit to the County,
Tithing, Hundred, or Wapentake, or to the Court of his Lord, etc. Here is the
Free man again, yet indebted, he owes suit, and is chargeable with those
duties the Law has obliged him to, Legal liberty there may be, there ought to
be, if these pretenders ever turmoiling, and troubling others more peaceable,
and modest then themselves, could overturn and alter government, as often as
the unquiet Florentines did theirs, could make it their perpetual motion, who
changed ten time in a very few years Match. Hist. 57.67 69.99 90.115.166.171.237.
, the proscriptions and slaughter of the best Citizens and the pangs and
throws of every change considered, This liberty would not be worth the blood
she must swim through to her throne, and perhaps then there would be little
liberty for any but those who conduct her thither: liberty (so this Historian
upon the motions of his City) is oppressed by the name of liberty, Salust in
his description of the Aborigines gives the best character of these lawless
libertines in these words, They were a kind of savage wild men, without Laws,
without command, or government; free and loose, Such I take ours to be, and
such their liberty, which may and will ever be pretended, but without
extirpation of all Religion, humanity, order, and civil policy can never be
had. And if only Cato's wise and just, or honest man be at liberty, and all
wicked men slaves, and villains Plut. in Catone Vtic.
, I believe few of this Sect, let them move every stone they can, are likely to
be free; man is a labyrinth full of windings, let the outside be never so
specious, and taking, it may be a great distance from the heart, there is no
safety but in distrust; we should suspect every thing which our own experience
has not assured us of, most of all when Laws which are the heart, and vital
parts in a Government are practiced upon, we idly and fondly charge destiny,
and the period and ruin of things upon fatal families, or boundary years, when
the truest cause of the calamity is our own unworthy lightness. The reason why
the Commonwealth of Sicyon survived the policy and Estates of all Greece
besides, is made this; in seven hundred and forty years they never set forth
new Edicts, nor went beyond any of their Laws, never exceeded them; all things
below are in continual motion, have their infancy, their manhoood and old age,
which is change, and death, their rise, and fall; yet as regular diet and
temperance preserve the weakest most declining bodies, so although considering
the multitude of wicked men, and what may hurt without, no Government in
judgment can subsist at all without the peculiar never failing assistance of
the divine power, yet may good Laws well obeyed prop up, and keep off the fate
of that, which else would tumble presently. And all things else would be more
constant, if man were so.

CHAP. II.
Of the Law of England, and what it is: Its Antiquity, not Norman; King Edward
the Confessor his Laws brought down to Magna Charta, and there settled. The
fundamentals are Saxon-English. The English-Norman Laws since, because of new
offenses, of Tenures.

AS wisdom goes, and must go, it has ever been easier to gain the reputation
of wisdom, then of goodness. The good man was he who loved his Country more
then himself, who obeyed and reverenced the Laws for Justice sake, and if
possibly, would not have outlived them, rather just then shiftingly politic.
The answer to the question, Who was the good man, used to be, Qui leges juraque
servat, he that kept the Laws. The Ancients of the greatest experience, and
learning peaceably ever observed the Laws of their several Countries, neither
were those of old Greece or Rome, more renowned for Philosophy or valor, then
for this piety; it is notorious, how false that charge, of breach of the Laws
against Socrates was, They who sentenced him, erected a Socrates in brass, in
the most famous place of the City, a piece of Lysippus his workmanship Diog.
lac.
. Here though Caesar had won the field, Caeto was the Conqueror, and might
well say, He had ever been more puissant then Caesar in right and justice Plut
in catone utic. Plut in A. ristid. 623.
, and that his life was invincible. For this reason had Aristides that most
illustrious title the just, a title given to that late victorious King Lewis
the 13 of France, if titles are specious from subdued Nations, as from Crete,
Numidis, Africa, Asia, Dacia, etc.

How more illustrious is that by which is signified, not the Conquest of men,
but of injustice, of that which is the enemy of men every where. Bastards, as
Cardan would have it, are not therefore wicked, but such says the illustrious
Scaliger, which go false, counter, and beyond what the Laws command Exerc. 265.
. Those of Crotone (in the upper Calabre) protest they would sooner die, then
mixing with the Bruty (those of the lower) change into strange rights, manners,
and Laws Live. l. 24.
. It is memorable what a Persian Colonel speaks to Themistoeles of Laws,
Stranger my friend, says he, The Laws, and Customs of men are different, some
men esteem one thing honest, some another, but it is very bonest that every man
^^ep and observe those of his own Country Plut. in Themist.
, We are the most ungrateful of all men for those benefits we receive from our
Laws, if we be not zealous for them, if we do not strive with all the world in
that lawful glory of obeying Laws; we may call the Law of the land most sacred
as reasonably, no doubt, as Justinian calls his so. I will show how this, and
all additions of dignity else are due to it. And now that we may not be ashamed
of obedience, that we may not so much unman our selves to bespeak and worship
an unknown Goddess (though as short of what should be, as much imperfect as
the Fuller earth, and sea are crowded into a Globe, I will say shorter, so far
am I from promising, and I believe he that makes the next sally may be short;
for it must be a great hazard, a great adventure to praise those things which
no men could ever dispraise: if he that writ Trajanes Panegyric could not do
him full right, as I cannot think he did, what can be said of these Laws,
which had more then twenty Trajans for their founders, with their Senates of
their worth, that if after the old trick you should call the Gods in, nothing
could be got by the voucher; I say that we may not be ashamed of our obedience
to such Laws, I will show what they are, and which is the best demonstration, I
will show what this tree is by the fruit. The Law of England is that which is
called Common Law of England, The Common Law.
explained, and declared by judicial records, and supplied where the plainness
of it cannot reach the injustice and deceits of men practiced, in the later,
more crafty and wicked ages, by that Law which is called Statute Law 1. Inst. 11
(besides which there are reasonable customs, etc.) The Common Law excels
the Statute Laws, and may control Statutes Hub. l. 5. E. 4 40.4. Inst. 42.3.
Inst. 13.77 2. Inst. 526.588.518.11.6, 7, 8.
. If (as the Lord Cook) they be against common right, or reason, repugnant, or
impossible Sir l. Dav. Pref. r. 8.118.
: Dr. Cowel a Civilian yet very knowing in the Common Law, says, It is derived
from the Law of nature, and of Nations, as well as any other Law, whatsoever,
consentaneous to Justice and reason Inst. Jur. Anglic. 25. Dav. rep. 30.
Postrat.
. As Moyle, We rule the Law according to the ancient course 33. H. 6.8.
. And as Ashton there f. 9.
. Where it has been the use of all times to wage Law, and no other way, this
proves in a manner a positive Law, for all our Law is guided by Use or
Statute. And Prisot, where Ashton says this as a positive Law, says, it cannot
be, for there cannot be a positive Law but such as is judged or made by
Statute. In the same Book Fortescue says, The Law is as I have said, and ever
was since the Law began, though the reason be not ready in memory; yet by study
and labor a man may find it E. 5.
, and Markham a chief Justice f, 24 4.41
. It is good for us to do according to the use before this time, and not to
keep one day one way for one party, and and another day the contrary for the
other party, and so the former presidents be sufficient for us, etc. And Ascue.
Such a Charter has been allowable in the time of our predecessors who were as
sage, and learned as we be 37. H 6.22. 4 Inst. 165 Dact. 17.
, all Commissions of Justice use to run, according to Law and Custom of
England, as of Oyer and Terminer, of Goal delivery, of the peace, etc. The
Writs run, To take that Assize, or do that, etc. according to Law and custom
Not. Brev 186.118, etc.
, (there is Custom of the manner Na. B. 3.
, Custom of the City ibid. 22.
) as Sir John Davies in his Preface to his Reports, long experience, and many
trials of what was best for the Commonwealth begot the Common Law. This Law, as
the Spartane Law and part of the Roman Law in imitation of them, is said to be
unwritten, and preserved in the memory of the people, yet is there little of it
(if there be any little) but may be found in the book Cases, the Romans called
their unwritten Law Custom, Custom (so they) approved by the manners of those
who use it, obtains the force of a Law written Just. Inst. L. (...) 2.
; and again, without writing that becomes a Law which use has approved. For
continual manners approved by the consent of those who use them, imitate Law
Vbi sup.
; this is matter of fact, and consists in use and practice only, nor can it
be created by Charter or Parliament. for as the same Sir John Davies Vbi sup.
, when a reasonable act done is found agreeable to the nature of a people, who
use it, and practice it again by iteration, it becomes Law, and as he goes on,
this custumary law is the most perfect, and most excellent (every man in reason
will grant this) to make, and preserve a Commonwealth; For laws made (still he
speaks) either by Edicts of Princes, or Councels of estates, are imposed upon
the subject before any trial made, whether the same be fit, and agreeable to
the nature and disposition of the people, or whether they will breed any
inconvenience or no; but a custom never binds till it has been tried and
approved time out of mind, during which no inconvenience did arise, for if it
had been found inconvenient, it had been used no longer, but had been
interrupted, and so had lost the virtue of a Law: This is declared to be so by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament, in the 25 year of King Henry the eight,
which I shall cite below; and if the Judgments and Declarations of Parliaments
be not regarded, I know not what can give satisfaction. Vid. 3. c.
Ancient liberties and customs which have been usitatae and approbatae, used
and approved, c. 9. Stat. Mert.
make the Common law. The statute called dictum de Kenelworth, speaks thus,
the party convict shall have judgment according to the custom of the land. 57
Hen. 3. c. 25.
The 27 of King Edw. the first of Fines. -- Contrary to the laws of our Realm
of ancient time used. The (34 of the same King confirms to all Clerks and
Laymen their laws (liberties and free customs as largely and wholely as they
have used to have the same, at any time when they had them best; c. 4.
law and custom of the Realm are made the same. 1. E. 2.34. E. 3.
Abjuration is called custom of the Realm. 9. E. 2. c. 10.
The 25 of King Edward the third says, According to be laws of the land of
old time used. C. 2.
The title of the 27 of this King speaks in maintenance of the laws and
usages; the Statute 36 of the same King, -- Laws, Customs, and Statutes. C.
15.
Statute 42. according to the old law. C. 3.
In the time of Richard the second, Law and usage are the same. 1 R. 2. c. 2.
It would be tedious to heap up more of this kind; I will only add the
declaration of the Houses of Parliament in the time of Henry the eight, which
is thus; Their words being directed to that King. This your Graces realm, etc.
has been, and is free, from subjection to any man's laws, but only to such as
have been devised, made, and ordained within this realm for the wealth of the
same, or to such other as by the sufferance of your Grace, and your Progenitors
the people of this your realm have taken at their free liberty by their own
consent to be used amongst them, and have bound themselves by long use to the
observance of the same, etc. as to the customed and ancient laws of this
realm, originally established as laws of the same, by the said sufferance,
consents, and custom, and none otherwise. 25. Hen. 8. c. 21.
Now if what the people of England have taken up out of long use, custom and
consent be not good, agreeable, and convenient after so much and so long
trial, they would appear the most foolish of all people; They would not
deserve that free liberty which themselves by their repraesentors tell us at
the submitting to and taking these laws they had; and if they be good,
agreeable, and convenient, they would appear the most foolish of all people by
their change. No laws ever were, or can be made with more equity then these,
to which besides use, and custom, and experience, free liberty, and consent of
those who were to observe them gave life. There is custom of Courts which is
law too, part of the Common law; Plowd. Com. 320.
as the Statute of Kenelworth. -- If any man shall take revenge because of the
late stirs, be shall be punished according to the custom of the Court, etc.
C. 26.
Six times is the Common law called by Littleton common right; It is sometimes
called right, sometimes justice. Mirc. c. 2 Sec. 16. Fleta 6. c. 1. Mag. Chapter c.
29.
Magna charta calls it, justiciam vel rectum, justice or right. -- Westminster. 1.
Common right, and the King wills, (these are the words) That the peace of holy
Church, and of the land be well kept in all points, and that common right be
done to all, as well to poor as rich, etc. later statutes have -- Justice, and
right, 1. R. 2. c. 2.
full justice, and right, 2. H. 4.1.
good justice, and even right. 7. H. 4. c. 1.
Common droiture in a statute West. 1. c. 1.
is rendered, Justice according to the law and custom of England, 2 Just. 161.
called common right, (as the Lord Cook Because the common law is the best,
and most common birthright the Subject has, for the safeguard and defense, not
only of goods, lands, and revenues, but of his wife and children, body, life,
and fame also. 1 Just. 142 2 Just. 56.
That which is called common right in the second of King Edward the third. C. 8.
In the first of that King C. 14.
is called common law; Not only as Fortescue, do the laws of England favor
liberty. C. 42.
But they are notioned by the word. The word liberties in Magna Charta,
signify the laws; C. 1.29.
and in that respect is the great charter called the charter of the liberties.
2 Just. 47
The Statute de Tallagio non concedendo, has these words, -- That all the
Clerks and Laymen of our realm, have all their laws, liberties, and free
customs, etc. C. 4.
In the 38 of Edward the third, the Laws are called Franchises, in the old
Books the great Charter (the fountain of all our Just. 81.
Foundamentall Laws) is called the Charter of Franchises, the common Liberty,
the Liberties of England, Bract. 291 414. Pleta. l. 2. c. 48 Brit. 178
because (so the Lord Cook) they make frecmen. 1 Jnst. 1
The customs of England bring a freedom with them; therefore in Magna Charta
are they called Free Customs, 2 Just. 47. Mag. Char. c. 29.
the Courts of Justice are also called Liberties, because in them, as the same
book, the Law which makes freemen is administered; Mich. 17. Epist. 1. in com.
berot. 221. 2. 2 Jnst. 4.
the Law then is Liberty it self, Liberty and Law are convertible, nor is this
Liberty titular only, and a Liberty of words. In the expressions of the
Petition of right out of Magna Charta (cited in the first Chapter) and out of
the 28 of Edward the third, No free man shall be taken, imprisoned, or
disseased etc. but by lawful judgment, or by Law of the land; and no man of
what estate or condition soever shall be put out of his lands, or tenements,
nor taken, imprisoned, nor dis-herited, nor brought to death, without being
brought to answer by due process of Law, which is as after in that Petition of
right either Customs of England, or Acts of Parliament. 3 Car. Reg
The Lord Chancellours oath is thus, That he shall do right to all manner of
people, poor and rich, according to the laws and usages of the Realm: 10. R.
2. rot. Parl. 8.
The Barons of the Exchequer swear, no man's right to disturb, let or respite,
contrary to the laws of the land, 4. Jnsti: 109.
which must be meant of the known, and certain Law of the Land called in Magna
Charta, Legemterrae, upon which all Commissions are grounded wherein is the
clause, to do what belongs to Justice according to law and custom of
England. 2. Jnsti. 51.
The illustrious Viscount of St Albane, amongst his Aphorisms of universal
Justice, has this, Let no Court deal in cases capital (our Laws say Civil
too) but out of a known and certain law; God denounced death, then he
inflicted it; nor is any man's life to be taken away, who knew not first he had
sinned against it. Augm. scient. 402.
By this Law of the Land, although there is not nor cannot be any liberty which
should protect the transgressors of it, yet have all Offenders a legal trial,
nor are possessours of the worst faith, thrown out without the hand of the Law,
only against those who attempt to subvert or weaken the Laws, there is a Writ
to the Sheriff in nature of a Commission, to take the impugners and to bring
them (as the Register) to the Jail of Newgate. Regist. 64 2. Justi. 53.
This, as the Lord Cook, is lex terrae; The Law of England, to take a man
without answer, or summons in this case, and the reason given is -- He that
would subvert all Laws, deserves not the benefit of any. Amongst the articles
exhibited to King Henry the eight, against Cardinal Wolsey, he is charged with
oppression in imprisoning Sir John Stanly, and forcing him to release a farm
taken by Covent Seal, of the Abbot of Chester, etc. (as the words) by his
power and might; Artic. 38.
And that he threatened the Judges to make them defer judgment: Artic. 39
that he granted many Injunctions, the parties not called, nor any bill put in,
by which diverse were cast out of their possessions of their Lands and
Tenements. Artic. 21.
The close was, That by his cruelty, iniquity, and partiality, he has
subverted the due course and order of the laws. His Indictment went higher,
and accused him, That he intended the most ancient laws of England wholly to
subvert and weaken, and this whole Realm of England, and the people of the
same, to the Laws Imperial, commonly called the Civil Laws, and to their
Canons, for ever to subiugate, etc. Mich. 21. H. 8. Coram Rege.
Now although the Civil Law deserves as much honor as can be given it, and
commands, and is obeyed much abroad, yet this Law of the Land held the
possession here by a long unquestionable prescription, and after the trial of
many ages, got the affection of the people, (whose fathers grew up happily
under it) which was not easily to be removed, the rather because seldom does
any Nation, willingly submit to, or welcome the Customs and Laws of another,
which they have not been acquainted with, and our Judges who will not (in our
Books) part with one of its Maxims; 2. Jnst it. 210.
would not have fallen down before the shrive of any unknown Themis, and have
offered up the whole tables. It were no hard matter to heap up testimonies,
Vid. chap. 3,
if some would think it lawful to trust men in their own arts or
professions, and can it not but be more reasonable, that such should be heard
in the defensive, then that those who profess full Hostility, bringing with
them only mistakes of their own prejudice, should sit Judges of the trial
which is in their own cause, and if thus far the reins be given to turbulent
desperate spirits, every thing how sacred soever may be arraigned at these
tribunalls, the articles of our faith will quickly totter, nor will any
principle be safe: This descent will be fatal, there being no stay in the
precipice, the bottom only must receive men, where he that falls is crushed
to pieces, and what is worse, those unhappy ones who follow, cannot see their
danger. Thus we have seen what the common Law, the Liberty and Franchise of the
free people of England, the law of the land is; The law of ancient time, d. 27.
E. 1.
of old time used, 25. E. ^.
the old law, 42. E. 3.
for ages according to the judgment of these Parliaments makes the law more
venerable, it is an addition of honor to it. Now it follows in order to
speak something of the Antiquity of this law. The Antiquity of the Law.
But as the beginnings of things sometimes are rather guessed at then known;
it is no wonder that there should be no general agreement here of opinions:
some will make the Law a Colossus of the Sun, knocking the Stars with its
head, more ancient then the Dipthera or Evanders mother, others a late small
spark struck from the clashing of the Norman Swords, the child rather of
Bellona then Jove, terrible in the Cradle, the truth being mistaken by both. To
rely upon the authority of a Chancelour or rather chief Justice in the time
of King Henry the sixth, upon which the r. 2. Epi. r. 6. Epist.
antiquity should be raised, was less then that of Aventine, who professed
History, where after a prodigious link of German Kings, before the Arcadian
Moon, he will needs bring his Dutch to the Wars of Troy, which he proves out
of the laws of Charles the 4. (who lived less then two hundred year before
Aventine, and some three hundred years before us) from which he is peremptory
there must be no appeal, Boicar. Hist. 49.
for a great Lawyer (continually employed in the public affairs, or in his
study where his many volumes upon the law show the whole man might well be
taken up,) to fail in a piece of History, if he may justly be said to fail
this way, who only trusted another who was careless. It is no blemish, such
as can deserve the censorian rod of our Critics, besides all men love to
consecrate their originalls -- This is allowed to antiquity (says Livie)
mixing things humane with divine, to make the beginnings of Cities more
majestic, and we may say as he does of his Rome, of our Laws, if it be
lawful to canonize any, to carry them up to Heaven, or fetch them down from
thence, that glory alone is due (though it needs not) to the most sacred laws
of the land. Sir John Fortescue his words are to this effect, That if the laws
of England had not bin most excellent, the Romans (who cry up their Civil Law)
Saxons, Danes, or Normans, had altered them; de lg. Ang l. c. 17.
by which our Laws must be British at least, and our Saxon Fathers who beat
the Britains or Welsh, out of their own inheritance into the parts they now
inhabit, must be supposed farther (which is strange) to rob them of their
Laws, as men who had not wit nor reason to keep peaceably what they had
gotten, without the help of their policy and order, whom they had overcome.
Caesar if he did but first show Brittannie to the world, did that as Eutropius.
L. 6.
He made the Britains tributary to the Romans, whose name was unknown to them
before, as Strabo, twice he was victorious, and returned with Hostages, a great
number of Slaves and much prey. L. 4.
Brittanny was not known to be an Island till the coming of Julius Agricola
Proprator hither 39.66.
as Suetonious of Caesar, aggressus Britannos ignototantea, none of these
commend their Civilitie, none of them mention their Laws. Herodianus in severe.
They went naked according to the cuts in M. Speed, their skins painted (whence
they had their name) in the shape of all sorts of creatures, and gashed,
ignorant of gardens, and of tillage; Strabo ubi sup.
Inoulti omnes, says Mela, whom no long peace says Tacitus since Claudius who
was here in person, and disarmed them (about 150 years after Caesar) had
softened, like the Gauls, but more simple and barbarous; Woods were their
Cities, their Cattle and themselves lodged under one roof. Strabo ubi supra.
Heredian who writes thus of the Britains, lived and wrote probably 240
years at least after the Incarnation, and about 50 years after King Lucius or
more; So that it would be very strange that such laws as ours which yield not
to the best in Christendom for goodness, should have such a Cradle; It would
be inquired what laws the wild Rovers of Laboradora or Cafariae have set
forth, as little civilized, and living much after the rate. It is scarce
possible too out of Tacitus, that there could be any Common Law amongst them;
heretofore says he, they were governed by Kings, now they are drawn by petty
Princes, into partialities and factions, etc. they have no common counsel
together, seldom it chances that two or three States meet, and concur to
repulse the common danger. Invi ta Jul. Agri.
The first Laws we find here in use, were the Civil Laws of Rome imposed
upon the people, as the Romans imposed their power: And had that Epistle of
Eleutherius the Bishop of Rome (unheard of till 1000. years after Eleutherius)
to Lucius, or Liever Maur, been no forged piece, which not only in the
unhappiness of the Synchronisme, or mistake in the years of our Savior, not
agreeing with the Pontificate of Eleutherius, but by Manutenere a Norman-Latine
word used in it, and since crept into our Law, it is convinced to be: D. Hen.
Spelm Council. 35.36.
yet what needs King Lucius to send for the Imperial Roman Laws, which were
settled here before, and no question only in use here then. Liever Maur being
no free King, nor of the whole, but of the Joeni alone, called after the
Kingdom of the Eastangles, now Norfolk and Suffolk, merely a Substitute of
the Lords of Rome, like a Tetrarch if so much, ever fettered in those chains
they had put upon him. From the time of Claudius the Emperor, who subdued near
all Britain, the Roman Laws prevailed even amongst the Brigantes, those of
Yorkshire North at York, another way amongst the Silures, or those of Caer
Vske in Munmouthshire, and amongst the Cornavii at Deva, Caer Leon Vaur, now
Chester, in all the Colonies were set up the Roman Courts and Tribunals. About
an hundred years before Liever-Maur, Tacitus, relating what happened in the
Colony of Camolodunum amongst the Trinobantes, now Maldon in Essex, under
Suetonius Paulinus, says, Strange noyses were heard in the Courts, Ann. l. 4.
as Dio. In the Court was heard a barbarous murmr with much laughter, Die l.
62.
and Eutropius says, a strange Colony is brought to Camolodunum with aband of
veterane soldiers, to be an aid against the rebellious, and imbue the
confederates, to the offices or duties of the Laws. Severus before his more
Northern expedition, Camd. B^it. 338. has the same words.
as Herodian relates, left his younger son Geta in the part of the Isle subject
to the Romans Juridicundo rebusque civilibus ut prae^sset, as it is translated,
H^^od. l. 3.
that he might look after the business of the Laws, of Justice, and the
civil affairs. After the death of Liever Maur, so famous was that Tribunal of
the Romans at York that Papinian the most renowned Civilian of his own, or
many ages, sat Judge there: There did the Emperor Severus and Antonine set
forth the Imperial Constitution, called De rerum venditione, Cod. l. 3. tit. 32
as the most knowing Knight has observed. D Spelm. ubi sup.
Agricola as Tacitus in his life took the noble men's sons, and instructed them
in the liberal Sciences, preferring the wits of the Britains before the
Students of the Gauls, as being now curious to attain the eloquence of the
Roman language, whereas they lately rejected the speech; a likeness of our
Laws with those of the Britains is endeavored to be proved by that only
place in Caesar's Commentaries, L. 6.
where it is said, (but of the other Gauls, not of the Druydes, whose
employment was about things divine, Ibid.
sacrifices public and private, and who were interpreters of Religion, whose
Discipline as there was found in Britanny) That if the wife be found guilty of
the death of her husband she was burnt, as in our petty Treason. Caesar's words
are, The husbands (amongst the Gauls, which is no part of the Druyds
Discipline, from whomsoever derived) have the power of life and death over
their wives, (which is not Common Law) and when the Father of an illustrious
Family (not any Gaul) dies, his kinsmen meet, and if there be any suspicion of
the death, inqurie into it, etc. and if it be found, kill the wife,
excruciated with fire, and all torments. Caesar where he speaks of the
Britains, shows strange marriages, Lib. 5.
Ten or twelve of them (says he) have commune wives amongst them, especially
brothers with brothers, and parents with their children. But many hundreds of
years since all this, the Britains were very barbarous, and rude, so that he
who shall read the Laws of Hoel Dha, or the good, In Sr. H. Spel. Counsels.
near one thousand years since Caesar, will have little reason to think our
Common Law ran from any such fountain; and it seems the old Laws and Customs
of this people were far worse, and more rude yet, all which laws and uses (as
the Proaeme) at Guyn upon Taff in deeued, or at Twy guyn artaff, he abolished,
Gloss. D. Spelm. tit. lex. Hoel. etc. e Proaem legum.
and gave new laws to his Britains from the givers name called the Laws of
Hael Dha. Further, King Edward the first, who totally subdued Wales, in the
Statute called Statutum Walliae, where he changes many of their old Laws, by
his words there makes it clear, that the Laws of England and of Wales could
not be the same; for so there had been no change. The words are, The Laws and
Customs of those parts hitherto used, we have caused to be recited before us,
and the Barons of our Realm, which having diligently heard, and fully
understood (as it is fit were laws worse then those, there should be full
understanding ere a change) certain of them by the counsel of our Barons
foresaid we have blotted out, certain we have suffered, and certain corrected.
Stat. Walliae, or of Rutl. 22 E. 1.
Perhaps it was not thought fit after a new Conquest to make a thorough
alteration of things too suddenly; yet was this a long Statute, and much of the
Law of England imposed upon them by it. The 27. of King Henry the 8. swept all
clean. That commands, that the Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes of this Realm
of England for ever, and none othr Laws, O rdinances, nor Statutes, shall be
had, used, practiced, and executed in the said Country and Dominion of Wales,
etc. 27 H. 8. c. 26.
The Saxons as M. Daniel, made such a subversion of State as is seldom seen,
the new retained nothing of the former, which held no other memory but that of
its dissolution, scarce a City, Dwelling, River, Hill, or Mountain, which
changed not names. The distance made by the rage of war, was so wide between
the conquering and the conquered people, that nothing either of Laws, Rites, or
Customs came to pass over unto us from the Britains, nor had our Ancestors
any thing from them but their Country. Hist. 9.
But the Author of the patches to the Laws of St Edward, though in Geoffrey of
Monmouths strain goes full up to King Brute himself (of Geofferies begetting)
speaking of the weekly Husting of London, says he -- which was builded a long
while ago, like and after the manner, and in memory of old great Troy, and to
this day it contains in it self the Laws, Rights, Dignities, Liberties, and
Royal Customs of old great Troy, Ll. S. Ed. c. 35.
etc. which like the Phoenix lives in its ashes, and here (such is the
kindness of some of our quaint Authors) has overcome Greece in the grave,
being more fruitful in noble Colonies then her Enemy, so that it must be a
very fair descent, where the pedigree is brought down from old great Troy. As
of old the Greek Laws, so since the German Nations have overflowne Europe, now
are the German Institutions every where received and in force, says Grotius.
De jure belli. etc. 133.
As the Lombards, Burgundians, Franks, Swevians, and Vandalls, and other the
brothers and kinsmen of the Saxons seated themselves in Italy, France, and
Spain, and spread their Laws where they overran, upon no other Title but that
of the Sword; so did the Jutes, Angles, and Saxons plant themselves, and the
customs of their first homes here, first as friends and allies invited in by
the British King Vortigen, having lands, dwelling places given them to fight
for the Country, they make a league with the Picts, the public enemies,
destroying those whom they were called in to protect, in which manner they
settled themselves, leaving none of those amongst them, but such as were content
with slavery: Their own Countryman venerable Bede, borne 227. years after
their landing, tells us, (comparing them to the Chaldeans, whom I choose to
refer him to, who would know more) Bid hist. l. 1. c. 15. p. 59.
their Laws and Language, though themselves have suffered by their own blood,
by their fellow Tribes, the Danes and Normans, some of those calamities which
they made others feel, where time and age, and corruption gnawing, to which all
things are subject, have not made a little change, continue in the maine to
this day. These Nations so powered out of Germany retaining the rites and terms
of their own Countries, all of the same manners and tongue. It comes to pass
(as the most knowing Gloss. 435. Col. 1.
knight) that there is so much consonancy betwixt us, and the Germans, French,
Italians, Spaniards, and Sicilians; both in the Canon of the ancient laws, and
in the names of Magistrates, Officers, and Ministers of State; therefore as he
goes on. Let them brag that will of the antiquity of their municipal laws,
their beginnings can be had no where else. ( Germany it is meant is the common
mother) The terms of art of some of these Nations got as far as Constantinople,
amongst the Greeks, where we may find (...) a Captain, from (...) a throng,
(...) he that holds by knight service, from buccella a morsel, buccellarius is
amongst the wise Goths of Spain thus used, (...) homage (...) is gelt, rent,
tribute, etc. from the Saxon geld, (...) a bill, scedule, etc. and many more
which Meursius in his Graeco, barbara, has collected; the most ancient laws of
al these people, are the salic laws, nay and of all laws now compiled
obtaining. These and the Franks who made them, were of Germany, so named from
the River Sala in Frankenland, not from Franiker as Ortelius would have it,
They were made in the third year of Pharamond king of the Germane Franks 105
years before Justinian the Emperor, who published the Imperial Laws. The
Author where he has no Latin puts in his Franko-Germanic of the Latin fashion.
As William of Oangis, in the year 420 the Franks began to use Laws and did
dictate their Laws by four Princes of their Nation, sala signifies in the Dutch
an Hall, as with us, or Palace, whence are called law salic, manners-salic,
vassals salic, which belong to the sale Hall or Palace, and as yet is to be
seen the salic book, Salbuch in the German libraries like our Doomesday or
Liber Agrarius here, says another, who tells us there of the Salian Franks (the
Authors of this law) named so from the former river seated on both sides of the
Main, upon which stands Francford the head of the Nation Boioar. hist l. 4.313.
of whom and this Law is said before; what the best Authors write. In the same
Salic Law are many words used in ours, as Campio, Forresta, Forrestarius,
Sparuarius, Marcha, Veragelt; which is our were gild, etc. These Customs went
with Pharamond eight years after into France, then after those of the western
Goths in Spain, the Burgundian Laws, the laws called Alemaaic, Boian, and
Frank, other then the Salic, were instituted by Thierry the first (son of
^lodove who first became Christian) corrected by Clothaire and Childebert, and
perfected by Dagobert. After follow the Lombards, who as they were a Colonie of
the German Saxons, so are their laws full of their and our Customs, agreeing
together in many things yet Dn. Spel. gloss. 440.
. When Austin the Monk was sent hither by Gregory the great to convert the
Saxons in the year 597. (Not one hundred and fifty years after the entrance of
the Saxons) he was commanded by him, to take interpreters with him out of
France in his way Bid l. 1.25.
, and it was unlikely while the Saxons yet kept the language of their
Countrymen, they should have forgot their Customs, contrary to the manner of
all the other Tribes of that Nation. The first Saxon laws writ by them after
their Conquest are those of Ethelbert of Kent, the first Christian and Monarch
then, which says Venerable Bede amongst the other good deeds he did his people
set constitutions of right judgments according to the example of the Romans,
with the Counsel or advice of his wise men, Mid srotera getheat.

Which he commanded to be writ in English, and which are held (says he of his
time long after Aetbelbert) to this day l. 2. c. 5.
. These were short and rude like the age. Next are those of Ine the West Saxon,
those of Offa the Mercian Kings, of Alfred King of England founder (so
Ingulphus) of the English policy, and order ever since observed, called by the
book of Ramsie The renowned King Alfred founder of the English Laws. Who is
first said by Master Lombard and others of the greatest name to have divided
this land into Shires, Hundreds, and Tithings, etc. to establish jurisdiction
in every of them Archaolog 15.
; again it is said, he gave not only laws, but Magistrates, Shires, Hundreds;
etc. which (so one place speaks) we have often observed Gloss. tit. Ll. Angl.
Iugulph.
. Though no man can honor the sacred memory of this most glorious Prince more
then my self, and I know viros magnos sequi est pena sapere, yet I cannot
believe this. Malmesbury speaks only of the Hundreds and Tythings, the
invention of which he attributes to this King de Gest. reg. c. 4.
. He might (which the Glossary is once contented with) review the Laws of
Aethelbert, Ina, and Offa; transcribe and insert whatsoever was worthy into his
laws, and impose them upon the Angles, the English (generally as the Danes
submitted to him) in which name the Jutes and Saxons were included; he might
add much, and polish what he found, being never idle, ever employed for the
good of his people, either in his Courts, and Councels of State, or in the head
of his Army. But he that looks upon the laws of King Ine will find enough to
assure him that King Alfred laid not the first stones of the Government, which
by whomsoever laid, were laid before King Alfreds great Grandfather was born,
there being near 200 years betwixt these two kings Fasti Savil.
Not to recite the laws upon offenses, we read in the laws of King Ine, of
the Shire, the Alderman, and the Kings Alderman. One law speaks thus: If any
man shall let a thief escape, or hide the theft, etc. If he be an Alderman
tholige hisscire he shall forfeit his Shire, etc Ll. Ina c. 36.
. Another -- If any man shall demand Justice or right before the Shireman (the
Earl) or other Judge c. 8. v.c. 6.51.
etc. The Proaeme. and mid eallum minum ealder mannum and with all my Aldermen
the chapter of breach of the peace -- In the Kings Town, Aldermans Town, Kings
Thames Town, etc. c. 46.
Thorold a Benefactor to Crowland Abbey long before King Alfred in two old
Charters is called by King Kenulph Vice Comes Lincoln, and by King Withlaf
quondam Vic. Com. Lincoln, sometimes Sheriff of Lincoln Council. Sax 3^8.
Ingulph. 854.857.
. Venerable Bede who flourished in the time of King Ina tells us, in the days
of King Edwin King of the Northan hymbres, Paulinus the first Archbishop of
York converted to the Faith Blecca with his family Line cole ere szre geefan
Bid l. ^. c. 16. l. 5. c. 4. p. 375.
. The Gerefe of Lincoln and elsewhere says he, Hanwald the gesith (a word
rendered comes) with his geref with his Sheriff Aethelwine betrayed King Oswine
l 3. c. 14. l. 4.22. l. 5. c. 4 5.
. Hundreds and Tythings are not named in the Laws of the Kings, Ina or
Aelfred. In King Ina's Laws pledges borgas are named, by which probably we may
think Tythings to have been then: One Law -- wills, if the geneat the
husbandman (as now we speak) steal and run away, that the Lord pay the angild
the price, etc. if he have no pledges Ll. Ina. c. 21. Ll Edg c. 6. Cnati.
19.27.35.
. After the laws of King Aelfred, those of Edward the Elder, of Aethelstone,
Edmund, Edgar, Aetheldred, and of Cnut the Dane succeeded, all which were
distinguished, and ranked under three heads. The first of the Weft-Saxons,
under whom as united, and submitted, were comprised the Saxons, generally caled
estseaxna laga the West Saxon Law. The second of the Mercians or Angles called
Myrcna laga the Mercian law; the best and most select of which King Aelfred as
before took into his laws, not rashly as he says in his Preface: He durst not
(as his words are) because he knew not what the next age would like, set forth
much of his own. What he did (still as he) pleased his wife men Praefat. in Ll.
Alf.
, those of his Counsel. The THe^elaga was the last of these called the Danes
law, of all which we may say as is observed out of Ovid.

-- Facies non omnibus una,
Nec diversa tamen qualem dicet esse sororum.
Yet King Cnut as much resemblance as there was, liked it not, out of all these
laws he composed one Common Law which King Edward the Confessor observed
Malmesb de gest. reg. l. 2. c. 11 ^ See here chapter 3.
. His title says, The laws of St. Edward begin, quas in Anglia tenuit, which he
held; Edward the third before the Conquest (as one) set forth one Common Law,
called the laws of Edward to this day Ranulph, cester. l. 1. c. 550. Hov. 600.
Ll. Ed c. 35. in Hoved.
, which because they were just, and honest (as the Paraphraste upon the Laws of
St. Edward) he recalled from the deep abyss, and delivered to be kept as his
own. As another, he was the lawful restorer of the English laws Gemetic. l. 6.
c 9.
all this may be, he resto^ed them, and recalled them from the deep Abyss,
they might be forgotten (dedicated as the Paraphrast speaks to oblivion wholly,
but not as he adds from the time of King Edgar) in the reigns of Harold the
first, and Hardicnut. Besides restoring and addition, he commanded this law
should be kept as his own, and being a king of the Saxon blood, and falling
last upon the work, it is no wonder that he should carry the name: I shall
speak more of this in my third chapter. Hence from this time are our Laws
called the Common laws, the same in substance with those in use since. The
reason why our Saxon Books are so thin, and have so few lines in them, may be
this. Our ancestors had their unwritten customs, such as they brought with
them out of Germany, which (as since) lived, and were preserved in the memory
of the people, V. c. 1. sup. Gless. D. Spelm. tit. Lex Lomb.
as well as their laws written. After all this, as we find in the laws of
William the I. there was a difference in the estimation, of men offending
according to the customs of Provinces. Ll. Guil. 1 s. 3, 4.
The punishment or mulct of breach of peace was forty shillings in the Mercian
law, fifty in the West Saxon, etc. He that will look into the Saxon laws,
will find as clearly as can be, considering the distance made by so much time,
which is but a distance of words, the fundamental stones of the building, he
shall find freedom enough, and peace every where provided for, (in the words
of those Laws) the peace of God, of the Church, of Religion, etc. Laws
concerning Tithes and Church-rights, etc concerning Sacrilege, false Witness,
Adultery, Incest, Fornication, marrying a woman by force, Perjury, Slander,
Usury, Murder, Homicide where it is Chancemedly, Robbery, Theft, of the Fly-man
or Thief who runs for it, the receiver, him that is taken in the manner
(Hondabend, and Backberend) Burglary, Clandestine Sales, vouching to warrant
what is sold, false rumors, counterfeiting money, change of goods, just
weights, repair of Castles, Towns, Bridges, Highways, waging Law, Outlawry,
judging according to the dom bec. Vid. Ll. Ed. sen, c. 1.
or Judgment book, (one of which as as Asserius Menevensis Bishop of
Shirburne, a familiar of King Aelfred, that King made, but it is lost,)
concerning Appeals when Justice was denied in the Hundred, or too rigorously
administered, trespasses, wrongs, battery, affraies, incendiaries, the wife of a
thief, pledges of good behavior, amercement of Towns for the escape of a
Murderer, the injust Judge; those who will not serve, those who injustly
trouble the Owner of Lands who has good title, those who change their place of
abode, Merchants, rescue; in most offenses the punishment of a Freeman was
pecuniary, or loss of Liberty, of a Slave by whipping. The reason of which M.
Lambard makes, because of the rareness of offenses then; See Chapter 3
fighting in the Kings Palace, breaking open houses, and firing, robbery, open
theft, and aebermorth manifest killing, (murder, the same, and from whence our
word murder comes) and Treason against the Lord were capital, could not be
expiated with money. The Jury of twelve men is denied to be more ancient then
the Norman Conquest by M. Daniel, In Will. 1.
and Polydore Virgil, but with a great deal of bitter vehemence by the last,
who says, there is no Religion in it, but in the number, with as much truth,
as that the same King William brought in the Justices of Peace, or that
Wardship began with Henry the third, which King John's Charter alone confutes,
or that the Hotspur Lord Percy was taken alive at the battle of Shrewesbury,
and lost his head by the axe, which are his relations. That this Trial is of
English Saxon descent, is manifest by the Laws of King Etheldred, ordained at
VVanating, C. 4.
which speak thus: In all Hundeeds let Assemblies be, and twelve Freemen of the
most ancient together, cum praeposito, Ll. Ed. Sen. c. 5.11.
in Saxon gerefa, with the Reeve of the Handred, shall swear not to condemn
the innocent, nor absolve the guilty. Lamb. in verbo Centur. D. 5 ^el. in
Jura^a. Vid. C^asultum de M^ntic. Walliae, c. 3.
The reason of the great silence of this in the Saxon times is, because the
vulgar purgations, the Ordiles were every where then in use. The Norman who
wrote the grand Customary, in the beginning of it says, the Confessor gave
Laws to the Normans when he was amongst them, and in the first Chapter de
Appella, he mentions the Custom of England, to prove things by the credence of
twelve men of the Neighbors or Visne. After all the ill Customs (so much
decried in the Barons wars) taken away, and Sr. Edwards Laws restored, and
confirmed in Magna Charta, the inquest of twelve continued, untouched, and
never complained of, it was in use with the French in the age of Charlemaigne.
D. Spelm. gless. verb. in Quaest. Vid. Gesta de villa novilliaco post appendic.
ad Fledvardum.
This Law of S. Edward I think is above all exception, and full to the thing
-- by which after a prohibition that no man buy a live beast, etc. without
pledges, and good witnesses -- is said, and if any man buy otherwise, etc.
after the Justice shall inquire by Lagemen -- (legal men) and by the best men
of the Borough, Town, or Hundred, etc. C. 38.
This trifler Polydore reviles our inquests by twelve as devised (so he) to
oppress men under the show of equity; and the Canonizers of Gunpowder Garnet,
calumniate it as upstart and unjust. (Of these hereafter.) For Polydore, says
the excellent Sir Henry Savil, he was an Italian, a stranger, not conversant in
our Commonwealth, neither of much judgment nor wit, Epist. ad Eliz. Reg.
snatching at things, and often times setting down what is false for the true.
M. Seldom bids all Readers in these things, or such like, to take heed of
Polydore, and his fellows; for (says he, and no man can say it better) out of
carelessness being deceived, he attributes many things to William as the
Author, which it is most certain we owe to the most ancient times of the Saxon
Empire, etc. Notae in Ead. 194
Courts of Justice were erected before the Normans were heard of, as the Halmot
or Court Baron. Ll. Ed. c. 23 Hen. 1. c. 10
The friborge or tithing called Tenmentale in the North, by the Normans
Frankepledge, a most excellent policy of State, and one great reason why when
it was practiced insurrections and theft are so seldom heard of; in the
tything every nine men were pledges for the good bearing of the tenth; If the
substance thereof was performed as it ought (says M. Lambard) and as it may by
Law, then should the peace of the Land be better maintained then it is. Office
of Constab. 9.
this Mr. Daniel affirms. H^st. 38.
By the due execution of this Law, as the Lord Cook, such peace was universally
holden within this Realm, as no injuries, homicides, robberies, thefts, riots,
tumults or other offenses were committed, so as a man with a white wand might
safely have ridden (before the Conquest) with much money about him, etc. 2
Inst. 35
few Suits, or causes of Suits must needs then be. The Hundred which was ten
tythings, a Germany Institution, Gapit. Car. Calui apud siluacum.
where every man was bound to attend, in the North called Wapentake, then the
Trything, Thryhing, or Leet, the Jurisdiction of which extended over the third
part of a Province, containing three or four Hundreds. Ll. Ed. c. 34.
The County Court called gerefas gemot the Sheriffs gemot (or Court) to be held
by the Institution of King Edward the elder, every fourth week, where the
Sheriff was to decide civil and prediall causes, and every sfraec (as there)
plea, was to have an end at the day: Ll. Ed. sen. c. 11.
The supreme Provincial Court was the Sciregemot, or Shire Court, the same
which now we call the Sheriffs turn, kept twice the year, where the Thanes or
Noblesse were bound with the Freeholders to be present, the Bishop was Judge
for Church Matters, and the Alderman (of whom below) for things secular; here
was the Assembly of all the Hundreds, Ll. Eadg. c. 5. ll. Aethelst. m. s. c.
20. Il. Cnuti. c. 7 ^. p. 2.
here Causes Civil and Criminal were determined. This Court and its
Jurisdiction was very ancient, being famous, and used in the same manner
amongst the Franks and Lombards, as may be seen by their laws. Ll. Car. and
Lud. Im. l 4. c. 26. Car. m. Lom. l. 2. tit. 52. Ll. Aleman. tit. 36.
William the first divided the Jurisdiction, and confined the Bishop with his
Causes Ecclesiastical to a Court by himself, which were discussed in the
Hundred and Court of the Shire before, which appears by that sanction of this
King, directed to the Earls, Sheriffs, and all the French and English (so it
speaks) who have lands in the Bishopric of Remigius, Bishop of Lincoln,
(though there only the Hundred be named) Not in eadm. 167.
yet there is added -- The Episcopal laws which were not well kept nor
according to precepts of holy Canons, etc. and (as this is recited elsewhere)
They shall bring nothing to the Hundreds, or Judgment of secular men, M. S
tab. Rob. Winch. Arch. Cant. in eadm. 168.
and every secular Court is alike forbidden to Churchmen by the Canons. In one
or other of these Courts, in the less or greater, all causes were to be
determined at men's homes, and at their own doors, if the parties would rest
there, no man ought to sue out of the County, to draw his Plea from thence
without good cause, (which might be pretended then) and in every remove ought
really to be now, as appears by the Tolt, Pone, Accedas ad Guriam, and
Recordare. This good cause was, if the Suitor could not have Justice at home,
or what he had was rigor, and summum jus, then might appeals be to the
Palace, to the King there, (whose Court is called the High Court of Justice for
law and equity) Ll. Aelfr. c. 38. Ll. Edg. c. 2.11. Cnuti. c. 16.
after the manner of the ancient Jewish Commonwealth, a course observed says
the most knowing Knight, all Europe ore. Gloss. tit. Cancellaria.
Our ancient Kings (as he) swore before the Realm and the Priesthood, right
Judgment to do in the Realm, and Justice to keep by counsel of the Peers of
the Realm. Ll. Edu. Con. c. 16.
viz. (In this Court) every City and Borough had their Courts, the Burgmote
kept thrice the year, the Wardmote, the Husting, the most ancient and supreme
Court of the City of London, is of Saxon extract, which every Monday used to be
held, now on Tuesday, yet does the style still say held on Monday, Lincoln,
Winchester, York and Shepey have their Hustings, it held Pleas as it does of
things real and mixed; Judges there were too in the manner we find after the
Normans, who changed only their name from Aldermen to Justices. There was the
Alderman of all England (Chief Justice) as Ailwin Founder of the Church of
Ramsey, was called upon his Tomb -- The Kings Alderman (as the most knowing
Knight thinks) Gloss. tit. Aldermannus.
like the Missi, In Capit. Gar. m. and Franc. ll.
as our Justices in Eire, or of Assize. The Alderman of the County Iesse then
the Earl, but equal with the Bishop, which three sat together in the County,
the Earl was to take care of the Commonwealth, the Bishop of the Church, the
Alderman of the County, to declare and expound the law. Gloss. ibid.
(Besides as to execution of public Justice upon the contumacious, he might
(which our Posse of the County resembles) use force, raise the people.) This
difference is plain in that law of King Aethelstane Be erum -- of the
estimation of heads, P. 55. part 2 ll. v. ll. Jnae. c. 8 Faedus Regum Ae^fr.
and Gath. m. s. in gless. citant.
where the were gild or price of an Archbishop, and an Earls life (who are
joined as equal) is fifteen thousand th^imsa -- of a Bishops and Aldermans,
who next follow, and are joined, but eight thousand, etc. Sometimes the same
things are said of both the Earl and Alderman, so that they may easily be
thought in those places the same. This was a Salic Institution to substitute
thus, two or three under the Earl whom they called Sagibarons, as Ingulphus,
who is altogether for King Aelfred; King divided the Governors of Provinces,
who before were called Vicedomini into two offices, into Judges, whom now we
call Justices, and into Sheriffs; yet he has in our Charter Bingulph a
Vicedominus, (which Title the Justices yet in Ingulphus retained) and Alferi a
Sheriff. In An. 948.
The Saxons had their Hold, or Heretoch, their Military Commander in every
County. Places had their Bilaga by-lawes, (besides the Common Law) Law made by
consent of Neighbors, now by the Homage in a Court Baron, Suitors in the Leet,
or view of Frankpledge, in towns by the Inhabitants and Neighbors, as M.
Lamhard. The Saxons our Ancestors retained the manner of the old Germans their
own Elders, who in Tacitus Jura per pagos vie^sque reddehant, made
distribution of Justice not only in one Town, or in the Princes Palace, but
also at sundry other special places within the Country, and (as he) truly the
Normans who invaded the Posterity of the same Saxons here, did not so much
alter the substance, as the name of the Saxons order. Arch^ion. 89.
But to satisfy those to whom the Normans may be as odious as their Conquest,
(although perhaps they may be Normans themselves, most likely descended by some
Mother from them, and may seem as fond as if now at Millaine or Pavie, after so
many hundred years they would endeavor to distinguish the Lombard, and
Insubrian, the Insubrian Gaul from the Italian, in France the Gaul, and
German-Franke in Spain, the Carpetane and Wisigoth,) I say to satisfy them, I
will prove by the testimony of those who lived then when this Norman change is
imagined to be, that there was no such overturning of things as is believed.
The Title of the Laws, called the Laws of King William the first, published
by M. Seldom, with his learned Notes upon Eadmer, (and since with the Saxon
Laws) is this: These are the Laws and Customs which William the King granted
to the whole people of England after the Conquest of the Land, these were those
which the King Edward his Cosen beld before him. In these Laws recited by
Hoveden in the life of King Henry the second' King Edwards Laws are confirmed
in these words; This we command, That all men have and hold the Law of Edward
the King in all things, together with those Laws which we have added for the
profit of the English. Pars Poster. 661.
This Confirmation was not freely given, but in this manner -- King William
having heard the Laws of the Danes and Normans, and approved them, -- (as the
Chronicle of Lichfield having approved the Laws of those of Norfolk,
Suffolk, Grantbridge, and Deira, etc.) he commanded they should be observed
through the Kingdom, as more just then any others, because himself and his
Barons were Norwegians by extraction, (not a word is there of any resolution to
introduce his Norman Laws,) this the English thought a more killing blow, then
that of his Victory, they beseech him (and by the soul of King Edward, etc.)
to permit them to enjoy their own ancient Laws and Customs, under which their
Fathers lived, themselves were borne and bred up, to wit, the Laws of holy
King Edward, and they tell him, it could not but be very hard to receive Laws
unknown, and to judge of those things they understood not. The Paraphrast of
these Laws Chron. Lich.
The King long resolute at last yields, and as these, with much authority were
venerate, and through the whole Realm corroborate, and before other Laws of
the Realm, the Laws of King Edward, not because he found them, but because be
restored them, says Gemeticensis of the same age with King William. l c. 9.
The Chronicle of Lichfield and Hoveden are more large, with which agrees the
first Chapter of the Laws of good King Edward, (thus it speaks) Which King
William confirmed, all of them use near the same expressions, By Precept of
King William (say they) are elected out of every of the Counties of all
England, twelve of the most wise men, who were enjoined before King William,
that in what they might neither declining to the right hand, nor the left, in a
direct way, they should lay open the Constitutions of their Laws and Customs,
nothing omitting, nothing adding, nothing out of prevarication changing: Hoved.
601 Chron. L^ch. ll. Ed. c. ^.
Further, yet in that Chronicle Aldred the Archbishop of York (not Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, as the Paraphrast would have it, there being no
Thomas of that See, till lawless Beckets days, who as this, and Malmesbury)
crowned him, Malms^. l. 3. (...) vita Pontific.
and Hugh Bishop of London, by command of the king, writ with their own hands
what the foresaid jurates said, from the laws of holy mother the Church
beginning, etc. Ingulphus Secretary to William in Normandy, and after made
Abbot of Crowland by him, is witness enough alone, and as he, I brought this
time with me from London (where he had been about the business of his house)
to my Monastery, the laws of the most just king Edward, which my Lord William
the renowned king of England had proclaimed authentic, and perpetual, all
England over to be kept, under most grievous penalties, and commended to his
Justices in the same tongue they were set forth Ingulph. p. ult.
This proclamation was not all (to allay the storms which perhaps the
violation of these laws had raised) for the good of peace, says an ancient
Monk, He swears upon all the relics of the Church of S. Albane, touching the
hol, Gospel. Abot Fretherick ministering the Oath, the good and approved ancient
laws of the realm, which the holy and pious Kings of England his ancestors, and
especially King Edward set forth inviolably to keep Vita Ab. S. A^b. 8. s. ^0.
. that the English laws were in use then, I can prove out of that famous plea
of Pinnende^e betwixt Lanfranck Archbishop of Canterbury and Odo Bishop of
Baieux, and Earl of Kent; there it is said, the King commanded all the County
without delay to sit and all the French of the County, and especially the
English, in the ancient laws and customs skilled to assemble Not. ad E^d. 198.
William the 2. promises only easy laws, justice, equity, and mercy, and laws
desirable Hunting. l. 7.372. ead. 13. Ma Par. 14 Heved. in h. 1.
, which his successor Henry the first construes, (and there could be no other
meaning) to be meant of these laws, he swears, To take away all the injustices,
and oppressions of his brother, promises the good and holy laws to keep, and to
strengthen the liberties and ancient customs which flourished in the realm in
the time of S. Edward the King Ead. 55. Malmsb. in Hen. 1.156 Ma. Pa. 55.
, and in his laws he says, The law of King Edw. I grant you, with those
amendments, made by my father with the counsel of his Barons Ll. Hen 1. c. 2.
Ma. Pa. 56.
, and in the same place, those things which hence forward shall be done, shall
be amended secundum lagam, according to the law of King Edward; yet after he
imposes a new law a medley, out of the salick, ripuarian, and other foreign
laws, with some pieces out of King Cnuts Danish laws, which were but a small
time observed and could not take any thing from the laws of King Edward, king
Stephen confirms the laws in these words, all the liberties and good laws which
Henry King of England my Uncle granted them, and I grant them all the good
laws, and good customs which they enjoyed in the reign of King Edward Ex lib.
autiqu. Ll.
. The Londoners request of Maetildis the Empress, daughter of Hen. the 1. That
they may be suffered to use the laws of Edward, because (as they) they were the
best, and not the laws of her father Henry, because they were grievous, which
she refused, whence great commotions were made Florent. wig. in an. 11 42. cont.
, (which grievous laws certainly were that salic rapuarian Danish medly) and
likely enough a commotion in those boisterous times, would follow the refusal;
many of the disquiets, and tumults of those first reigns, being raised upon the
pretense of the breach of these laws, a pretense so taking that the No^mans
themselves either colored their insurrections with it, or else preferred these
before their own laws, and ran the hazard of their lives and fortune in earnest
for them. Henry the 2. commanded the laws of his Grandfather to be observed Hov
p. pricr in H. 2.
, of which below; Hovedens words (this I will note here) that Henry the second
made Ranulphe of Glanville chief Justice of England, by whose wisdom the laws
underwritten were made, which we call of England; make no new law, nor that
chief Justice a lawmakers, they explain what is intended by the laws of Henry
the first his Grandfather -- for the laws there underwritten Hoved. pars pest.
6^0.
, are merely King Edwards laws confirmed by William the first: king Richard the
first swears to keep the good laws, etc. Paris in Rich 1.
without saying of St. Edward, which yet can be no other, those (as is shown)
had got the name, those must be meant by the expression good laws, the kings
before and after swore to keep them. K. John absolved from the Popes thunder
(though at his Coronation by that oath to destroy bad laws, and substitute the
good, to exercise right Justice, he had sworn the same Ma. Par. 197.
) is forced to swear, that he will (as there) revoke, or restore the good laws
of his ancestors (here the expression good laws is interpreted) and especially
the laws of king Edward Id. 239.
, In the same place where king John commands that the laws of his Grandfather
Henry be kept, this must be intended, of the first laws of his great
Grandfather ( Henry the seconds Grandfather so often mentioned in the
controversy betwixt Henry the second, and that Martyr of the Roman make
without a cause, disobedient, unruly Becket Hov. 492. in H. 2
called by that king as before his Grandfathers laws,) I say his great
Grandfather Henry the first before here recited, where Henry the first grants
lagam Edwardi regis the Law of king Edward. A Charter of which Stephen the
Archbishop of Canterbury produces in the very next page (of Mat. Paris) after
the absolution (which well might be produced several transcripts of that
Charter being sent by Henry the first to be preserved in the Abbeys of all the
Counties) and there tells the Barons of the kings promise, which he forced him
as he says at his absolution to make, that was, to take away all injust laws,
and the good and just laws, to wit (as he still) the laws of king Edward to
revoke (for restore) and cause to be observed by all in the realm. And now (as
he goes on) there is found a certain Charter of king Henry the first, by which
if ye will your lost liberties you may to the Ancient state revoke, the
transcript agreed word for word with the Charter Ma. Pa. hist 55.210
, the great sticklers for the lost liberties, for the good and just laws, for
St. Edwards laws, are all of them Normans, or Norman-French, such as came in
since Edward, and being settled here for some generations, now made a great part
of the whole, amongst which are Fitz-walter Marshal of the Host of God, and of
holy Church (this was his style in the succeeding wars) Vescy, Percy, Ros, de
Bruis, Stuteville (as there) Saerie of Quincy Earl of Winchester, the Earl of
Clare descended from the Norman Gislebert Bigod, Vere Fitz-Warin, Marshal,
Beauchamp, Manduit, Fitz Allen, Mandeville Estoteville
Munhrey, Mowbrey. Montfichet.
Munifichet, Montacute, de Gant, Laval, etc id. 254.
. These when king John asked them what laws they would have, answered not, Sir,
We are the Norman Conquerours, give us this people for a spoil, a prey, make
them our villains, but quite another thing, they offer him a Scedule for the
greatest part, as this Monk, containing the ancient laws and customs of the
realm, the chapters of the laws and liberties (says he) which the great men
(the Barnage or Baronage as in other places he calls them) sought to be
confirmed, were partly written above in the Charter of king Hen. partly taken
out of the ancient laws of king Edward id. ibid.
. Alll which laws, with much ado were confirmed by king John, this Scedule is
the same, and everywhere agrees with our Magna Charta, or grand Charter (and
that of the Forest) granted and confirmed by king Henry the third, called then
by this Author the long required liberties id. 323.
, or rather by the whole Clergy and Nobility, who tell the king they would give
him the fifteenth, which he desired, if he would grant them the long required
liberties, which says this Historian the king granted, and presently Charters
were writ, one of the common liberties, etc. And strengthened with his seal,
and one sent into every County -- But (says he) the tenors of the Charters is
had above more expressly (for here he recites not a word of them) So that (as he
still) the Charters of both the kings are not not found in any thing unlike 5.
H. 3 l. 1. Mort. dancest. In. 323. in an. 1224 the 8 of the King as he, yet th
charters has an. 9.
. In the year foregoing, this King was sought to by the Archbishop of
Canterbury Stephen, and the other great men, the Barons at Oxford, where he
held his Court to confirm the liberties and free customs etc id. 316.
. Which he did not then do, but sent his letters or writs to all the^ Sheriffs
of the realm to cause twelve knights, or legal men of every County to enquire
upon oath what were the libertics in England in the time of king Heary his
Grandfather, (so he is yet called id. 317 Ma. W^st.
) the breakers of the Charters are Excommunicated, with candles burning cast
away extinguished, and cast away stinking Id. 861.
Thus we see the stream of the laws of king Edward, the ancient liberties, and
free customs, some times running freely, sometimes weakly, sometimes stopped
in their course, at last have brake through all the Dams, have mixed, and
incorporated with the great Charter, whose basis and foundation they are
Nobilis D. Rog. Twis^ den praefat. in Ll. w. 1. and H. 1
, there still in being, and still the fountain of the Common Law. The great
Charter raised upon this basis in one of the Statutes of confirmation, is
commanded by king Edward the first, to be allowed by the Justices in judgment,
as the Common Law 25. E. 1 c. 1
. So that well might the Lord Cook say, The great Charter is but a
confirmation, or restitution of the Common Law Iast. 81
. It has been confirmed above 30 times, and by a Statute, if any Statute be
made against one of these Charters it is to be void 42, E. 3 c. 1 ^
, which if it were intended not of the time past, but of the time to come, I
see no such absurdity in it, as some men's over wise policies would fancy; some
parts of it being as moral and immutable, as the Decalogue it self. As those,
That no man shall distraine for more service then is due, no man shall be
amerced for a small fault, but after the manner of his fault; no man shall be
destroyed without trial, justice shall not be sold, nor deferred, etc. The
observation of these Laws was a condition of Peace, which ever appeased the
ancient distempers, and cemented what was loose and dis-joynted in the great
body. The Laws toe of St. Edward are inserted into the oath of the Kings of
England, usually taken at their Coronations, which were not only superfluous
and abundant, but an impious vanity, if there were no such laws any where,
after the solemnity of this religious and sacred bond to be observed. The
manner of taking the Oath, as we find, is this; The Archbishop asks the King,
Whether he be willing to take the Oath usually taken by his Predecessors, and
whether the Laws and Gustomes by the ancient, just and devout Kings granted to
the people of England, with the confirmation of his Oath, he will grant and
keep to the same people, and especially the Laws, Customs, and Liberties, by
the glorious King Edward to the Clergy and people granted. Ex libro regali.
After he is led to the high Altar where he swears to observe them, etc.
Further, so far are some from allowing our Laws to be Norman, that they are
of opinion the Normans received theirs from us, (as they) most of their
Customs being so derived; as William of Rovel, in his Preface to his
Commentary upon the grand Customary, Edward the Confessor being a long while in
Normandy, gave Laws to the Normans, and made the Customs of England, and
Normandy, D. Spel. gloss. v. jurata.
which if it were not so, nothing is lost by it, nor does it make any of these
truths suspicious, Sup. 55.
that so few of these Laws are come to our hands (of which something is said
before) and of their Book-Cases or Judgments none at all: There never could be
any such Volumes of them heard of, as are fancied, besides the honest
simplicity of the first ages, and the strictness of rules spoke of, writings
and deeds either to pass Lands or Privileges, were not in use till King
VVithred, near 700. years after our Savior, that King being so illiterate,
that he could not write his name, as himself confesses, Council. Sax. 198
, King Aelfred little less then two hundred years after this complains of the
ignorance then, that there were scarcely any on this side Humber, who could
understand the ordinary common prayers, or translate a piece of Latin into
English, but in the beginning of his reign on the South of the Thames, he
remembered not a man who could have done it; Ibid. 379 Epist. Aelfredi, ad
Walsagepiscep.
and although this King of sacred memory, if perhaps (as I cannot think he
was) not the Solon and Arthitect of our Saxon English order, yet a great
restorer of it, built gloriously upon the frame he found, yet these were less
then beginnings would likely have been, where such a Prince had been the
Workman, he could not intend them; the Danes like a fatal whirlewinde tearing
up root and branch, every where ruining, had long before broke into the Land,
which two hundred years together they miserably harassed, with whom he fought
fifty six battles, and as may be imagined, had not leisure to perform the
duties of peace, but in his arms sometime hid in the poor shed of an
Herdsman, as the most knowing Knight, a King without a Kingdom, a Prince
without people, so that he could not think of his Laws, Council. 378.
and although there was some breathing, and the storm had some intermission,
some calmes were in the two hundred years, some in his reign, yet such ravage
and spoil had these barbarous thieves made, and so universal might the
Confusions and Disorders be, we may conceive it would be the labor of no short
peace, to restore things fallen or shaken, to their first condition, without
making any the least progression, this being not to be done till the
corruptions which war, licentiousness, and careless negligence have bred in
the parts most sound, are plucked up, and the weeds thrown out, which must be
the work of time: The proceedings too of the Saxons our Ancestors (as M.
Lambard) in judgment was de plane, and without solennity, enough to clear
this, though the Saxon Laws then were enough for the Commonwealth, yet they
had no great extent whatsoever unto S. Edward, gathered out of the Laws of
those who followed this King, and saw more quiet days, or out of the whole
body of the Saxon Laws could not reach far, but not out of any defect in the
Law it self, then the cause why the law runs in a larger channel, and spreads
into more veins now, is not any artifice, or injust dealing of those who
practice it, but the improvement of estates by good husbandry, much traffic,
whence contracts are more frequent; As Sir John Davies, there is more Luxury
and excess in the world, more force, deceit, and oppression, more
covetousness, and malice, breach of peace and trust, which as they gather
strength and multiply, so must the laws, there is a necessity that as these
mischiefs increase there should be supplements of laws to meet with them, Mr.
Daniel observes of the Assize of Clarendon long after the Saxons, that it
consisted (as it does) of very few points, and that the multitude of actions
which followed in succeeding times, grew out of new transgressions, etc. When
the Romans were little better then shepherds, and herdsmen, it is said a few
Ivory tables contained their laws, after they came to be Lords of the world,
thousands of Books were writ of the Romans Civil Law. Albericus Gentilis justly
reprehends Ludovicus Vives, who maintained (as he) that all things might be
finished by a few laws, as the same Mr. Lambard (speaking of the Law of
England) positive or written Law neither is nor can be made such a perfect
rule, as that a man may thereby truly squ^e out justice in all cases which may
happen; for written laws must needs be made in generality, and grounded upon
that which happens for the most part; because no wisdom of man can foresee
every thing in particularity, which experience and time does beget Archeior.
76, 77.
. There is a curse of peace, the highest prosperity has its dangers, there can
be no safety in it, the rich man is more infirm, more unsound then the poor,
pride and malicious contention are diseases he is seldom free from: it is well
said of wicked men and their injustice, there is need of many laws to bridle
them, of many Officers to execute, of many lawyers to interpret those laws. We
know all laws come not in by heaps but as time corrupts things, and new wrongs,
and offenses are discovered, by the same degrees. Thus the Sumptuary laws
amongst the Romans came in, the Fabian of Plagiaries, the Julian of public or
private force, de ambitu, and the rest, all our Statute laws which are
remedying. So must it be, and so it has been, in all Commonwealths, of all laws
whatsoever, unless there could be a stay of men's manners, unless they could
move in an orderly course, either continually running upon things forbidden, or
avoiding them, either constant to their own goodness, or their lawless sins,
there must be new Laws to amend what is amiss, unless Prophecy may be
presupposed in the first Lawgiver who with cast of his eye with one look can see
every thing. Thus we have seen whatour laws are, and from what fountain they
flow; so then their discontent who only hate the sword, and by whom the laws
are loathed in no other notion but that of Norman conquest must be removed:
they being not only demonstrated to be justly made, and according to the law
of Nations, weighed, and allowed, not by the wisdom of a narrow age, but
imbelished, and polished by the experience, and wisdom of a thousand years,
(the fundamentals being yet of an higher rise) and what is most of all
Saxon-English, must needs be venerable; they will be so, with those who are won
by reason, and with those who are not capable of that, yet will be taken with
the name, if their obstinacy be not above their senses. But if the law be not
Norman, Tenures.
if it suffer that which is (some will say it is the same) whether the Wen be
native born with the face, or ad nate growing upon it after, the deformity is
alike. And the next guilt charged upon the Iaw, is the vassallage of feudes, or
Tenures, being a servitude thought unworthy of free men, it may easily be
shown, that those were not first shown us by the Normans, that they had made
their entrance long before, and if this be culpable, scarce any laws, but none
of those of the Germane fountain (from which the most of these as is proved in
the western world are derived) are innocent. I will not look so far back, as
upon Surena among the Parthians, whose hereditary right it was, and might be
like our grand serieauty, to put the royal bond, or Cydaris, as it is called by
the Persians Curt. l. 111
, upon the Kings head Plut. in Crasso.
. Not upon the soldiery amongst the Gauls, heads devoted to him and his
fortune, whom they followed, the Gessel amongst the Gauls and Germans Caes.
com. l. 3.
. Not upon Nero his kissing the Armenian Tyridates kneeling, which might be
thought homage Sueton. iu in Ner.
. Nor upon Alexanders kiss taken by Mr Fulbeck Paral. 4. Dial.
, for the same, Calisthenes is refused this kiss given by the king to every of
his friends at supper with him, after they had drank, of whose fee we read
nothing in History, and his Philosophy would make it seem small one. Budaeus
would have seuds first begin in the ancient Clienteles of the Romans, and in
the relation between the Patricii the Nobility, and the Plebeians, or Commons,
the tie betwixt whom was reciprocal; the Patron was bound to protect the
Clyent, and he with all faithfulness to observe the Patron, to attend him in
public assemblies, to contribute to the marriage of his daughters, to the
payment of his public mulcts, etc. Yet was there another relation, and that
was servile, betwixt the Patron and freed man, appearing by the operae
libertorum, the duties and day works of the freed man to be done to the Patron,
whom he was obliged if he were an official freed man to serve, and help in all
things, the artist paid a certain sum of money, either might be reduced to his
servitude if he were ungrateful, part of his goods at his death were due to his
Patron. There were the fundi Limitrophi, the border grounds of the Romans,
belonging to the souldie^s marchers upon the guard for defense of the borders.
And Alexander S. verus is reported to have given the Lands of his enemies won
by him to his Praefects of the marches, and to their soldiers, and to their
heirs Lamprid. in Alex. Sen
Constantine the great appropriated the Lands assigned, for the pay of the
soldiers, to them, and their heirs, with this charge, to maintain continually
a certain number of soldiers: which came to a near resemblance. Gregory
Haloander In praes. Noves.
, says, the customs of the feuds were called by the ancients jura militiarum,
by Justinian in the novelles (...) Those who hold feuds by Aescuage, are called
by him (...), shield bearers. The (...) in the novelles, is more then our
livery. The chief Lord, the first year the heir or successor of the Vassal
came to the Land, was to have the whole revenue of it, or a certain sum of
money, in token of the return to the Lord, and redemption. There was the glebal
goldein in the Code, so called, because the Senators paid it to the Prince for
their possessions. There was too, (as Z^zamene) The glebal adscriptitius (...),
the villain who continued, was aliened with, and followed the field Germany
(as the most knowing knight Gless. D. Spelm. scudum.
) brought forth the rights, and customs feudal, and propagated them by
tradition, not writing, their beginning is rather to be referred to the Salian
Franks, says the most learned Mr. Seldom, then to the Lomberds. Feud is a
reward or stipend: It is a right in another land to the use and profits which
the Lord gives for a benefice, on condition, That the receiver do fealty,
military duties, and other service. By which as in our Copy holds the
Franktenement was in the Lord still. Necessity of war begot the invention,
Emperors, Kings, and Princes to reward those who had fought valiantly for
their new Conquests, and to plant a perpetual soldiery, prepared, ever ready
upon the Ban, to get to horse, or march, bred up to arms, as to a profession,
to the intent the Country might be preserved against invasions, and tumults,
without the Princes or the public charge, (mischiefs sometimes breaking in so
suddenly, that the slownesse of any other preparation, where levies of men,
and moneys require time, cannot be staid for) Countries were given to the Capt.
who after made subdivisions to their soldiers, the Captains part being
proportioned according to the number of those under him, all being still
incorporate, a civil unseen militia, not ever shriking the eyes of others,
quietly mixing, and keeping course in the common stream, like Traianes
Cohorts, differing nothing in habit, P. in. Paneg.
tranquillity and modesty from others, but at the first summons of the foot,
ready like the seed of Cadmus to start up fields of armed men. The Justice of
the institution was as much as the policy; all these tenures have been created
according to this rule, (as the Lord Gooke,) 4. Jnsti. 192.
Cuius est dare, eius est disponere, every proprietary may annex his condition
to his grant, and dispose as he pleases of his own, nor has the Vassal any
reason to complain, volenti non sit injuria, he might have refused the thing,
his acceptance binds him to the charge coincident. Hotoman describes a fief, to
be a benefice for which some duties are done, to testify the gratefulnes of
the taker. Disp. c. 1.
I should think here would be the injustice -- That the whole benefice should
be enjoyed by the Tenant, and the Granter from whom it moved be allowed none of
his own reservations to himself; I believe there are few men now without
harths or households Gods who would resufe a good manner, because these ties
hang upon the Labell. Sir Themas Ridleyn a Civilian fetches the Feudes chiefly
from the Lombards, View etc. 71.
much augmented and adorned by them they might be, Gloss. D. sp. 256.
(which Lombards were Cousin-Germanes of the English Saxons, whose Companions
in the Conquest of Italy, part of the Saxons were) and their charges are almost
the same with ours; yet in the volume of the ancient Lombard Laws the word
feud is not to be found, seldom the word benefice, but their are many things
directly tending to this purpose; as also in the Laws of the Franks, called the
Capitulars, our English Saxon and those of others. The word feud is of Saxon
original, feb fech, from whence it comes being the same with fee in use now:
The greatest part of the words taste not only of the Germane, but of it is more
ancient dialect the old Saxon. D. spelm. ibid.
The feuds came but of late to be a volume of the Civil Law, composed by Obert
de Horto, and Gerard Niger under the Emperor Frederick the first surnamed
Barbarossa, anciently the fee was held merely at the will of the Lord, Ger.
nig. l. 1. T. c. 1.
after for a year, for life, made perpetual and hereditary by Conrad the
salic, the year 1025. amongst the Germans, where the descent was, as we call
it by Gavelkinde. amongst the French in the reign of Hugh Capet, which he began
in the year 988. in the year 913. as Munster will have it Conrad the first
changed this custom, he gave the Dukedom of Saxony, to Henry the Faulconer
as a fief hereditary to the end (these are his words) that he might be the more
vigilant to combat the Obotrites (now those of the Dukedom of Mecklenburge)
and the enemies of the Faith. After (as he) Otho the first (who began his reign
938.) and his Successors did the like, Cosmegr. 346.
after his defeat of the Hongres. ibid. 359.
Lothaire the Emperor forbad Lords to take away the Vassals fee without his
crime, which some interpret signal ingratitude, Feud l. c. tit. 20.23.
to which Conrade adds, unless he be convinced of the crime by the judgment
of his Peers or equals of the Court, ibid.
which is called Landamentum. It is said of the Germans, the Emperor, because
he cannot judge causes in all places, conferres upon illustrious men: viz.
Princes, Earledomes, and feudal banners, Specul. Sax. Artic. 52.
as another they have their fanleben, or principal fees the collation and
investiture of which belongs only to the Emperor. Stat. German p. 2.52
These were the fees of the great Captains or Barons, called by them freyberen
-- under which are the Medii Liberi who followed the War, and ought homage to
another as Servitors noble, Munst. 145.
the Land they called Terra salica, was the same with our Knight service,
Bodin. l. sixieme c. 5.
this was simply called a fee military, held of the Barons and Vavasours, of
all which the Iaws speak, where are mentioned, the great Captains who received
the regal fiefs, called vassi dominici, who held in chief, the middle of a
lower sort who received siefs from them, and the lowest to whom those gave.
Feud. l. 1. tit. 1. sec. 4. Et tit. 15.
Frederick the first, is made to speak thus, We in the presence, and witness of
all the Teutonic's and Lombards, and of the Bishops, and lay Princes, and
Barons, and Vanasours, etc. Raedenic. l. 2. c. 31.
There is a Gavelkind as well in their honors of the greatest Houses, as of
the Lands, which held in the Crown it self till Charlemaigne, and is
abolished in the House of Hessen but fince the last peace. The words of the
Lord Arundel of Wardours creation (made Earl by Rodolph the 11. for his good
service and valor against the Turks at Strigoniun and the parts about) were
-- we have created him, and all and every of his Children, Heirs, and
Posterity, and Descendents lawfully of both Sexes for ever to be born, Counts
and Countesses, etc. The ancient Saxons were divided into three sorts; the
Edhilinges, or Nobles, the Frilinges, or Freemen, the Lazzi, or Villeins, which
agreed exactly with our distinctions, though now their remains nothing of the
latter but the memory of it with us, not yet worn out a among the Germans;
and as to some duties, as tilling the Lords ground, carrying in his corn, etc.
the complaint of the mutinous Clownes of the schwabische kraisse, or circle of
Suevia was true, that their condition was little better then servile, Sleid.
com l. 5.
fiefs are every where in France upon the reasons before brought in, as all
their old Laws and Institutions, by Pharamond, and his German Frankes, the
Conquerours of the Gauls. The Nobles from the time of Hugh Capet, took their
surnames from their fiefs, the French have their fief, dominant en royale, or
tenure in capite, held immediately in chief of the King, and whereof many
others hold, their fief of Dignities either held immediately, or of some fief
so held (then called fief mesne) a Barony or Chastelleny, the feudum vexillare
or fief Rdnneret. The fief ample, or Knights fee held of the Lords Mesne,
Barons, or Chastellaines, and their fief roturior ignoble as our Socage
Wardship, Fealty, Homage, Courts, Customs, Jurisdiction over Vassals, are
incidents of the noble fiess; a name (as Berault) which comprehends all the
species but the last; they have their Cotier, paying the Cens a quit rent, or
tilling the Lords ground, etc. The Cens was a Custom of the Romans, and
imposed in imitation of them, their Villain, or basest servile Tenant is yet in
being, they have their Court feudale, or fonciere, which is as our Court Leet,
or Baron, a Court of base Jurisdiction, to which the Lords Vassals owe their
suites and services; so of Escheates, there is little difference betwixt them
and us, in them and in the right d'Aubaine, where a Stranger possessed of
Lands, or Goods dies not naturalized. The right of bannery is the same with us,
which is the privilege of having a common Mill, Oven, etc. whereto the tenants
of the Manner must resort, so of the dehris for wrecs, or shipwrackes, of right
of warren, fishing and fowling, of Hereot a Custom of of the Germans yet, of
Relief, of escuage, Herefare, with the English-Saxons, Ofaide de chevels, de
chtvalry to Knight the eldest Son, marry his Daughter, their Pure aumosue is
our Frankalmoigne; Those of Spain (as the author of the estates of the world)
are Goths, and retain their Customs though not their name since Roderic D.
T. V. Y.
as Doctor Cowell a most learned Civilian; if you look upon the Italians
divided enough in their dominions, upon the French, Spaniards, and Dutch, our
own Country or the Scots, you shall find the Laws of feudes to be admitted.
Jnst. Ju. Angl. pref. 14.
Tenures are amongst the Persians, Jov. Hist. l. 14.
the Turks, the Russe and the Spaniards of Peru, by the Ordinance of Charles
the fifth, the Emperor and King of Spain; Bodin l. 6. c. 2.
by all which it is clear that they were no invention of the Normans, being, if
we father it upon the Lombard or Frank, both which are the fathers of it in
their Conquests, (and not the rather which we might upon the Teutons and
Germans, the common fathers of these) known and in use long before the Normans
are heard of: whose appearance which showed them to the world was in inrodes
and piracie, wherein many years together from their first sally from Norwey and
those parts, (places which is every where the fate of the most Northern
Provinces barbarous enough at this day) to the days of Rollo more then two
hundred years, there was neither civility nor honesty in their actions; so it
is likely, (though somewhat they might bring with them) they took up what they
wanted in Manners and Government, from the French, with whom they have kept so
great an agreement since, for which, and a Province unjustly wrung from that
Nation, they gave nothing in return, but depopulations and blood; and had they
introduced here the rites of Tenures, they had introduced but what themselves
took up, (either took up, or brought with them is the same) and what was
common, as has been observed, amongst all the victorious Germane Nations. The
only way to make it plain, in what manner, by what right the Saxons possessed
their Lands, will be to search into those times, into the Records of them. The
most knowing in these things deny not fees, servitude of fees somewhere is
denied* Gloss. verb. frud.
I will begin with the Alodium (as likely to be freest) which is said to be
Foleland, made the same with our Socage, (which yet originally was servile, and
more servile then any military Tenure will be found to be.) V.C. Dom. Wat.
Gloss. in Par. D. Cowel. v^r. Socage. Lit. S. 119. D. Lpel Dominici Colani.
The Aloaries are said to be the better sort of those who held by socage, they
are compared to the Frankleudes amongst the French, of the Noblesse, Nobiles
militiam exarbitrio tractantes, for service when the fit took them, D^n. Sptl.
verbo Alod.
called out at no man's command, in no foedall servitude; yet who acknowledged a
Lord, says this place. -- Out of that of the Doomsday -- Tit. Sudsex. Comes de
ow. Laneswice. Godwin bolds of him, and of him seven Aloaries, who swore
fealty, and paid some Cens or small Rent. This must seem a strange kind of
military Gentry, owing little more then to God and the Sun, amongst a people
descended of those from whom Feudes are descended, whose fortunes were built in
the field, and must ever have one hand upon the Sword. The Franklends were not
so free, as it appears by this Glossary; free they were from Tribute, but not
from the Wars. id. verb. Leudes.
The word leudes has several meanings: Generally by it, the leudes, the
Subjects of all sorts are intended, according to that. It was agreed betwixt
Childebert and Gruntchranne, that none of them inveagle away another leudes,
Greg. Tur. l. 6.
specially it is taken for the Vassalls praediall, servile, feudall, and noble;
more restrainedly for the vassalls royal, after called Barons, which must be
the Frankleudes. I will relate, and only relate what I have found elsewhere
amongst us of our Alodiary, Doomesday is cited in these words, And in Sussex
Cetingley, Tit. of Honor Cheding.
(for Chittingley a Town in Pevensie Rape) Almar held of Ring Edward, as Alode
sicut Alodium. Upon which the Aloarie is said to possess his Land by
Clientelar right, D. Seld. in Ead. 202. v. ibid. 217.
the Titles of Honor -- citing this and the place in Sussex before, say,
Alodium was not Land whereof no Tenure was; it might be such a Tenure as was
free from any chargeable service; and again, (as free as Kent is thought to
be) the same Doomesday speaks thus, These forfeitures has the King over all
the Alodiaries, of the County of Kent, and their men, (vassalls) And when the
Alodiary dies, the King shall have relief therefore of his land, except the
land of holy Trinity, etc. and of their lands be has relief, who have soc and
sac.

Not to fall upon a discourse of the feudall Soldier, who fights ever for his
own, and the Mercenary, though nature binds us to defend our Country, I know
not why any tie (in a reasonable equality to our strength and means) to knit
this knot faster can be called servitude, and some more willingly obey a
condition of their own acceping, then a command: I will show below there were
special obligations of this kind upon those who were certainly beneath the
Alodiary. The Saxons had their Manors, which they called Beries, sometimes
with lesser Manors, or Berewics, as Hamlets of the greater holding of them,
which had many plough-lands, many kinds of services, many Freemen, So^mannes,
many of those who did the Lords work about the house (from D. Spel. gloss.
board the house in Saxon called bordarii, or from board, which in Saxon is a
Table, a word u^ sed for it still) many villains belonging to them, v. Ps. 68
I know not why these Borders should be thought Norman in their name against
the Etymology. If that place in the Doomsday be considered, Tit. Norf.
Nereburgh, (a Town, now Nerborough) held Aelwie in the time of King Edward the
Gonfessor, now R. etc. Then four and twenty villeines, etc. Then and after ten
bordarii borders, etc. Tit. Hereford. And other twelve borders working one day
in the week. The Demeanes were called the Inland; the Tenancy, and what was
allowed the Colony, or Husbandmen the Vtland, according to the testament of
Bithric, D. Lamb. Itin. Gant.
I bequeath, says he, to Walfege that Inland, (as M. Lambard the demeanes) and
to Elfey the outland, as he, the Tenancy. The Ecclesiastical Laws of King
Edgar, command Tithes to be paid both out of the Thenes Inland, and the
Neatland, the Tenants land. Ll. E^g. Eccles. Council. 444.
Thus must Ingulphus be intended in the deeds of Withlaf and Beored, Mercian
Kings, twice are these words, Also I confirm to the foresaid Monastery of the
gift of Geolph, son of Malt in Halington, four Oxganges of land of Jnland,
which the Margent once corrects by Luland, for Juland, both which make it
nonsense; there is added, and ten Oxganges in service: The words -- Manor,
Mansions, Teuements, Marshes, common of Pasture of all Beasts, are frequently
met with in the ancient Grants made by the Mercian and West Saxon Kings to the
Monastery of Crowland, Inulphus Savil 859, 864, 881.
with the terms, acres, hides, Carues Oxeganges, Yardlands, Firmes, Rents,
etc. many of those Mannours had their Royalties, or huge Privileges, (as
Ingulphus calls them) annexed, both of Jurisdiction in some parts lessened
since, and profit. King Edgars Chatter this Monastery, describes and grants
them, I grant and confirm, says he, etc. free from all secular charge, and
that they have all the free Customs with all that which is called Soc, Sac,
Tol and Team, Infangthef, Weife, and Streye, Id. 881.
amongst which Sac in the Halmot, since Court Baron, was common to all Manors.
In the great Plea of Pennedene, (of which before) the Archbishop is said to
darrein all the Liberties and Customs of his Church, Soca, Saca, Tol, Team,
Flymena, Fyrmthe, (for Flymen firm) Grithbrice, Forsteal, Haunfare, (for
Heinfare) and Infangennetheof, Not. in Ead. 196.
most of which are now worn out, unknown in these base Courts; yet I will say
something of them, not that I pretend to give full satisfaction, being in some
of them unsatisfied my self, as they are upon whom I rely, for Soca D. Cowell
cites S. Edwards Laws: c. 23.
He says -- some will have it an Inquest, as if it were seek, some. Suit of
Court; others an exemption of the Tenants from any public duties without the
Manor or Liberty, called still soke; soon -- socne is in Saxon liberty, Ll.
Cnuti. c. 69 4.
free Jurisdiction; frithsocne is a sanctuary, a liberty of peace. Ll. Eccles.
r. Cnuti. c. 2
In the lives of the Abbots of S. Alhanes, we read, with all the lands which
William Chamberlain, or the Chamberlain held in the Soke of Luiton; 69.
it is the Liberty, or Jurisdiction of the Lordship, within which the Lord may
hold his Court, to which the Tenants ought to resort, to do their Suit, and
out of which they are not to be drawn -- Sac is conusance of Pleas; Tol is
said to be a liberty to buy and sell within the Manor, Ll. Edu. c. 24.
more likely, some duty paid to the Lord upon such sales. Team in other Saxon
out of the Laws is progeny; by some made a power to have, and and dispose of
villains, and their race; it is, (so I gather from the Saxon laws) cognizance
in a Court Baron of things claimed, stolen, where he in whose hands the goods
were found might vouch his Vendor, and he over till the Thief was discovered,
if he were teames yrthe, as King Cnuts Laws speak, if he deserved the right,
as having bought before legal witnesses (otherwise not, and he was to pay the
penalty imposed.) at the third Voucher, the Owner is to have his goods, the
team was to be in the place where the goods were found, no man was bound
fylgean team to follow it, I know not whether: timth is used in the Laws of Ine
for vouch, getiman in those of Aelfred for the Voucher, as geteaman in those of
King Edward the elder, and King Aetheldred; timan and teaman to vouch, team for
vouching, tymoe he has vouched, in Aethelstanes Laws, tyman, team in those of
Aetheldred, team, teames time in Cnuts, in the same sense Ll Ina l. 74. Alfr.
4. Edv. sen. 2. Aethelft 24 Aetheld. 9, 10. Cnuti. 21, 22. Edv 3.25.
the other terms may be rendered by Mulct of sustaining Fugitives or Out-lawes,
of breach of the peace, forestalling, departing of a Servant, Trial of a
Thief taken within the Jurisdiction. There were Parks in the Saxon times,
which though it be a digression, I thought fit to observe; this appears by the
word Deorfald, Deerfold, and by the Doomesday, where they are are called
Parcisylvatici bestiarum, Wood Parks of Beasts. Forests too here are as
ancient, called Bucholt, and Buchurst, is the same, holt and hurst both
signifying a Wood. King Cnut in his Laws c. 77. v. manne Ferest. D Sp. gloss.
verb. Forresta.
gives any man leave to hunt in his own Woods or Fields, forbidding only to
meddle with the Kings Venison in the places of freedom, other Forest laws
were after set forth by the same Cnut, one of which in the thirty chap. gives
leave to hunt, but not so generaly, it names not woods. If the Saxon original
were as narrow, (which no man now knows) yet I see not why these laws should be
suspected for it, as they are 4. Inst.
, where this chapter is thought to be a prohibition to hunt (which it is not.)
It agrees with the law before, men were to avoid the kings game, not
wheresoever according to the word, but wheresoever he will have it (according
to the other law) gefithod privileged, free. What the Thane was, and how he
held his Lands, and Lordships, I will next enquire.

The word Thane, Thegen, thein, thegne, (we find theowan too) and all these
ways it is written, is used sometimes indifferently, in some places merely for
the kings servants, merely for a servant, as in Doomesday Cola the bunter,
Vluiet the hunter, Godwin the Falconer, etc. and in a Saxon Sermon In Beda
(...) 382
. The Queen of Seba tells Soloman blessed are thy servants, theguas and
theowan, the Apostles are called thenes Bid 483.
, yet in other places it may be observed directly and properly restrained to,
intended of a Thane, holding Taine Land, though he might in some honorable way
or other serve the king too. Such might he be in Bid, (whom as the fable
speaks, no bonds could hold, when his brother was at Mass praying for his
soul, as supposing him slain in the battle with Elwin king Egfreds brother)
who feared to confess that he was the kings Thegne, but said he was a folelic
man, and again, those that were with him saw by his face, and carriage, that he
was not one of the poor folk, but that he was of noble race Bid. l. 4. c. 22.
, and being questioned, answered he was the Kings Thegne. There is the Kings
Thane and the theoden mean or under Thane. The first, the Kings Baron, the
other the Lord of a Manor v. ll. reg. Cnuti. c. 69.
, as a most learned Antiquary Neither were there with them (the Saxons) any
other created titles after the Prince, or Etheling honorary it seems, but this
of Earl, and their Thanes, according to the Charter of the Confessor for the
Lands of St. Paul's Church there, which runs thus: Edward king Great mine
Bisceops, and mine Forles, and all mine Thegnes ou Thau shiren, where mine
Prestes in Paulus Minister habband Land D. Seld. tit. Hon.
. He acknowledges there were the feudal honorary, ninrges THegne Kings Thane
who held of the K. in chief, that his land only was honorary Taineland, that he
held by service of personal attendance, by service of an Office, or military
attendance he maks the theoden Medmera THegne or under Thane to be feudal too,
Which sein Council. Sax. 406. Now in print.
and the same with a Vavassour out of the M, S. of Athelstanes laws sometimes
at the Library of St. James he cites, Si Ceorlman prove batur ut habeat 5.
hidos terrae ad ut Waram (which should be utfaram expeditionem) regis, etc.
That is, says he, held of the King by knight service Tit. Hon. 2. edit. 622 624.
. In Doomesday tit. Bockingham scire, is, Burchard Teigue. 1. Baro Regis
Edwardi -- That is Baron of King Edward. Amongst the witnesses to the
privilege of King Aeiheldred, granted to the Monastery of Christ Church in
Ganterbury, is Aethelmere the kings Discthene translated dapifer Leafric his
braegel thene, Master of the Wardrobe. Siward the kings thene a t raed of his
Council Council. 500, 501.
, which certainly were Thanes or Barons by the service of these places. We read
of those in the Saxon Cronologie, who served not (n ordinary, lived not
continually at Court, v Sax. Cron. 534, 543.
or near the kings person (like those in the Confessors Chatters here) yet are
called the Kings Thenes. The words are these, And in those three years, many of
the kings most choice Thenes dyed, amongst which were Suithulfe Bishop of
Rochester, and Ceolmund Alderman or Earl in Kent, and Beorhtulf Alderman
amongst the West Saxons, and Wulfred Alderman in Hamptonshire, and Ealheard
Bishop at Dorchester, and Eadulf the kings Thane amongst the South Saxons, and
Beornwulf the Gerefe in Winchester, and Ecgulf the kings Master of the Horse,
his horse Thene, and many other of the most noble Cronolog. Sax. 545.
Which I shall make yet more clear, when I come to speak of Hereot out of the
Laws of King Cnut. This Law is meant of the less or under Thane, If any Thegne
which in his bockland (opposite to so cland, which passed without writing) has
a Church and a burial place etc Ll Edg. 2
, to make it more full (as before is said) that the policy of these Germane
Nations tended much to war, the very ceorl^^ or plowman could not under such a
penalty keep at home, when an Army was to march L^. Ina. c. 52.
, and whosoever withdrew himself from the march, forfeited all he had Council. ^
Ae^ham. c. 24.
, if the king were in the expedition, The Doomesday says -- In the City of
Hereford -- The Burger serving with his horse when he dies. The King shall have
his horse, and arms. As there. Wallingford in the time of King Edward the
confessor contained 276 hages or houses, rendering ten pounds of rent or gable,
and who remained there performed the kings service with their horses, or by
water. We find in the Saxons times in a gift of lands reservations of
services, and creation of Tenures: king Aelfred at peace with Guthrun the Dane,
whom he wins over to the Faith, gives him the Provinces of the cast Angles and
Northumberland to be possessed by Foedal and hereditary right Council. Sax. 379.
Asser. men vens.
. John Pik who writ in the reign of king Henry the first says, king Aelfred
gave these Provinces, etc. Under fealty of the King, that he might preserve
that by hereditary right, which he had invaded by robbery. Malmesbury relates
this in the same words de gest. reg. l. 2. c. 4.
, in the Chronology we find. Here Edmund the King wasted all Cumberland, and
gave it to King Malcolne, king of the Scots, on condition that by Sea, and
Land, he should assist him in his wars, that he aere his mid yrhta that he were
his fellow in action Cronal. S^x. in an. 945.
, of the first of which Harding has.

To whom the King gave then all Eastenglond
-- To hold of him the Land.
Malmesbury reports in the life of King Edgar. That there came to his Court
Kunadie King of Scots, Maleolne king of Cumberland, the arch Pirate (Admiral)
Maccuf, all the kings of the Welsh, Dusual, Gifreth, Huual (Hoel Dha) Jacob,
and Judethil, whom Edgar bound to himself in a perpetual oath l. 2. 4. c. 8. v.
tit. Hon.
, which may be called Fealty. Where the same Harding recites the beneficiary
Clyents or Princes (who had sworn Fealty (says Mr. Mare claus. 280.
Seldom to king Cnut) he adds, So did the Kings of Wales of high Parage,
And all the North-West Ocean
For their Kingdoms, and their Lands than.


There is an example of the creation of knight service here before the Normans,
in the lives of the Abbots of St. Albans. Then says the Monk in the time of
Abbot Leofstane and Edward the Confessor. The Chilterne a small country near
the Monastery was full of Woods, in which lodged diverse beasts, wolves, (not
then it seems extinct) bores, wild bulls, and dear, and which were more
mischievous, thieves, out laws, banished men, and fugitives. Abbot Leofstane
to the profit of this Monastery granted to a certain stout knight Thurnoth, and
to his two comerades Waldef, and Thurman, the Manner of Flamsted, on condition
that the said knight Thurnoth, with his comerades forenamed, and their heirs,
should preserve the west parts, abounding most with thievs, as well from
noisome beasts, as thieves, and answer such loss as by their neglect should
happen, and if common war should happen, with all their diligence, and power
defend the Church of St. Albans, which they, says he and their heirs
faithfully performed, till king William conquered England; then that Manor was
taken from them because they would not endure the Norman yoke, but a certain
Noble man, Roger of Thony to whom that Manor fell, stoutly performed that
service Vit. Ab. 46
. In Doomesday is said, That the Church of holy Mary of Worcester, has the
hundred called Oswalds hawe in which lie 300 hides, of which the Bishop of that
Church from the constitution of ancient times has redditiones socharum, and
regis servitium and suum; Which is made Socage rents, and knight service, 3.
Rep. Praef. In an old Charter of the age of Doomesday book are these words, To
Edwin, and all the Teigues and Drenges, and to all the men of St. Cuthbert of
Goldinghamshire greeting, the same as Sir Hen. Spelman with Barons, knights,
and Freeholders. In Domesd. tit. Cestresc. -- Of this Manor another Land
fifteen men, whom they called Drenches for fifteen Manors held, and tit. eod.
in Villa Wallingtone. To that Manor belonged thirty four Drenches, and so many
Maenors they had. It is clear (so the Glossary) that these Drenches were a
kind of vassals, but not ignoble, who held by knight service, one of which
Drenches he conceives Edwin in Norfolk (whose posterity was after called
Shireburn) to have been; who proving before William the first, that he sided
not against him, and that being found true, he and all those in his condition
Weentun Monum, hi^ example ^n C^^ington of Sir Rob. Cotton.
, like to lose all, were confirmed in their Lands and Lordships, to have and
hold (those are the words of the confirmation) as wholly and peaceably as ever
they did before the conquest. By the Records of Term. Trin. 21 E. 3. Commit.
Ebor and Com. Northumb. Rot. 191. This Drench is described thus: That the
foresaid Vghtred, held the said lands, viz. In Northumberland, of our Lord the
king, and of his progenitors kings of England, by the service of a Drench:
which service in the parts foresaid is such, that of whomsoever he holds any
thing there, by such service it is held, and if the Tenant dye; his heir being
within age, the Wardship of the heir, and land belongs to the Lord of which,
etc D. Spelm. gloss verb^ Dronches.
, with the marriage. Whether wardship and marriage (as the Lord Cook 4. Inst.
193.
no badges of servitude) be of the same antiquity with king Aelfred, I will not
take upon me to determine, the Lord Cook, as also the Mirror in the place
cited by him are for the affirmative Inst. 1. p. 76.4. Inst. 292. mire. sect.
3. graft 911. etc.
. By a law if any man dye intestate, the Lord is to have nothing but what is
due by the name of Hereo^ Ll. Cnu^^ c. 68.
, by Mr. Lambard this is acknowledged Engish-Saxon, and thought to be the same
with relief: one place says -- Relief, or rather Herent Not. in radwes. 152
, and Hereot or relief 154. 161 id.
, and compares the Hereota to the (...) Hereor is a service and acknowledgement
of the seigniory of another, a tribute (so Dr. Cowel) given to the Lord amongst
the Saxons, for his better preparation toward the war. In the Monastical
institutions of king Edgar, Hereot is called geunlic gaeandul a customary Cens,
or duty said to be given to the kings by the great men of this Country after
gethtenege their death. It is forbidden by this king to be given for all
Abbots, and Abbesses In not. ad eadm.
(before as it seems not so free) as here the words: By the great men after
their death; make it quite another thing (though it is called so) from relief,
which is for the heir, and never paid but where there is one Gloss. verbo
Hereot.
. The Hereot was to be reasonable (and here again we shall see the ranks of the
Saxon noblesse.) The Earls eight horses, four sadled, four not, four Helmets,
four coats of maile, and eight spears, as many shields, four swords, and two
hundred Saxon ^,
Marks of Gold. The greater Thanes, the kings Thanes, four horses, two sadled,
two not, two swords, four spears, as many shields, an helmet, a coat of maile,
and fifty marks of Gold. The Medmere or under Thane, one horse ready, his
weapon, or as amongst the West Saxons, his neck ransom, amongst the Mercians
two pounds, amongst the Eas^-Angels two pounds. The Kings Thanes Hereot amongst
the Danes who has free jurisdiction the his socne haeb^e four pound, and if he
be further known to the King, two Horses, one sadled the other not, one Sword,
two Spears, two Shields, and fifty marks of gold: The conclusion has not
Infimae conditionis Thani as the Latin is -- But he that has less and less,
may be he two pound, Ll Conti. c 69.
other Lords had their Hereot too. The Laws of Kings William, which as the
title, were the same which King Edward observed -- calls this which in these
Laws is Hereot, relief, and the Earl, Kings, Thegne, and Underthane who are
here charged as is said, there are called and named Cnute, Barun, and Vavasour,
and charged much in the same manner ^. 22, 23, 24, v. c. 20.
with little difference. King Edwards Latin Laws where any man falls in war
before his Lord by Land or else where forgives his relief, c. 3^.
and gives his Heirs, his Lands, and Money without diminution. ibid.
I will observe a little out of those old grants and Charters which preceed the
Normans, by which the religious heretofore made their titles, only careful to
get, and to be free, where we shall find other men were not so. The
confirmation of Pope Agatho, of the new raised Monastery of Medeshamstede after
Peterborough, before the age of Charters, An. 680. Council. Sax. 164.
recites the immunities. It was to be in no theudom in no kind of servitude,
neither to King, Bishop, nor Earl; No man was to have any rent or tribute
there; in the Council of Becanceld King Withered freed the Church, from all
difficulties of saecular servitude, from feeding the King, Princes, Aldermen,
Earls from all works, the greater and lesser grievances, etc. Council
Becanceld. Au. 694. Council. Sax. 190.
Witlafe King of the Mercians, in the year 833. confirms to the Monastery of
Crowland their Lands and Tenements thus; I grant, deliver, and confirm, those
Lands and Tenements, etc. for a peaceable and perpetual possession, to have
from me and my Heirs, whosoever Kings of the Mercians after me to succeed in
puram Eleemosynam, in perpetual and pure frankalmoigne, Libere, quiet et
solute, or (as we now use it) quit, and discharged from all saecular charges,
exactions, and tributes whatsoever, by what name soever; Ingulp. hist. Council.
Sax. 328.
as another place amongst many things done and said, Ceolnoth the Archbishop
before the whole Council (of Kingston) showed, That the aforesaid Kings
Egbert, and Aethelwulfe his Son, gave to Christ-Church (at Canterbury) the
Manor called Mallings in South-saxon, free from all secular service and
tribute royal, except these three, expedition military, fird, or firdfare (upon
the Herebanne, the proclamation or edict military) and to repair Bridges and
Castles, Brugbote, and Burgbote, Council. 340.
by some not to be released Charta E^dbaldi. M^lmsb. de gest. reg. l. 1. I^ae
reg. Glelienb. Concit. 228.
which was not true. The most learned Mr. Seldom -- says -- in England before
the Normans were military fiefes, the Earls and Thanes were bound to a kind of
Knight service, all the Lands of the Kingdom (except some privileged, etc.)
held of the Crown mediatly or immediately; but says he, the expedition
mulitary, etc. those three were not so much by reason of tenure, as general
subjection to occasions of the state; Tit. Hon. 1 Edit. 321.
likely so, yet to recite the opinions of others, there are that think this
firdfare to be the same with our escuage, the Charter of Kenulph, An. 821.
the Mercian King to Abingdon, discharges all services but the expedition of
twelve men with their shields, cum scutis, burgbote, etc. as the most knowing
Knight. In the ancient Charters and Leases often profectio militaris and
expeditio are the same which amongst the Saxons is called here fare, amongst
the Germans Hereban, with us and the French escuage at least that which is
certain. Glos. verbo Heribannm.
The Charter of Bertulph King of the Mercians, Anno 851. to the Monastery of
Crowland grants, All those abovesaid Churches, Chappells, Lands, Tenements,
Pastures, Fishings, Manors, Mansions, Milles, Marshes, free and discharged
from all secular service and earthly charge, etc. and I free from all duty of
the King, and of every other Lord and man, of what dignity, excellency, and
honor soever. Council. 346. Jngulph. Hist. 861.
King Athelwulf the West Saxon and Monarch, in his grant of the tenth Mansion,
and of the tenth of all goods to the Church, differs little from these. He
will have that tenth part to be free (as the several Copies have it, and as we
find it hitherto to have been) from all socular servitudes, and from all royal
tributes, the greater and the lesser, or from the taxes (as in Ingulphus) which
we call winterden, as Malmesbury Witerden, as Math: of Westminster Witeredden,
who agrees with the others in this part, only he has secular services for
servitude; all of them make the Charter conclude (contrary to the Charter of
Eadbald before) and let it be free, etc. to serve God only, without
expedition, repair of Bridges and Castles, which by the old law (or old policy
rather) of the English Saxons, it is said the Kings could not discharge. This
is therefore called the writing of the Liberty of the Churches of England. This
Charter worthy of everlasting memory, was granted in a General Council at
Winchester, such one as is called Pan Anglicum, where were present three Kings,
Athelwulf the Monarch, the West Saxon, Beared the Mercian, after driven out by
the Danes, and Edmund the Eastangle, the Martyr, slain by those Danes. Hence
the most worthy Knight thinks the rectory and the glebe to have had their
beginning, though fair additions from the munificence of pious patrons have
been made to it since. council. 349. 352.
In optona grena (Vpton grene) as Ingulphus -- St Gutlac (the tutelar special
Saint of Crowland,) had and bath Woods and Marshes, etc. in the time of King
Edward, free and quit from all services, Hist. 909
and from the time of King Etheldred was the Seat of our Abbey (says he) quit
and discharged from all secular services, and our Abbey was quit and free from
all secular services in the time of that King, who was the lawful Successor
of the royal blood of the English, and father of the most pious King Edward.
p. 911. s. 30 40.50.
And again, a great part of the Marshes and Meadows of the Seat of our
Monastery (says he) I demised for a certain yearly rent, and other services
to be done. 912.
The Folcland (of the basest tenure) amongst the Saxons as M. Lombard, which
passed without writing, was that which now we call Copyhold at the will of the
Lord, Glos. terra exscripta.
whose condition, as also that of those who held by socage, was far more
servile before the Norman entrance then in some times since, before the
services of all these consisted in fcasance, in doing, after in render by
payment, etc. as the most reverend Judge Littleton of those who hold by socage.
Afterward these services were changed into money by consent of the Tenants, and
desire of the Lord, viz. into an annual rent, etc. yet the name, etc.
remains, and in diverse places the Tenants yet do such services with their
Ploughes to their Lords. L. 2 s. 119.
Bracton calls the Copyholder villein sockman (or sockman of base tenure) L.
2. c. 8.
others tenant in villeinage, servitude indeed, or villeinage since Richard the
seconds time is by degrees rather worn out, then abolished by any law, nothing
now is left but the name, the last man which I have known claimed for a
villein being Crouch of Sommerset-shire in Queen Elizabeth's time. Die. 266. 283.
This too is Saxon English, and preceded the Normans, but was never favored by
the Law. Die. 267. lit. s. 193. Forost. c. 42.
The Saxon laws call the villain theo mon or man theo and theoe indifferently,
a servant man, or servant, not that freemen were not servants too as since they
are, both which are visible in that Law of King Ina: If a Servant man work on
Sunday by his Lords command, be he free, and the Lord shall pay thirty
shillings for a penalty, if he work without his Lords knowledge, he shall lose
his hide, (be whipped) or his hide gild, the price of it, but if a Freeman
work that day without his Lords command, he shall lose his freedom, or sixty
shillings. Ll. Ina c. 3.23.46.73.50. Ll. Aelfr. c. 5.
In that extract of the Lands of the Monastery of Crowland, taken out of the
Doomsday Book by Ingulphus the Abbot, we find in Langtoft, S. Guthlac bas,
etc. viz. five Carues, eight Villains, Barders. sup. 81.
four Board. and twenty having soc socham habentes, 5 Carucatas, it should be,
twenty socm. habentes, 5 Carucatas -- and in Bston, etc. There in Dominio one
Carue, five villains, two Board. and seven soem. with two Carues in Soudnave
slound -- two servants, six villains, three Board. with one Sochman, having
three Carues, etc. with much more of the same. Ingulthus Savil. 908.
In the year 1051. Thorold of Buckenbale Sheriff of Lincolnshire, likely of
the the blood, a descendent of the former Thorold, who had Lands in Buckenhale,
grants the Manor of Spalding to Wulgate Abbot of Crowland in these words, I
have given, etc. to God and St. Guthlac of Crowland, etc. all my Manor situate
near the Parochial Church of the same Town, with all the lands, and tenements,
rents, and services, etc. which I had in the same Manor, etc. with all the
appendants. viz. Colgrin my Reeve, and his whole scquele, with all the goods
and chattels which he has in the same town, fields, and marches, etc. also
Harding the Smith, and his whole sequel with all the goods and chattels which
he has in the same town, etc. also Leftan the carpenter, and his whole sequel
with all the goods and chattels, etc. also Ringulph the Ringulphum primum.
first and his whole sequel, with the goods, and chattels, etc also Elstan the
Fisher, and his whole sequel with the goods and chattels, etc. Also Gunter
Liniet, etc. Outy Grimkelson etc. Turstan Dubbe, etc. Algar the black etc.
Edric the son of Siward, etc. Osmund the miller, etc. Besy Tuke, etc. Elmer of
Pincebeck, etc. also Gouse Gamelson, etc. With the same clauses to them, as
before. The conclusion is; these my servants (servos) and their goods, and
chattels, with all my Cottages, etc. together with my Piscaries as well in the
marches adj^cent as in the sea coming up to the same Town, etc Ingulph. 913,
914.
. Plain denotations of the Villein regardant, this was done in the tenth year
of Edward the Confessor, fifteen years before the Conquest; and unlikely those
rents, services and the villeinage of these men should begin the day before the
grant. This Ingulphus himself makes plain. It is (says he) to be declared,
that in the seat of Crowland villeins, borders, nor Sochmans are not received,
unless out of fear of war over our heads p. 911.
. I should think this Sochman very base, neither of much esteem nor freedom
where he is so ranked, and keeps such company as in these places. Nor here was
our law more inhumane then those of all other Christian Nations. The Civil law
suffered this slavery, till Justinian by a general Edict restored al men to
their freedom, it was frequent in Germany till the reign of Lodowick the
second. The villains there were affranchised, with reservation of day works,
and Escheates which hold yet in the low Countries and in France, etc. says
Bodin Republ. luire. 1.
In Poland the Villein is yet in being, he is called there Kmetos and may be
killed by his Lord. Lewis Hutin freed many of these from their servile
condition in France. Humbert those of Dauphine, Thibalt of Blois those of his
Country. Charles the seventh of France, others. Henry the second the
Bourbonnois, Emanuel Philibert of Savoie did the same in his Countries; The
Lord of la Roche Blanch in Guascgogne An. 1558.
(in Boains time) pretended not only a right of succession to the goods of his
Subjects (so the Peasant or Vassal under the jurisdiction of any Lord is
called) called by the French main-morte, but also that they were bound to plant
his Vines, till his Fields, mow his Meadows, reap and thresh his Corn, build
his House, to pay his ransom, and the taille in the four cases anantiently
accustomed ( viz. for Knighting the Kings eldest Son, marriage of his
Daughters, voyage over Sea, and Captivity) and, if they stragled out of his
Lands without his leave to bring them backlike Beasts with halters about their
necks, which last part was cut off by arrest of the Parliament of Toulouse. By
all this it is manifest in these things there is nothing singular, nothing
without example, the greatest could be given; and let the Normans and their
entrance be as injust as is imaginable, never to be forgiven, such as no
satisfaction can expiate. These are no crimes of that Conquest, and ought not
to be involved in the name.

CHAP. III.
Of the Courts of Justice, of Suites, of Counselors, of the Judges, of Writs,
Pleadings, the Terms of Art, Hotomans censure of Littleton, the common Laws
may easily be digested into method, their principles and excellency in several
respects, mercy, etc. confirmed by Parliaments and testimony of others not of
the profession, the professors honorable.

NO Nation can compare with us in the Justice and Majesty of our Courts, Courts.
where (so general is their extent, and power to redress wrongs) every man
let the injury be what it could, and done by whatsoever great injust man, might
be righted; nor are there any Supernumeraries amongst them, Courts of no use
but to vex and entangle. The first judges -- posito modo praetor aratro -- are
said to give Laws to administer Justice to the people while the Plough rested,
but upon the same reasons which make Laws at first (as is said) plain and
simple, multiply, Courts must needs grow more numerous. In the Saxons times
besides the lesser Courts before discoursed of, to relieve men at their own
doors. There was but one high Court of Justice ever moving with the Prince,
which judged (as Mr Lambard out of those Laws of appeals, forbidden where
Justice might be had at home) not only according to Right and Law, Sup. 59.
but also after equity and good conscience; the words of the Laws are, unless
he cannot find right at home, or right be too heavy, Ll. Edg. c. Ll. cnum. 16.
in this Order faies the same Mr. Lambard, and in these two sorts of Courts was
all Justice administered till William the Conqueror, Arch. 20.
and after him this Court continued under the chief Justice of England
ordinarily; which great Officer the first man next the King alone had the power
of the Chief Justice of the Pleas of the Crown, of the Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas till the nineth of King Henry the third, according to that of
Magna Charta, the Common Pleas shall no longer follow the Kings Court, though
this Charter was before granted by King John, in the 17. of his reign, it
should seem by the charge against that much wronged gallant man Hubert de
Burgo, chief Justice in King John's time, and in the time of Henry the third,
after the death of William Earl of Pembroke chief Justice, 4 H. 3.
that this huge office was not shrunk, that the chief Justice was then whole
and entire, Ma. Pa. addi^. 149.
besides the pleas of the Crown, and common pleas, he had the power of the
chief Baron of the Exchequer, and of the master of the wards, Addit. ubi sup.
and sometimes commands armies, Ma. Pa. 193.
an employment too much for one man, and business too much for one Court. Upon
which reasons distribution of the jurisdiction was necessary, which flowing
after from one Fountain by many streams into several Courts, is no small ease
to the people, and this additional alteration is the greatest improvement
imaginable. Hence are derived the Benches, the Chancery, and Exchequer, of the
excellency of which, and other high Courss, pipes communicating justice with
more speed and facility over England, I will say something, but briefly; my aim
being to make a trial whether those who are not to be moved else by any other
way, will trust and yield to their own eyes, before which I would lay things as
plainly, and as openly as I can, and show them, that if justice only be
desired (the pursuit of which lawfully and civilly is fair and honest) here it
is to be had, it can never be deficient, if the execution of things be
answerable to their institution. Here it is commanded, That justice be
administered as well to the poor, as to the rich, without any respect to be had
of persons. West. 1. c. 1.
Here (is said) It is provided, agreed, and granted, that all men, as well high
as low, shall have and receive justice. Stat. Marlb. c. 1.
The times had been unruly before, and many of the great men (says the
Statute) would not submit to the justice of these Courts, they would be judges
in their own cases, distrain men grievously, and take such revenges as they
thought fit. Stat. Marlb. ibid.
Here, as another Statute, The Justices are to do even law, and execution of
right. 20 E. 3. c. 1.
The supreme of these Benches after this alteration, dealt in pleas criminal,
called placita Coronae in the books 4 Inst. 71 Stamp. Pleas of the crown.
examined, and corrected errors, misdemeanors, and offenses against the peace,
granted the Habeas corpus, and upon return of the cause relieved prisoners,
held pleas by Bill, for debt detinue, covenant, promise, of all personal
actions of ejectione firmae, and the like against any in the custody of the
Marshall, or any Officer of the Court, who may implead others in those actions,
of all trespasses with force and arms, of Repleviu^ Quare im^^dit, etc. of
Assise of Novel disseisin. These Justices are the sovereign Justices of Oyer
and Terminer, of Jail delivery, and conservators of the peace, etc 4 Inst. c.
7.
. This Bench may grant prohibitions to all other Courts, to keep them in their
bounds. The Chancery (as before) supplies the wants, and relieves against the
rigor of the Law, in its extraordinary ju^isdiction; The Ordinary held pleas
of s^ire facias to repeal the Kings Letters patents, of Petitions, monstrance
of right, Traverses of offices, of partitions there, of scire fac. upon
recognizances there, Writs of Audita querela, and scire fac' in the nature of
it, to avoid executions there endowment might be there, by the Writ de dote
assignands upon offices found, execution upon the Statute staple, or
recognisance in nature of it, upon the 23 of Hen. the 8. Personal actions might
be brought there by or against an Officer, or minister of the Court, it is the
officina justitiae, hence all Writs issue, it grants the Habeas Corpus out of
Term Ibid. c. 8.
. In the Court of Common pleas, or commune bench all real actions are
determined, and all common pleas mixed, and personal. Besides the Stationary
Courts at Westminster, there were the Justices in Air, the sitinerant
Justices. Charles the bald in the year 853. divided France into twelve parts,
and over every of the parts placed men famous for Religion and Law, who yearly
traveling their own Divisions, took cognizance of wrongs done betwixt party
and party, and of the public offenses according to justice. By which pattern
King Hen. the 2. of England in the year 1176. divided this Kingdom into six
parts, over every of which he appointed three Justices yearly to go their
Circuits Hoved. 548. M. Westminster. l. 2.39.
, though I know not why this institution is made more ancient by others. These
were followed by the Justices of Assize since in being, by whom they are
swallowed up, their circuits are twice the year, and at certain times, having
the power of Jail-deliver added, with the authority of the Justices of Nisi
prius annexed; also the inquiry and determinations of many things else given by
latter Statutes, and by another Commission of Oyer and terminer the power to
deal with Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and all misdemeanors whatsoever, they
have one other Commission of the peace in the Counties of their circuits, by
virtue of all which together they sit. More perhaps cannot be devised for the
ease of the people. Thus is justice brought to their own doors, the same thing
with a fixed standing Court, and as it may chance more safe. The less the
Judge is known in the Country, the less is the danger of siding or biassing.
I speak not this as if I had more fears then other men, or were for any of the
new jealousies, these are the fears of several of our Parliaments. There is
aprohibition in two Statutes, That no man of the Law shall be from henceforth
Justice of Assizes, or of the common deliverance of Gaoles in his own Country
8 R. 2. c. 2. 13 H. 4. c. 2.
: and a third Statute of confirmation is more full, it says, That whereas it
is enacted, that no man learned in the Laws of this Realm should etc. be
Justice of Assise in the Country where he dwells, since diverse men learned in
the Laws, etc. have by their means and policy, and for their own commodity
etc. obtained to be Justices of Assizes, in the Countries, and Counties where
they were born, or were inhabiting, whereby some jealousies of their affection,
and favor to their kinsmen, alliance, and friends, etc. has been conceived
and had etc. enacted etc. that no Justice etc. use nor exercise etc. as before
33 H. 8. c. 24.
. Upon such like reason is there another Statute enacting to this purpose, that
no Lord or other in the Country, sit upon the Bench with the Justices of
Assise 10 R. 2.
. And as nothing humane (I might say divine too) fathered, somewhere, as high,
as upon Lycurgus his Apollo, or the whispers of a Numa and his Eugeria, where
Gods might be fancied to descend for the production, and caelestiall wisdom to
flow into it, never so excellently contrived, can please all men; so perhaps
whatsoever production shall or can be, it may have, if not its mischiefs and
inconveniences, yet some failings incident to the imperfections of man in it
self, and by corruptions from without, their grace and flourish may be but
short, nothing is so uncertain in the taking as new Laws, much must be
ventured, much committed to fortune, and if according to the Saxon form (which
is shown is not yet extinguishd, and what is lost in jurisdiction, or rather in
use in the lower Courts is supplied, as is shown too, by a way if not better,
yet equal to it) standing Courts were every where, and what is more daily open,
at the Countreymans door; This would not perhaps so much ease the honest just
man, ever upon the defensive, who ever sues but for his peace, and the quiet
preservation of his own right, as it would multiply vexatious prosecutions,
some, the greater number, and the worst men, composed of malice and contention
would be encouraged by it to molest others, the trouble and expense being so
little, and the way to imbroyle so ready and near, there would be nothing but
complaints, the Law, and its remedies would quickly he abused, they would be as
great a plague as some men who only say so, would have them imagined to be;
actions would fly thick, and swarm so fast, one year would bring forth Volumes
more swelling then all the Annals now read; and if every man might be the
patron of his own Cause, (often his in justice) nothing would be wanting to
make the confusion periect, all decency and respect would be forgotten, for
which nothing would be had but prodigious noise, and rude tumults, Farther,
those who now are kept off by the conscientiousnesse of the knowing Lawyer, who
has made a discovery into the injustice of the cause, and oftentimes restreines
the heady client to run on, would presently be at the shock, fall into the
danger of a trial, which (being blinded with their own fury, their malice only
intent to hurt the adversary) they see not before how great it is, and however
are too weak of themselves, were the right of their side, and most plain, to
manage it to the best advantage. It may seem strange too, why the ordinary
course of our Circuits should not now be sufficient, why we should need quicker
returns of this sun of Justice, unless we think our selves the worst of all
men, and our age the most corrupt, every day falling further from the piety of
our forefathers, and more prone to oppress and devour one another: were there
a recession from the known Law, after a few of the first judgments) not to go
on far) it may be feared, there would be no small discord and contrarieties in
the determinations, where the Courts should be so numerous not derived from one
fountain, nor judging by one rule, that would be Law and right in one County,
which would be wrong in another, and which is the greatest curse in the Law,
that which should be most certain, would be without any certainty at all. To
proceed, instead of Conservators of the peace at the common Law now antiquated,
there are Justices of peace (of larger power then the Irenarchae of old)
appointed to take care not so much of the public discipline, and correction
of manners; as for the peace and security of the highwaies Cod. Thead. in rub.
de Irenarch. l. 1.
. Their name shows why they were instituted: They are in their sessions
quarterly to hear, and determine all Felonies, breaches of the peace,
contempts, and trespasses. They are to suppress riots, and tumults, to restore
possessions forceably taken away, to examine felons apprehended, and brought
before them. To provide according to the Statutes for impotent people, and
maimed soldiers, to punish rogues, beggars, forestallers, and ingrossers, etc.
to commit or bind over offenders to the Sessions, or Jail; to take
recognizances for the peace, etc. such a form says the Lord Coke of
subordinate government for tranquillity, and quiet etc. as no part of the
Christian world has the like, if the same be duly executed. 4 Inst. 170.
suites.
There are other Coures for administration of justice, of narrower
jurisdiction, and confined in smaller limits (of some of which I have spoken
before) yet able to put an end so small differences, and ordinary trespasses,
not to be prevented sometimes amongst neighbors, if men would be so contented.
Who commonly themselves make the Courts below thin, and are the causes of the
troubles they seem to detest; let the quarrel be as trivial as is imaginable,
for an Asses shadow, yet as in some Countries the custom is to threaten they
will have a London process for him, the poorest clownes will trudge to London on
foot from the farthest parts of the North, or West, more miserably then
Carriers horses, and undo themselves (which is no hard matter) with one
journey, rather then not discharge their full spite; who if they return not
back as merrily as they set out, they may thank themselves. But because delay
is charged up on the Courts, not only as an heinous crime, but such as must by
all means be born with them, inseparably inherent to them; something I will
speak of that: I will make it evident that delay is more odious to the Law, then
to those who complain of it, and that it bred from nothing else but the
corruption without. We find in the Saxon laws not only one which fines the
Shieriffe (for doubtless of him is the word gtrtfan there meant V. Ll. edu.
sen. c. 5.11.
) who sentences not according to right, after the testimony of witnesses ibid.
Ll. c 5.
, but also another; commanding the Shieriffe to keep his Court, to have his
Assembly (which now we call the County Court) as the words, and institution of
King Edward the elder, every month; And that every man may have justice, and
every plea an end at the day when it comes: whosoever omitteth this (still as the
Law) he shall make amends, etc. ibid. c. 11
like that of the twelve Tables, SOL OCCASVS SVPREMA TEMPESTAS ESTO. We need
not wonder that suits could be so prepared, or rather that so little could be
in them, that they could be dispatched in a day, if the plainness of the age
before noted be considered, when the folcland the possession of the rural man
passed without writing, and the bocland (not to be aliened if there were such a
condition in the writing Ll. Aelfr. c. 37.
) in a few words. No man might change any thing but in the presence of the
gtrtfan or Baily, or of the Mass. Prie^t, or of the Hordre, or of the Lord or
the soil, etc Ll. Aethelst. c. 10.
. and no man might buy beyond twenty pence, but within a Town, before the
Portgreve, other tenth man, or with the Shieriffes witness in the Folcmote
ibid. c. 12
. To look downward Magna Charta has it: We sell no man, nor deny, or delay no
man justice and right c. 29.
. It is a maxim in Law, Lex semper dilationes exhorret. The Law always as
(Markam) eschewes delays 22 H 6.40. a.v. w. 1. c. 40, 44, 45. w. 2. c. 25.
sta. Glou. c. 2.
. The Barons of the Exchequer are commanded to do right to all men without
delaie 20 E. 3. c. 2.28 E. 1. c. 10.
, they are sworn to it 4 Jnst. 109.
. The common Law requires often that full and speedy justice (according to the
words of those w^its) be done to the parties Na. Br. 23.182. 4 Just. 67.
, all writs of Praecipe quod reddat, are, That justly, and without delay, he
render etc. all Judicial Writs are without delay etc. When any Court makes
delays, and will not give judgment, the Writ de procedendo ad judicium lies.
The words of which are, Because the rendering of judgment of the plea which is
before you etc. has taken long delays etc. We command you that you proceed to
give judgment thereupon with that speed which is according to Law and Custom.
When execution is denied, the Writ of execution of judgment lies: by which the
Justices are commanded to canse execution to be done without delay of the
judgment lately given Na. Br. 20. v. 2. J^s. 270, 271.
. There was a Court raised by Statute for redress of delays in the great
Courts, where yet the delays are not imputed to any foul play of the Ministers
of justice. The words are, Because diverse mischiefs have happened of that
that etc. the judgments have been delayed, sometimes by difficulty, sometimes
by diverse opinion of the Judges, and sometimes for some other cause, it is
assented etc. a Prelate, two Earls, and two Barons henceforth at every
Parliament shall be chosen, which shall have Commission, and power of the King
to bear etc. the complaints of those that will complain to them of such
delays etc. and to cause the same Justices to come before them etc to hear the
cause and reasons of such delays, which cause and reasons so heard by good
advise of themselves, the Chancellor, Treasu^er, the Justices of the one Bench
and other etc. shall proceed, and make a good judgment etc. if the difficulty
were so great to require it, they were to bring the tenor to the next
Parliament, Where a final according (as this Statute) was to be taken,
according to which the Judges were commanded to proceed to give judgment
without delay 14 E. 3. c. 5.
. Causes have used to be adjourned out the Courts, and to be determined by an
assembly of all the Judges, called since the Exchequer chamber, as in
Chudleighs case V. 1.
, warranted says the Lord Coke, by the common Law, and ancient presidents
before this Statute. The frequent use of which (so he) has been the cause why
the Court founded upon that Statute of Edw. the 3. has been rarely put in ure
4 Just. 68.
. There is a Court erected by Parliament for errors in the Kings Bench, as it
is called by the Statute 27 El. 8.3^ El. c. 1.
; and for those who love no errors, another Statute commands, That judgment
be given after the demurer is joined and entered, notwithstanding any defect in
process, or pleading, other then such as the party demurring shall particularly
express 27 El. c. 5
. If things were truly looked into, we should find delays, and other indirect
courses to proceed from the artifice, and unjust subtilties of suitors, of
those who prosecute bad causes to infest and wrong other men; and from the
cheating Mountebanks (a skum of litigious men of no rank nor quality, nor of
any study in the Law) who undertake them, Impostors more doted on then those of
the profession, famous for their integrity and industry, really and honestly
understanding. Impostors rather to be listed under the notion of Incendiaries
and common Baretors, then of any others, catching at any thing refused by the
honest learned practiser, venturing to soder the most broken title, by sleights
and false daubings, to the ruin at last of those who employ them, though not
without some mischief, and infinite vexation of the adversary, and the injust
Client having consumed himself much, is encouraged not to flinshe, for what
follows is blown up with fresh hopes, tampered with new shifts, and arts of
reviving, till he has given himself wholly up, till he is wilful, and at last
like a Gamster swearing over his last stake, he loves every tergiversation, and
struggles with all his power and cunning to avoid the disgrace, and loss of
being overthrown; when he must see while there is any justice left it cannot be
avoided: but when this blow hits him, though himself was the worker, and the
motion began and continued from his own hand, then he implores the faith of
God, and man. Hence is a never dying quarrel to the Laws, the justly deserved
calamity is imputed to nothing else. If deceits, and wrong may not be secure,
and happy, the Laws shall be cursed and blasphemed, like Tacitus his Gods,
rather careful of any thing else then to provide (as he profanely) for our
safety. But in these exceptions to the Laws the kindness would be wonderful,
if the professors should go free (as it might) we meet with an old censure
which at the first fight seems something, Councillors.
which includes the professors of all Laws alike, it is this, That the Lawyers
of the best quality and fame, one and another, all of them, seldom refuse any
man; and since their cannot be a right of both parties, oftentimes defend the
wrong, which in good conscience they ought not, nor cannot wish should
prevail. To this I reply, every right is not clearly seen; nor every wrong
suddenly known; 4 Reppreface.
of late some Statutes are long, and full of perplexities, ill penned; here are
late and new inventions in assurances, which the eye of the Law before never
beheld; Many unskillful Empericks are employed about wills, and Conveyances,
where if the words of their general president, or receipt (if they have any)
will fit the sense of the party who conveys, it is well, and lucky, otherwise
the patches of their own prove dangerous. And some ambiguities in clauses and
expressions may happen which cannot easily be tried by any law before, nor can
any Counselor very often assure himself, he may give his opinion
conjecturally, and probably, and that is all, accidents alone, the act of God
may make things litigious, which it is not in the power of the most wise to
prevent. The lawyer himself too may (not stranges a a man) make his mistakes,
something may slip from him imperfect, which may trouble others to judge.
Suarez speake^ excellently of this. -- For whereas (says he) such is humane
condition that a man can scarcely explicate his sense in so perspicuous words,
but that often ambiguities happen, especially in laws of men, which are briefly
and generally delivered, therefore in applying them to various cases in
particular, many time doubts arise, to take away which, the Legislator either
not in being, or at hand to declare his intent. The opinion of wise men, and
interpretation doctrinal is necessary, out of which necessity comes the skill
of the Civil Law, weighty, (because in every Art the judgment of the skillful
of that Art is of great moment) and inducing at least probability (that is all)
for if all were of one mind, they would make a moral certainty in these things
l. 6. deleg c. 1.
. The Statute raising the Court for delays beforementioned, makes it plain
there may be, not only difficulties, but diversities of opinions, in the
Judges too 14. E. 3. c. 5.
, there may be postnate cases, which could not be foreseen in the laws, where
all remedies could not be comprehended, nor are all things which follow in
confimili casu. The Statute of exemplifications begins, For the avoiding of all
such doubts, questeons, and ambiguities as have risen, and been moved, etc. in
and upon the 3 and 4 of Edward the 6. 15 E. v. 32 H. 8 c. 26.
The declarative Statutes are commonly made to take away doubts, and
incertainties before. Nor is this any wonder that the Councellor should guess
at the case, when in the extraordinaries, in things strange, and undiscovered,
the Judges themselves sometimes are divided. Of the case of the Shellies, and
the Uncle, the Nephew, in Queen Elizabeth her time, the Lord Cook reports
thus. After the said case was openly, and at large argued by the Council of
either party in the Queens Bench three days; the Queen hearing of it, (for such
was the rareness and difficulty, so he, of the case being of importance, that
it was generally known) and out of her gracious disposition to prevent long,
tedious and chargeabl suits betwixt parties so near of blood, which would be
the undoing of both of them, Gentlemen of a good and ancient family: commanded
the Lord Chancellor to assemble all the Justices of England before him, upon
conference to give their resolutions. Which they did, one Justice disagreeing.
Chudleight case in the same report is said to be so difficult, and of so great
consequence, it was thought necessary that all the Justices of England openly
in the Exchequer Chamber upon solemn Arguments should show their opinions in
it, where the chief Baron and Justice Walmesly are dissenters, as also Justice
Gaudy in part. Till the first of king James, there were but four Judges of
either Bench, and many times (as the same Lord Cook 4. Rep. P^af.
) in cases of great difficulty, the Judges being equally divided in opinion,
the matter depended long undecided, for prevention of which, this King added a
Judge to either Bench. Retractations may be allowed in law as well as in
divinity, a man may differ with himself, believe and apprehend truly and
ingenuously, and with Judgment this way or that way, and after when he shall
hear the reasons of others, and the same case debated solemnly by the most
grave most wise, and most reverend of the profession, not only startle and
doubt, but but believe and like the contrary of what he liked before, truly and
ingenuously still, without any blemish of dishonesty or falsenesse to be stuck
upon him for it: truth is said to be the adaequation of the speech with the
species, and if here any mi^take be, as there may, the falsenesse is in the
notions, not in the man who speaks, and think^ he speaks truth. I know no
reason, where there is no leading judgment to sway, why the professors of the
laws should certainly be supposed to know the right, and on which side it is,
as if infallibility were so ready, or likely to be, where (as the Mirror joins
them) There is no law nor usage, and where there are no presidents to direct.
Cases not being included in any words of law, may be compared with the reasons
of other cases, according to similitude fancied, and opinion so produced is but
an uncertain and weak knowledge thus, or thus, which yet may well be otherwise,
every man knows how far the Topic argumentation comes short of the necessary;
further as Sir John Davies, When is right, or wrong manifested upon the
comencement of a suit, before it is known what can be alleged, and proved by
either party. The Councellor, when he is first retained, hears only one part
of the matter, and that also from his Client, who ever puts his case with the
best advantage for himself, after pleading of the parties when they are at
issue, when they have examined witnesses in course of equity, or are descended
to a trial in course of law, after publication and hearing in the one cause,
and full evidence delivered in the other, then perhaps may the Council of
either side dicern the rigt from the wrong, and not before. But then are the
causes come to their catastrophe, and the Councillors act their last part
Praef. ded. f. 6, 7.
. Thus as there are diversities of opinions amongst the professors of the
laws; we see there are invincible reasons why sometimes there must be such
diversities, and I would gladly know where there is any general agreement of
minds. A great man of the Clergy, but no great lover of the laws, or lawyers,
notes one Judge very hastily determining against others, do not Councels often
do the same, the later quite thwarting those which went before, and what he
grants? are not Divines divided against Divines, not only in things of
Ceremony, but of Faith? If we look upon other Arts and Sciences, we might
think all things made from Heraclitus his principles, that strife was the
father, what dissonance of opinions, what knots never to be untyed, (says the
incomparable Petrarch upon the discourse of discord) are there amongst the
Philosophers? Who can number the varieties of their Sects? what conflicts
amongst Rhetoricians? what discords of all Arts? what clamours amongst the
Lawyers? (those of the Civil Imperial laws) how well they agree, the
immortality of causes proves. Sick men can witness what concord there is
amongst Physicians, what unlikenesse of minds is there about things sacred,
and Religion; where the differences are oftener tried in the field then in the
Schools Petr. de remed utr. fort. 429. l. 2.
. By no other law is it said, is unlawful maintenance, Champerty, or buying
Titles, so severely punished, as by ours. By what other law (asks the most
learned Knight) is the Plaintiff for false clamours or injust vexation, or the
Defendant for pleading a false Plea amerced, the amercements in Magna Charta
(of which hereafter) were instituted to deter men from injust suits, and defenses
2 Inst. 28
, the French impost of 100 sous upon the Process, is thought injust, yet says
the Republique, never was any so necessary in this Realm, where there are more
suits then in the rest of Europe; which have sprouted chiefly from the time of
Charles the sixth, when by Edict the ancient custom to condemn those in costs
who had lost the cause, was cassed Bod. Rep. 889.
By the Saxon laws he that denied another his right either in bocland, or
folcland before a Judge without any right forfeited to the king 30s: so the
next time, the third time the kings over hyrnysse, 120. s. for his contempt Ll.
Ina c. 8. Ll. Edu. sen. c. 2. Ll. Cnuti c. 7.
, such laws as these which might fright troublesome spirits, are of high
necessity; yet I think where men's own Consciences restrein them not, the
punishment of laws would not prevail with all men. Nor can we expect any
continual peace from vexatious suits, nor any security from delays and deceits
in them, till a Christian generous honesty diffuse it self every where, and
there be a general perfection of charity and love in every man which is not
easily to be hoped for. France may be famous for its sprightlinesse, Spain for
its gravity, Germany for the arts, what clime is renowned for any such honesty:
Unles the new Atlantis can be found again, and its Idea of a Commonwealth, the
Magic Region of the Moon thoroughly discovered, and it lie hid there. Or Euphorn
Barclaie may be believed of his Lusinia so unlike the whole world beside. Of
which that it breeds men worthy the genius of the place, and of their own
fortune, (for so he says) if it be the Country some think he means, he may be
credited, for the rest of the innocence, and piety of the people, it is more
then I can say of my own knowledge, and I would lead no man's Faith where things
are not plain and certain. Other causes of multiplicity of suits in these
latter ages are observed by the Lord Cook to be, first peace (noted before c.
2.
) In the reigns of the kings, Edward the 3. Richard the 2: Henry the 4, the 5,
and and 6. and Edward the 4. Peace was but like the short Sun shine of a winter
day, overcast as soon as seen; nay the reigns of some foregoing Princes, as of
King Stephen, John, and Henry the third were almost a continual civil war,
sometimes known under the notion of the Barons wars. Then as says the first
Statute of Westminster. in the Preface. The estate of the realm, and of the Church
was ill kept, the Religious of the Land many ways grieved; The people otherwise
entreated then they ought to be, the peace less kept, the laws less used, and
malefactors less punished then they ought West. 1.3. E. 1.
: Then the great men would not be justified, have and receive Justice in the
Courts of Justice Stat. Marl v. 1.
. Plenty, dissolution, and dispersion of Monasteries, etc. Informers,
concealers, multitudes of Atturnies, more then are limited by law are next made
causes by him 4 Inst. 76
. His reasons of decrease of suits follow, and are these. The Statutes of 35
Eliz 3. and 21 of king James, c. 2. Have given full remedies concerning
Monasteries, the 21 of that king, c. 4. concerning informations, the 4 of Hen
4. c. 18. has made provisions concerning Attorneys, they are to be examined by
the Justices, their names to be put into the Roll, the good, virtuous, and of
good name to be received, and sworn well and truly to serve in their offices,
and specially (still as the Statute) not to make suit in a foreign, Country,
The others to be put out, and if any be notoriously found in default of Record,
or otherwise, he is to forswear the Court, and never after to be received. The
Statute 21 of king James in the 3 chap. has provided against Monopolies, and
new projects, in the 8. against abuses in procuring of Supersedeas of the
peace, and good behavior; the 23 chap. against vexations delays by removing
Actions out of inferior Courts. The 16. chap. appoints a limitation of
Actions, gives them age and death, it allows in the common Action of Trespass,
Quare clausum fregit, where it is by negligence, or involuntary, to plead
tender of amends; the 13 chap. prevents and reforms Jeofailes, the 28 chapter
repeals many obsolete Statutes, the third of King Charles more. The Petition of
Right being a confirmation after other Statutes of the same kind, provides for
the rights, and liberties of all men; for the quiet of their estates, and
persons 3 Car.
, enough to satisfy those, who are not desperately resolved the more reason
they see given to take off their dislike, to dislike the more. But it may be
feared as it is more easy to hate then to show a cause, Non amo te volusi, --
worse then beastly wilfulness sometimes must be allowed: and the mean, and
contemptible malcontents are not more guilty of this immodesty, then many of
the better sort, and who indeed may be learned in their own Studies, or
Professions, and therefore will conceive themselves able to judge all others,
not considering how ridiculous it would be to hear an old Physician censure
the order of the Imperial, and Swedish battles: a m^er plain Captain, the
Aphorisms of Hyppocrates, a Grammarian or Pedant condemned to noise by rule,
the Mesolabes of Arebimedes. The most Reverend Judges of the Common Law, have
ever been the most careful of all men, where things were intermixed out of
their learning of the Laws. (though not out of their knowledge sometimes) to
call into the decision, the learned of those Arts, or Sciences to which they
belonged. That every man is to be believed in his own art is their maxim. We
pray in aid, says Justice Saunders; when any thing falls out in our Law
concerning other Sciences, and faculties. This is honorable (says he) and
commendable in our Law; by this (as he goes on) it appears we despise not (I
may say, how ever able, for some of this robe whom I could name many easily
match those who by their own favorers are thought to have gone furthest in
general learning) other sciences then our own, but allow and commend them, as
things worthy of commendations Plowd. com. 124. v. r. 7.19.
Upon this reason was Huls (a Bachelor of both the Laws) sent for by the
Judges in the time of King Hen. 6. to hear his Legick (as it is said) upon the
difference of precise and causative compulsion 7 H. 6.11
. Again, where an appeal was pretended, for which excommunication should not
disable, the Judges enquired of the learned in the Canon law concerning the
vigor of the appeal ^^ H. 6.25
. They use to enquire of Surgeons concerning maihem Com. 125. ^1 H. 7.33.
, as Gaws dries case. They ever give faith, and they ought to give faith to the
sentence of the Ecclesiastical Judges. (still there) This is the common
received opinion of our books r. 5. 1. p. 7
. and in another place, Though it be against the reason of the common law V.
4.29.
. Our predecessors (as the Justices, Brown and Stamford) in things touching
Grammar, have used to consult with Grammarians, and to pursue their rules
Plowd. com. 122, 127. and the books there.
: This love of our selves is the most dishonest of all others, an Empire in
sciences is not often heard of, some studies may employ a long age, those who
will be thought so sublime that they fill all places, beyond the Sun, and
Heavens way, sometimes may be observed to fly weakly, to flag, an Eridanus, or
perhaps the earth receives them. In Gellius; Favorinus a Philosopher, no
overweener I think, much esteemed, by this relator, high in name and opinion
out of this curiosity, quarrels with the Laws of the twelve Tables with no
great good luck, as he was met with, he shall be my example, how easy it is
for him who will be at all to miscarry somewhere. He had read over he says the
twelve Tables (which was something, his exceptions may seem the more
reasonable) as eagerly as Platoes ten books of Laws. One would think he was
pleased well enough with Platoes laws which he read so very eagerly, yet the
Athenians and Polybius justly reprove them for vain laws, which no Nation of
Greece could ever be persuaded to use Athen. l. 12. c. 22. Polyb. l. 6.
. The Laws of the Tables which dislike him were these: This de injuria
paenienda SI. INJVRIAM. FAXIT. ALTERI. VIGINTI. QVINQVE ARIS POENAE SVNTO which
at three farthings the assis (it was no more) he says was trivial, and would
deter no man from doing injuries. Some things in the Laws he supposes
inconsistent, as in that of the Talio, SI. MEMBRVM. RVPIT. NI. CVM. EO. PACIT.
TALIO. ESTO. The Talio, or like for like, was to be, unless he that did the
mischief satisfied him that suffered by him, and redeemed it. This Talio the
Philosopher thought was impossible to be just; the breaking by retaliation
might be too much or too little. That of dissection and partition of the
debtors body, being bankrupt, he charges as most cruel and horrible. The words
are AERIS. CONFESSI. REBVS. Q. JVRE. JVDICATIS. TRIGINTA. DIES. JVSTI. SVNTO.
POST. DEINDE. MANVS. INJECTIO, ESTO. IN. JVS. DVCTIO. NI. JVDICATVM. AVT. QVI.
ENDO. EO. IN JVRE. VINDICIT. SECVM. DVCITO. VINCTIO. AVT. NERVO. AVT.
COMPEDIBVS. QVINDECIM. PONDO. NE. MINORE. AVT. SI. VOLET. MAIORE. VIN ITO. SI
VOLET. SVO VIVITO NI SVO VIVIT QVIEM. VINCTVM. HABEBIT. LIBRAS. FARRIS. IN
DIES. DAT^. SI. VOLET. PLUS D ATO. TERTIIS. NVNDINIS. PARTIS. SECANTO. SI.
PLUS. MINVSVE SECVERVNT. SE. FRAVDE. ESTO. This which wills where there is
morbus, or aevitas, fickness or age, that the party appear before the Praetor
jumento vectus, which he abhors as a new face of a funeral. It says, SI. IN.
JVS VOCAT. SI. MORBVS. AEVITAS. VE. VITIVM. ESSET. QVI. IN. JVS. VOCABIT.
JVMEN. TVM. DATO. SI. NOLET. ARCERAM. NE. STERNITO. These are all his
exceptions, and for these (as it may seem) in his words, There are things in
the Laws most obscure: some hard, some gentle, and remiss. Sexius Caecilius
(as Gellius) famous for his knowledge and use in the discipline of the Laws of
the Romans, and for interpreting of them, answers for them, Thus. The
obscurities are not to be ascribed to the fault of the Writers, but to the
ignorance of those who cannot reach them, long age wears out both words, and
ancient manners, in which the sense of the laws are comprised, he tells him the
tables were composed three hundred years after the building of Rome, 700
years, or little less before their times, he defires the Philosopher, to give
over the endeavor of defending and opposing what he listed. To consider more
gravely what the things are he reprehends to leave a while the Acad my with its
disputations. He tells him that the sickness, named in the last Law (for there
he begins) was no grievous sickness, such as might make it inhumane to cite
any man. Morbus sonticus is the Law term to express that. That jumentum is not
a beast but a carriage here, and that without this carrying to the place by
law, the party summoned might make an everlasting essoine. He says, in the
first law of injuries only lighter injuries were meant, besides the AS,
anciently was a pound weight: for greater injuries the Talio was used; which he
grants could seldom and hardly be done according to the words and meaning of
the Law; but he says in that, The decemviri intended chiefly to restrain
violence by fear. Nor did they think so much consideration was to be had of
him, who had maimed or broke any member of another, and would not agree with
him to redeem the Talio, where he had his election, as to make it material
whether the hurt was wilfully done or not, or whether there were that exact
justice, and equality in the Talio, which is required by our Philosopher. And
how can it seem cruel (says he) That that should be done to thee which thou
have done to another. For the other of the creditor cut in pieces, he givs
these reasons. The Romans (so he) esteemed nothing so venerable, as the
Public and private faith, also in contracts as well as other duties, in the
use, and commerce of money lent. They thought this help of temporary want,
which the common life of all men stands in need of some time, would not be had,
if the perfidiousnesse of debtors might deceive without some grievous penalty,
which went by these steps: after judgment the debtour had 30 days allowed him
to procure the money, if he paid it not, he was delivered by the Praetor to the
Creditor etc. yet might he redeem himself within 60 days, after three of the
great markets he paid the score with his life, etc. The creditors (if more then
one) being permitted to cut the body into pieces, a punishment denounced with
the intent never to come to it, that no man should suffer it. Necessary for
terror sake, because wicked men contemn addiction and bonds; yet never as he
(in his knowledge) put in execution. Can any man imagine (says he) that we
should see so many as now we do, lie, in giving their testimony, if the
judgment in the twelve Tables were not antiquated; That the convict of this
crime should be thrown headlong from the Tarpeian rock. The sharpness of
avenging offenses is the discipline of living well and warily. These things
(says Gellius) did Sex^us Caecilius discourse, all that were present, and
Favorinus himself approving and praising him Gell. l. 20. c. 1.
. He that dotes not too much on his own great parts, that is not too much an
admirer of himself, will not think the law an easy study, that its height can
be taken at a distance, oftentimes in other learning we go about till we meet
a choice author; and one such as he may be, may serve the turn: It is not so
here, where many yearbooks, many book cases, and judgments (not extrajudiciall
opinions and conjectures of private men too frequent every where else) several
Statutes, with the common customs make but one body, and are all to be read
and known; whose bulk as it is not so ample, to weaken the firmness, or
soundness of the constitution, or make the symmetry of the parts less
admirable, yet cannot it be subject to the carelessness of the first fight, and
let the eye be never so steadfastly fixed, I know not who can judge the
Architecture of the Escurial by one piece, or perhaps upon the ascent of the
first staire. The most knowing, Sir Henry Spelman says of our law, that it is
perpetuis humeris sustinenda, it requires the whole man, revelation is of little
use here. Those who are really what they seem, and more, may say, as Aristotle
does of all men, The greatest part of the things we know is the least of those
we know not. But we are told of such as are not thought so only, but are
wonders of men, who have the world of knowledge within them, living, walking
libraries, men of strange parts. It is reported of Lodovico Pontano of Spalato,
that he could not only recite not only the titles of the laws, but also the
whole body, yet he dyed in the thirtieth year of his age. Of Suaerez that he
could cite any place of St. Augustine in the very words of that father. Of
Abulensis.

Hic stupor est mundi qui scibile discutit omne. Of the Earls of Mirandula, of
the Scaligers, we are told admirable things, of Joseph, that he could be asked
nothing which he was not able presently to give satisfaction in; besides the
tongues the Nubian too which he was most excellent in he had left (they say) no
Science, no Discipline untouched. Of others that they knew as much of the Civil
Law, as the great Civilians, yet could not be ehought to have leisure to salute
it a far off: who has not heard of the father of Venice?

If any such there now be (as well there may, nature we see by these examples
of the last times is no weaker then she has been) of so firm memories, of so
happy judgments, they are exceptions to my limitation, and are not to be
confined, if they be not too delicate to adventure, they may be ranked amongst
those who do not invade. Such men have reputation to lose, which they will not
hazard slightly, they will consider of things, and know well what it is they
censure. Whenever they appear, they cannot appear but as friends, there can
be no danger in them. Haste, and ignorance are only to be feared, if haste,
(as Livie of it) be improvident, and blind, what can ignorance be thought to
see. Every man ere he gives his censure of Laws, ought to read them over from
the beginning to the end, to look into them thoroughly according to that, In
civil est nisi tota lege perspecta, una aliqua particula proposita judicare,
etc Leg. in Civivile. st. de leg.
. upon one particle proposed, the whole is not to be judged. To the
understanding of laws, the words alone are not enough the intent of the
Legislator, the reason and end why they were given are to be enquired. By the
words of the Law is meant their propriety and signification, which will not
quickly nor without pains be known. The intent of the Legislator, is his
preceptive will, seldom found by the words, abstractedly, and nakedly, but by
the adjuncts, the matter, or circumstances. This is the intrinsecal form. The
reason of the law is only the end moving the Legislator to make it (not
composing substantially the law constitutive) to which the precept, and will of
the Legislator is to be accommodated. This if not expressed in the law, but
devised by the interpreters, is but a probable conjecture. Every
disadvantagious act of a drunken man by our law touching his lands or goods
binds him. Nay, and touching his life too, if he kill a man he is hanged for it
rep. 4.124 Plow. Com. 19.
. By Pittacus his law amongst the Greeks, allowed by Aristotle Polit. l. 2. c.
ult.
, if he had struck any man, he was to suffer double as much as if he had done
it sober. Some lawless good fellows would think all this very unreasonable,
in a law only intended to punish the wrong done according to the grievousnesse
of the offense. Since it is evident that mischiefs deliberately done (as they
may say perhaps) with advice, and malice, are naturally less pardonable, and
therefore worthy of more severe punishment. But as M. Plowdens report although
the drunken man kill out of ignorance it helps not. This ignorance was his own
act and folly, he might have resisted it, and shall not be privileged by it,
as the Court in that place of the Lord Cook. His drunkenness is a great
offense in it self, and extenuates not, but aggravates that which follows,
whatsoere colorable reasons may be given, this boldness is rather tolerable
in an Hotoman a stranger, then an English man. The law is the act of the whole
body politic, and ought to overruled every part of it, to bind every man,
the actual assent of every single man is not material, nor does the dissent of
a single man disoblige, we are tied by our forefathers, their public
submission to these laws (at their free liberty, and with their consent made
25. H. 8. c. 21.
) their acceptance of them long since, binds us, unless the revocation be, by
the same universal agreement, which I believe is not like to be had. As a most
reverend Lord chief Justice, strangers by living here, do tacitly submit
themselves to our laws, and forms of Law-making their grant and consent is
involved in the consent of Parliament chapter Just. Hubard. rep. 271.
. Much more of the naturals, and if all men's judgments (which may be as unlike
as full of diversity as their faces) must be satisfied with reasons of laws
long since established, or to be set up, it will be impossible any old law shoud
hand, or any new law take. Besides, all public authority (to which only the
power of lawgiving belongs) would lose its reverence. As the Mirror. No
creance, no belief is to be given to the vain voice of the people, The Judges.
they are to obey the laws, not to dispute them. We have have our (...) as well
as the Athenians, who are judges of the laws, of the reasonableness of them,
and who are to see them observed. King Edward the first, said by a most
reverend chief Justice long ago, to be the wisest king that ever was 5. E. 3.
c. 14.
, speaks thus in a Statute, where we may see what antiquity attributed to the
honorable Judges of the laws, The king wills that the Chancellor and the
Justices of his Bench shall follow him, so that be may have at all times near
him, some sages of the law which be able duly to order all such matters, as
shall come unto the Court at all times, etc 28. E. 1. c. 5.
. All the Justices of England, and Barons of the Exchequer, (as the Lord Cook)
are assistants to the Lords in Parliament 4 Inst. 56
. They were more then assistants to the Barons, their Writ was (for they had
their Writs too) Quod intersitis nobiscum, and cum caeteris de consilio nostro
super pramissis tractaturi vestrumque consilium impensuri. They were to treat
with the king and his Council, and to give Counsel. As Mr. Crompton, they were
to be demanded for the Law Jurisd. 2. Postnat. 22, 23.
; a Statute more ancient then the former begins -- All of the Council, as well
Justices as others, agreed that the constitutions underwritten, etc Vid. Stat.
de Bgam.
. And again, It is agreed by the same Justices, etc Ibid. i. 6.
. The Statute of Marlbridge says -- For default another day is to be assigned
according to discretion of the Judges c. 13. Mar^b.
, and discretion of the Justices, and the Common Law are joined 1 c. 26. ibid,
. The Statute of Westminster. 2. for damages in appeals has -- According to the
discretion of the Justices W. 2. c. 12
, in another place, Whereas the Justices in the plea of Mortdancester, have
used to admit the answer of the tenent c. xx.
, the Statute 27 of Fines, is according to discretion of the Justices 27. E. 1.
. All the Judges of England gave their Answer to the Articles of the Clergy 3.
Jacobi, which the Lord Cook calls Resolutions of the highest authority in law
2 last. 001.
, as upon the xx. chap. of Westminster. 2. by that he says it is confessed, That
admission, and allowance of the Justices ought to be holden for Law 2. Inst.
399.
. In the Parliament 19 of Edward the first, Sir Thomas of Weyland chief
Justice of the Common Pleas having abjured, etc. for murder. His wife and son
Petition the Parliament, for a Manor which the Lord of the Fee had seized as
Escheated, in which Sir Thomas had only an estate for life, jointly with his
wife, but the inheritance was in the son by fine. There were summoned says the
Record. as well the Justices of either Bench, as the rest of the realm, etc.
expert in the laws and customs, etc. The resolution speaks, Before the
Council, etc. there being called the Treasurer and Barons, and Justices of
either Bench, it is agreed, etc. The famous case of conveening Clerks before
the secular Magistrate, was debated in the time of a Parliament of Hen. the 8.
the Justices, etc. being present, and ruled according to the opinion of chief
Justice Fineux a most reverend Judge 7. H. 8. Kelle vay. 183.
. Reasonableness of time for tenant at Will, discharged, to carry away his
goods, of incortain fines of Copy holds, etc. is to be adjudged by the
discretion of the Judges Inst. 57.59.
. Distresses, are by the Statute of Marlbridge to be reasonable c. 4.
. No more is said. The Judges have ever yet determined that reasonableness as
they have ever (ordinarily) what is reasonable in other things, just and
injust, right, and wrong, what are evil customs, and what not, according to
the Laws, they have the use and customs of judgment, says a Statute De
Bigaem. c. 1.
. Good reason then that they be Judges of that use, and those customs, They
may claim this authority by a long prescription, it has been allowed them in
all Parliaments, and by all Parliaments hitherto V. 1 H 7. 3.4.20. 3 Just. 3.
. They in all the books do not only expound, interpret, and deliver the sense
of Statutes, but in Parliaments too, upon consideration of a Bill in the 43 and
44 of Queen Elizabeth, it was resolved (so we find a book speak) By the chief
Justices Popham and Anderson, and by diverse other Justices assistants to the
Lords of Parlia. meant in the upper House. That leases to the Queen etc. against
the provision of the 13 of El. are restrained by the same act 5. Rep. p. 2.14.
. The Lord de la Wares case concerning disability temporary and absolute was
(in a Parliament sitting) referred to a Committee, which at the Lord Burgley's
Chamber in White Hall heard what could be said by Council in the presence of
the two chief Justices, and of diverse other Justices, by whom it was resolved
Rep. 11.1.39 El.
. Here is an allowance of the latter, as well as former ages, whatsoever the
change may be: let us change till we shall not know our selves, if we retain
any face of Law, or Judicature, so it must be. I never heard (nor those who
have heard more) of such a Law yet which could be learned, practiced, and
understood, without study, and which all men, but those who had studied, and
understood it might be Judges of. The professed enemies of the Laws of England,
as such laws, have not been many, no not in very many ages, much stir there
was, much disquiet ere they were had, or rather restored. Never any tumults all
the Histories ore to undo what was settled. I do not remember any other Law,
named against it, but the Law of Wat Tylers mouth From this day says Tiler (in
London) all Law shall fall from Wat Tylers mouth.
, which we can make nothing of: we hear of Kets Oak of reformation, nothing of
his Laws. The Laws never were made the title of a rising: yet I believe under
such leaders little of the building would have stood whole. Those of the Roman
heresy are and have been inveteratly spightfull, have more then once attempted
to blow the Laws, and the Nation into the air together, according to that
divine determination of the Jesuiticall Oracle, that the innocent may be
destroyed with the wicked the Wheat plucked up with the tares Act. p. 93.
. They would have blown up all our Laws, though all of them are not accused,
not slandered by them, not in what I have seen of theirs, though likely they
shall all have their turns, not one of them not yet perhaps traduced by them, as
they are offended by it, if it keep their mischiefs from ripening, and be
executed against them (though much more ancient) then our quitting them, and
their heresies (and approved by their own Clergy here) but it shall be
reproached by them as one of our Statutes, Our Laws though necessary and
religious against them (being called by them) cruel Laws 3 Jac. c. 1.
. The Statutes of praemunire and provision etc. are abominable. Parsons the
Jesuit, that fury of sedition, charges the Law of Cawdries case highly, and
with the least dangerous Ponyards and daggers of his society wounds (as he
thought) the reverend reporter. Andrew Eudaemon, as others Cacodaemon Johannes
in love with the Straw miracle of the Gunpowder Martyr Garnet, condemns our
Laws and Courts, and the trial by twelve men, like Polydore Virgils Ghost, in
his words. He was of Crete, so he says, and if we believe him in that, we must
believe him in nothing else. The Jesuits were ever undermining, ever active,
full of plots and treasons, and their hatred cannot be imputed to any other
cause but this, for the ills they had done, they feared the bar; yet this
arrogance they might take from the house of pride, of which they were. The
Prince of which has ever (till we left him, where he had left the purity of the
first ages) encroached upon our Laws and government, praetending every where a
certain assistance of the holy Spirit, for which he is to be obeyed, a course I
would advise those to take, who inveigh next, and have nothing to say to the
purpose. The Pope (as the Venetians in the interdict tell the French Kings
Ambassador) attributes to himself authority to define, and determine even
against the opinion of all the world, what Laws are just and unjust, as Dr.
Marta. Besides the kiss of the blessed feet, he has the free faculty of making
and abregating Laws D' jurisd. c. 46.
. Whence this authority is derived, some are not assured, they refer it to
the spiritual authority with which the temporal is imagined to be indirectly
given. Others speak plainly, that he is a temporal Monarch over all the earth,
that he might receive appeals from Princes, give Laws to them, and annul those
made by them. That Ecclesiastics are to examine whether the Laws of Princes
be just, and whether the people be obliged to obey them; if we doubt this,
think it with the most; if we tell the flatterers and Parasites of this chair,
the former ages heard nothing, not a word of all this. They may reply in the
words of Paul the 5. That the former Popes did not well understand themselves a
great and certain mark of this present infallibility. To keep on the old course
of passing from the matter to the persons, there is yet another quarrel of this
kind, which I will speak to in a few words: There is one fling at the Officers,
at the ministers of the Law, and Courts. If there be any imperfection, any
negligence, omission, or mistakes in the execution of things (as it is but an
huge folly to conceive men so full of faithfulness, and vigilance, but there
may be) I see not why this should be a blemish to the Law, unless it may be
thought to favor murder or theft, because they are done, Laws can but forbid
and punish offenses, if the vices or faults of men must asperse sciences,
professions, and orders, and be an argument to demolish, there will not any
where be either science, profession, or order left: and long agone, had this
been heretofore allowed, there had been none of these left to demolish.

The Writs of the Law, Writs.
of which I shall next speak, are said by those who are for the Becselenisme of
the British antiquity to precede the Normannes: the word (...) is used by
Zonaras for an Epitome, or concise writing: a writing which conteines the sum
of any matter, it may go amongst the Graecobarbara D. Spelnt. verbo Breve.
: from the Empire it came to the Church. Those of Rome a long while have had
their Apostolical Writs. In the Laws of King Henry the first, amongst the
public offenses for which men were amerced to the King, after breach of the
peace which leads the order, follows the contempt of his Writs Ll H. 1, c. 13.
, where they are first heard of. These Writs at the first were but the Kings
letters, the Monkc of St. Albanes makes them the same. In the controversy
betwixt William the Chamberlain, and Gilbert of Cymmay concerning the Church
of Luiton. A certain Writ of the King (meaning Hen. the 2.) says he was
brought, as a praecept to the men of Luiton, to recognize the truth of the
right of the Church, etc Vit. Abb. 67.
. Another place, has attached according to the law of the Landby the Kings Writ
ibid. 143
. elsewhere they are called Letters, the Letters of the King, and of the Chief
Justice are set down in this Historian, ibid. 75.
who again in the Majority of King Henry the third says, -- It was provided
of the commune Counsel of the Archbishops and Bishops, that the Lord the King
should have his Seal, and his Letters should run. Addit. ad Paris. 151.
In the Chapters of the pleas of the Crown, in the time of Rich. 1. recited by
Hoveden an Historian somewhat more ancient then the other is said. And of all
recognisances, and of all pleas summoned before the Justices by the Kings Writ,
or of his Chief Justice, or from the chief Court of the King, Hoved. 744. v.
549
in another place the Writs of King John then Earl of Moreton, are said to be
taken (with his Messenger) containing his commands -- (his Mandates) by the
Major of London, who delivers them to the Arch. Bishop, etc. who calling before
him, etc. the Barons showed them the Letters of Earl John, and their tenor.
id. 735. s. 30.
A Writ with us, is a rule of Law, which briefly tells a thing, Bract. l. 3. c.
12.15.413.
which in a few words delivers the intention of him who brings it; some vary
according to the diversity of the Cases, Facts, and Plaints. There are as many
forms of them, as there are kinds of actions; they ought not to contain
either falsenesse or error. No man is bound to answer without a Writ. Fleta.
l. 2. c. 12. l. 6 c. 35, 36. Brit. c. 84.
The Civil Law makes this necessary, it makes citation parcel of the Law of
Nature. C. de unoquoq. F. de re indiciar. etc. c. 1.
The Writs as Doctor Cowell contain a summary and succinct repetition of the
fact, which brings forth the actions: Instit. Ju. Angl. l. 4. tit. 6.
well may the Lord Cook tell us they are so artificially and briefly compiled
as there is nothing in them redundant or wanting: Inst. 73.
and Sir Thomas Smith, Secretary of State, and Privy Councellor to Queen
Elizabeth said, It was not possible perspicuously to comprebend so much matter
in fewer words. Concerning the execution of Writs, the direction, returns, and
process, etc. upon them, he who would see what a strict care the Law takes,
that things be done justly, speedily, and without deceit, must search into
particular cases which it would be too tedious here to tarry upon. Pleadings
In the next, it will not be impertinent to consider something of the Pleadings
in the Actions of the Common Law, which whosoever shall well consider, he shall not
find them so horrible as some imagine them, nor the forms so intricate and
dangerous as they are misconceived: Pleas must not be confused and misordered.
First, the Jurisdiction of the Court must be pleaded to, then the person, etc.
Every Plea is to be direct, not by way of argument, etc. and to betriable and
pertinent to the pleader, it ought to have its proper conclusion. Things
apparent need not be averred, surplusage if not contrary to the matter, hurts
not; It must not contain multiplicity of matter to the same thing; there must
be certainty and truth in Counts, etc. the replication must not depart from the
Count, nor the reioinder from the Bar, etc. The Count must agree with the Writ:
if time, order and form were not observed in these things, the Judge and the
Jury would be entangled invincibly, and Suites would be endless. If we look on
the Libels in the Civil Law, and the Declarations of the Common Law, on the
defenses of the one, and the bars of the other, on the judgments of them
both, we shall find nothing in those of the last too narrow, nothing which can
be left out. The example of the action of injuries, and of the action upon the
ease which are the same, are compared by M. Fulbeck, Paral. 10 Dial. 67.
I will say no more of the Libell and Declaration but this; That the first
exceeds the last very much, near a third part in length, things quite
differing in nature, enough to encumber the understanding being brought in. I
will only compare (yet not at large) the defense of this action of Injuries,
of a less bulk then the Libell, and the bar in the action of the Case,
after a tedious recital of that which makes little, of the malice, etc. of the
actor, after a long prayer to be absolved, and that the accuser may be
condemned in charges, stretched near to the length of twenty lines, where the
Latin runs (as in all Laws it must) rather in a legal then an eloquent style.
The defense speaks thus, Inprimis igitur dicit, ponit, asserit, et quatenus
opus crit, prout supra Justificare intendit, Quod ipse praeventus seu
denunciatus ex nobilib. Catholicis, legalib. probis, et in omni genere virtutis
exercitatis parentib. seu genitorib. traxit originem, item dicit et ponit quod
dictus intitulatus, et praeventus vestigia dictorum parentum suorum toto
tempore vitae suae insequens fuit et est Catholieus, legalis, probus et
bonestus, absque et praeter id quod, Titius praedictus queritur de eode
intitulate seu praevento, aliqua laboraverit infamia, sinistra suspicione, ant
mala fama; item et quod semper pacifice et quiet inter omnes se babuit et
conversatus fuit omnibus prodessendo, et neminem laedendo seu offendendo. item
negat se dictum Titium pulsasse, verberasse, etc. farther on. How is this
recital of the parents and their Catholic virtues, etc. pertinent, to make
the party innocent, and the Libell malice. The ordinary plea in bar
(comprehending the general issue) at the Common Law, goes more roundly off,
and has no more words in it, then are of use and substance, being thus, after
saying, That the def. comes by his Atturny and defends the force and injury --
Et dicit quod ipse non dixit, non retulit, nec propagavit de praedicto W. verba
predicta etc. modo et forma quibus idem H. superius versus eum queritur, et de
hoc ponit se super patriam, et praedict. H. similiter etc. He denies that he
spoke the foresaid words, in the manner and form which the same H. above,
against him complains, and of this he puts himself upon the Country. What
can be more brief and neat? the defense here is made in fewer words then are
abundant, and to no purpose in the other. The Judgment in this action is five
times the length in the Civil Law, of that of the common Law. He that shall
find in some of the books, pleadings as he may imagine of a stupendous
frightfull length, if he look into them, will find, where a title has bin
many ways settling, many acts done, many conveiances passed, through which it is
derived the case could not be shut up in a less space. That they are only
formal, legal, orderly narrations, where nothing is superfluous, nothing
impertinent. Those who would be taken for the fine wits, Terms of the Law.
men beyond the Harp of Orpheus, who can make the stones and posts dance to the
gingle and tune of their Harmonious sentences bred in the shade, (who when they
are out of the noise of the wrangling Schools, wonder at every man, and are
wondered at as much, think they are in another world.) I say these delicate
supestitious ones who have heard of little else, and would not trouble
themselves too much, loath and abhor the monstrous barbarousnesse of the
terms as they speak. But if their Schools and Philosophy were tried by
Tullies age this barbarousness might be returned upon themselves. As the Bishop
of Virste, no Law consists in words but in the sense; not that which the common
people or Grammarians bring, but as use and authority affirm. Cencil Trid 660.
Epaminondas was praised for his life, not for his discourse, which was not the
courtliest. Law is like Petrarches, vera Philosophia: which as he, non
fallacibus alis attollitur, et sterilium disputationum ventosa jactantia per
inane circumvoluitur sed que certis, et modestis gradibus compendio ad salutem
pergit. Lightness of dress, and false, and artificial hair, and decking is
below the gravity and majesty of laws, substance is only to be looked for,
simplicity and brevity are grace enough. There is a sweetness, a comeliness
of neglect, what is more may abuse and deceive. Laws are not to persuade but
command, Reason and Solidity are to be reverenced for their own sakes, we
find no great eloquence in the first Doctors of our faith, nor was it needed,
truth the more naked it is, is the more lovely. It seems our constancy is
barbarous, and because through all the changes which mortality and God himself
have mad, with our sacred Saxon institutions, we retain many of the terms as
much Saxon, (besides, our Laws as is proved, are neither derived from a Greek
or Latin Fountain) this must be abominable to those that do not understand
them; to those who whatsoever they know abroad are ignorant at home, thus must
the pure Greek be barbarous to the modern Greek, the Latin to the Italian
and others, (called so by Michael the Emperor to the no small displeasure of a
Pope) the ancient Hebrew to the latter Siriack, an objection which industry
would remove, and after I am confident, those things would be as pleasing and
as admirable as now in the dark they are ugly and terrible; the German is a
mother tongue. I see says the most knowing Sir Henry Spelman, very many words,
and terms used by the French, Italians, and Greeks, to acknowledge the Saxon
Fountain (at this day unknown to the present Germans) and by the testimony
of Conrad Gesner, the Saxon is said to be the most ancient of the German
Dialects, and next approaching to the ancient Gothish, whose Manners and Laws,
with their terms not yet antiquated we have drank in. Pr. f. ad Gaess.
By the knowledge of this language of our forefathers (as Master Lisle) we may
find out the Etymologies and names of our words now used, we may add of our
Towns, Rivers, Hills; etc. Offices, Dignities, Magistrates, Royalties or
Privileges of Manors, and of our Courts, most of which were of Saxon
original, all which the most simple cannot think were taken up at random. The
Saxon as the mother German is harsh in the sound, nothing so smooth upon the
tongue, nor pleasing to the ear, as other languages where Consonants are more
sparingly used, or left out for the advantage of pronuncication -- but this
Excellency it has (for which all Europe ore it cannot be outgone, and generally
is matchles in) that it borrowes less, and is more copious, and significant
then others, which I think might yet be shown; for though time as it uses has
made its alterations, there are words enough of use still to express our
selves in, without raising from the dead any of those which have been buried
long ago and where there can be no progression, I know no reason why it should
not be as lawful to restore some of the softest of our own to their birth, and
honors which would quickly be as familiar to us, as to take in from France
and Italy, strangers every day. I make a question excepting the Teutonick,
whether any language of the West, without being beholding to the Greek or
Latin, can in their own Idiome express, Creator, Savior, Redeemer, Spirit,
Trinity, Majesty, Divinity, Eucharist, Baptism, Cross, Passion, Resurrection,
Temptation, Remission, Communion, Greed, Sacrifice, Prayer, Confession, Grace,
Repentance, Regeneration, Humility, Faith, Hope, Charity, Zeal, Sanctity,
Truth, Glory, Law, Justice, Peace, Honor, Nature, etc. with infinite others in
the Saxon. The Saxon has words for Unity, Deity, etc. for coequal,
coeternal, invisible, incomprehensible, incarnation, ascension, descension,
for Catholic and all such words (says Mr. Lisle) which we are now feign to
use, because we have forgot better of our own which is much. Sax. Menpres.
The ten Commandments, Lords Prayer, and Apostles Creed, are not beholding for
one word, nor the Nicene Creed, both Creeds retain Christ, and one has
Apostolican, not out of any want, for they have words of their own which
signify the same things, ( ge gmired is used for Christ, and Aerenrdac is
Nuncius (Apostolus) a Messenger) but because the general custom of keeping
these two, and commune use have made them as names not well to be changed. If
we look upon the translations of these in any other language, we shall not
easily find the like. The Saxon Books sometimes take in the Latin, but when
it happens seldom without necessity, as being to express such things as were
neither known nor in use amongst the English Saxons anciently, as Sacerd a
Priest, Sealme a Psalm, Calic a Calice, Ele Oil, Win Wine, Fic a Fig, Ymnan
an Hymn, Leo a Lion, Draca a Dragon, etc. in such cases where it is lawful to
infranchise Foreign words, though V. Scalig. Excerc. 294 297. 307.
barbarout. The tables compared with the latter Latin, will make it appear our
Language alone has not changed, and that the terms of other ancient Laws are
more obscure then ours; As Polybius, the best antiquaries could very hardly
understand the articles of the first League betwixt the Romans and
Carthaginians. L. 3.
I have interpreted them (so he) as diligently as I could. The Duilian beaked
pillar at Rome to be seen to this day (as Mr. Brerewood) in the Capitol, in
memorial of the annual Victory got against those of Carthage in the first
Paenic War, about 150 years before Cicero may be wondered at, where the e.
is used for an i. the c. for g. the o. for u. xf. for ff. s. is added
superfluously, in the midst d. in the end of word s. and m. left out, etc. as
navaled for navali, Triresmos for Triremes, Exsociont for Effugiunt, Leciones
for Legiones, Cepet for Cepit, Pucnandod for Pugnando, Claseis for Classes,
Numei for Nummi, there may be true Relics at Rome; however of the Roman
antiquities, and this may be one of them, I will not suspect it, yet this is
certain -- The Laws of the Tables, the Fragments of them which now are to be
met with, hundreds of years more ancient, come nearer to the purity of the
best Latin by much, somewhere there may be found an obsolete term, but the
style is far from this rudeness, and Grammatical enough, and I cannot tell
whether the Roman speech at the time of the first Paenic War not much more
then 150. years before Cicero could be bad. C. Navius one of the most ancient
Roman Poets Gell. l. 17. c. 21.
a Comicas vareo stipendia fecit -- served in this War; in the 8. year of
the Peace after this first War, and in the year 521. of the City, he
presented his plays before the people. See the verses ut on Scipio Gell. l. 6.
c. 18. Sae the speeches, etc. of Cote, Scipio, etc. and others then.
His Epitaph made by himself speaks thus Mortalis immortalis si flere foret
fas:
Flerent divae Camaenae Naeviom poetam.
Itaque postquam est orchino traditus thesauro,
Oblitei sunt Romae loquier letina lingua.


To omit Plautus, Ennius, Caecilius, near those times, the most excellent of
all Comedians Terence, within 30 years of this (or thereabouts) is famous: and
if the pillar speaks true, here is the suddenest change of a Language, that
ever was heard of. We find the saying to hold still, Verberum vetus interit
aetas Cadent. Quae nunc sunt in bonore vocabula volet usus. But though words
die, and yield to use which first got them credit) which has the dominion over
them s yet where things remain and live, words cannot be left by which they are
signified; for besides that after a change of terms, the old year books would
be as hard to be understood, as the older Latin. It may very well be thought
the new terms might come short of the former, and not express with halse that
fullness what they shall be intended for; the terms of all sciences as is
observed perhaps could not so effectually express the full sense of the matter
in the purer Latin, if that alone will be liked. Dr. ^owel a most learned
Civilian, in the preface to his Latin Institutions of the Common law, gives
this reason why he observed strictly the forms of expression in it. I use
(says he) the words of the Lawyers, lest being carried away with the conceit
of polishing, or the endeavor to deliver things more eloquently I should not
reach the whole sense; certain words are so fitted (so he still) (...) to the
shape or figure of the Law of England, that they are terms of art, and
prescript forms plainly, and otherwise expressed would lose their native
integrity: his example is in making or waging of Law Prefat.
. Some of them are of necessity to be used, as the words, Mayhem, Burglary,
Feloniously, Murdered, Ravished, Exchange, Warranty, Frankalmoigne, Frank
marriage, etc. and cannot be expressed by a way about, by periphrasis. No
others never so soft and smooth can serve the turn; and who will take the
pains, either from the Glossaries, or from the Saxon it self to be acquainted
with them, will find them as significant as any words of art in the Greek, or
any other Language, the Law lies in their force and propriety, they will find
the learning of a particular Law unfolded, and understood in the term Affidare,
Placita, Placitare, Nuda pactio, contractus, praescriptio, are slum, interesse,
executio, executores, certiorare, alienatio, with diverse others may be met with
in the Civil and Canon Laws; those which are not wholly used there in our
sense, differing but little Guardia, guarantiso, wadium, Alovium, Bannomentum,
Treuga, Forisfacta, Fidelitas, homagium, relevium, felonia, etc. in the fendes,
and if calumniari be thought wrested where it is used to claim or challenge,
so far, that Dr. Cowel conceives it a blow given to Priscian, never to be
forgiven: it is as much wrested in the proeme of the Institutions of Justinian,
where calumniantium iniquitates is, by the addition expounded) calumniantium
(as it) capitur generaliter pro omnib-delinquentib.) for all offenders: a blow
which Piscian must take more unkindly then the former. The Law Imperial flowing
from a Latin head professed by Orators, patrons, and advocates, who spoke no
other language, our law of the Land acknowledging nothing less then such a
beginning (as is said) and which will be thought admirable, not at all the more
unhappy for it. I know no reason why the same words should be thought
unhandsome in our law, and elegant, and beautiful in another: and as laws
(which is noted) if all the have imaginable were made for a change, could not
in our days arrive at that fullness and excellency to comprehend and redress
thousands of those wrongs which now we find remedies for.

The decemviri employed about the Tables thought they could have comprised all
accidents, they fell short in their account, all the books in the world, says
Bodin, cannot comprehend every case which may happen; for after all the
additions possible, it will be found that perfection of laws must be the labor
of ages, and that experience is the best and only happy Lawgiver. So would
there be the same length of time required for the new terms. Time is followed
at the heels by corruption, and ere our descendents shall make up what we
shall leave imperfect (if our change be not disliked and changed by them) they
that shall invent the last terms, perhaps without some key or other, will not be
able to understand the first. The length and change of time will make the next
as obscure as these; if we look upon our own language, and not so far back as
Robert of Gloucester, and others of the most ancient English writers, if Sir
Geofry Chaucer, and John of Lidgate be compared, who calls him master, and
betwixt whom there are not many years, it may be seen how quickly it altered,
as since the reign of King Henry the eight, we know it has sufficiently
changed again. It was the observation of the illustrious Viscount, that books
writ in modern Tongues could not be long lived: he expresses it in the term for
bankrupts cito decocturos, they would quickly break (which was the reason why
he caused that most excellent piece, his Augmentation of Sciences to be
translated into Latin) etc. So that I cannot yet find why the antiquity of
our terms should be a cause of change. It is ridiculous to think otherwise.
The Lawyer must speak the words of the Law: nor can the process, and forms of
the bar be expressed in neat and fine language. Cicero l. 1. de Orat. Orat. pro
Caetin. Gell. l. 20. c. 10. de voc. ab. ex. jure manu^ consertum.
Cicero himself is observed in matters of Law to speak like a Lawyer,
ordinarily using the terms. Ennius does the same in those Pellitur e medio
sapientia, vi geritur res.
Spernitur orator bonus, horridus miles amatur etc.
Nou ex jure manum consertum sed mage ferro.
Rem repetunt regnumque petunt: vadunt solida vi.


l. 16. c. 10.
And in this, Proletarius publicitus scutoque feroque etc.

And as no other Law can gain any thing of ours in reason, as little can they
gain of us in phrase, if the style be compared with the purity of the speech
they are written in, the style of the Imperial laws with the purer Latin. This
I will illustrate only with the design to make it clear that this homeliness
of ancient habit is not a rude fashion taken up alone by our Law. I will observe
somewhat of the Civil Law out of the professors of it, that we may see our
Laws only have not been censured, are not only subject to censure. Perinus
in Justinians life runs in a long invective against Tribonian (as he is
called) the architect of the Pandects, and of the whole Law, whom out of
Suidas, he calls wicked, impious, a contemner of Religion, far from
Christianity, a deceiver, and fraudulent, persuading the Emperor that he
should be assumed like Enoch, corrupt, basely covetous; so that the law lost
much in the infamy of so wicked and pestilent an author. Where he speaks of the
Laws, he says, Tribonian and his fellows were like cruel Chiriergions, who
cut to the quick, and which he cites Budaeus for; That they have left the
Pandects rather curtailed then compendious, fearing out of superstition dregs,
and things obsolete, they have heaped up matter out of the drier volumes, and
drawn that which will not quench any man's thirst. So that (as he goes on) in the
framing the Pandects, you would rather think they slept, then that they
digested any thing rightly, and compendiously. Justinian in the Proem to his
Institutions supposes an huge confusion before, call^ this a desperate work,
and walking in the midst of the deep. The body of it then was confused, and
of infinite extent says the Gloss. The Code, says Sis Th. Ridlye a Civilian,
is a barbarous Thracian phrase latinised, such as never any mean Latinist
spoke: for themethod it is rude and unskilful, where it departs from the
Digests, yet the knowledge of it is more expedient then the knowledge of the
Digests, because it determines neteers in daily use of life View of the Civil
and Eccles. law.
. The Digest is said to differ but little from the best Roman speech, but what
it has in words it wants in substance, as the same Knight, the learning of it
stands in discussing subtle questions, and enumeration of opinions, in which
there is more wit then profit. Again, this Digest or Pandect, as an old Gloss
strangely, a, (...) totum, c. Pandectarum.
and (...) doctrina, which is said to be drawn out of 150000. or as others
300000. verses of the old Law indigested and abolished, needed exposition and
amendment. The Compilers were not so quicksighted but that sundry antinomies
(as this Knight and Budaeus) or contrary laws past them, they were too subtily
Writ, and needed explaining; besides, in the Digest every case falling out in
common use of life was not decided, (for it is enough that Laws look upon that
which is likely most often to happen) nor, as our Knight, was it possible,
every moment new matter falls out, for which former Laws made no provision,
which was the reason why the Code was set forth, and why the Athenticks, or
Novelles followed. Being the Princes resolution of doubts confused^y put out,
as the Civilians abroad confess V. Lex Ju. Civ. ve bo Novellae.
. The Feudes, as the same knight, were drawn partly out of the Civil Law,
partly out of the Customs of Millain, but without either form or order Ib.
View 69.
, before the Cornelian Law of Jurisdiction of the Praetors, they were wont led
away which covetousness or ambition, out of favor or spite, variously to give
judgment, Changing and altering the laws they had set forth in writing. The
Cornelian law commanded, Dio. Cuss. l. 36.
1 That in the entry to their office, They should publish what law they would
use, and observe it. I will not say there is any such incertainty now, yet
where there are so many Doctors interpreting the Text, so many Comments, such
multituddes again interpreting them, without a miracle there cannot but be
great distraction in opinions. Hence it is that Gentilis and Alciat require,
that the authorities, and cases of the Doctors be weighed, not numbered Gentil.
l. 3. Epist. Alciat l. 4. perarerg. c. 17.
. Which is otherwise in our Law, where the judgment of any man whatsoever is
not of authority, nor is any thing binding but the determination of Courts, and
the rule of judgments before. Laws are not causes of strife, but the variety
of senses which is put upon them, we are told of a constitution of Pope
Nicholas the third, upon the rule of that Monster Francis of Assise, in the
argument ambiguous, and doubtful enough, yet did it never trouble the Order,
all Glossers, and Commentators being forbidden to meddle with it Council. Trid.
660.
. He that puts out the Imperial institutions, says he has added the cases, or
Themes as they call them of Cornelius Vibulanus, Having rejected the old as
barbarous, and useless, and that he has cut off part of those Notes taken out
of the Commentaries of the Doctors, which are called small accessions, because
(so he) very many of them were partly wide of the mark, nothing to the
purpose, partly absurd, andridiculous. Till of late, there was never any gloss
upon our Littleton, and now that which is, is made up out of the resolutions
and judgments of Courts, not as if Littleton needed any confirmation, One of
whose cases was acknowledged for Authentic by four Judge in the time of king
James, with this expression, That they owed so great reverence to Littleton,
they would not suffer his case to be disputed, or questioned Mich. 21 Jac. B. C.
. The Civil Law has its circumstances, and exceptions, the anomale before, and
in the contestation of the suit, to the Fact, of the intention of deceit, fear,
etc. temporary, perpetual. Its formulae, or solemn forms, by which let the
matter of Fact be never so orderly related, if either no conclusion, or an
unfit one be collected from it, the whole libell falls. Sometimes says a
French Civilian of the Parliament of Paris, a Process is determined by contrary
arrests, differing from others preceding, then which is pitiful, this clause
is added to the Text of the arrest; Without drawing it to consequence, or the
motive (I believe not always) is registered. France (says this Bodin again)
bas more laws and Customs, more Process and suits then the rest of Europe
beside, and more have been prosecuted in the last six score years, then in a
thousand before, which have througed in more and more (as he goes on) since
that Charles the seventh and his successors have begun to people the realm,
with laws made after the mode of Justinian, with a long train of reasons
against the form of the ancient Ordinances of the kings, and sage Legislators,
he adds. Where laws are few and simple rather commanding then entreating and
reasoning, Commonwealths have flourished to a wonder under them. Whereas others
with their Gods, and Pandects in a few years have been destroyed, or troubled
with seditions, or the mischiefs of Process, and wranglings immortal Repul. l.
1927 l 6.
. By the multitude of Authors, and Doctors, as the illustrious Viscount, the
law is torn in pieces, the Judge astonished, and the proceedings everlasting
Angm. Scient. 691
. We may see (as this French man again) enough of these suits aged one hundred
years, as that of the Earldome of Raise, so well managed, that the parties who
made the entrance into it are all dead, and the Process yet alive. Nor are the
terms of the ancient laws of the Tables to us now who know not the propriety of
the first Latin much more winning, more graceful then ours. Where they are
certainly ancient, they will seem as hard to the first sight as any, and their
sense as strange after, as the sound of others. As that Senates should be used
for revolters, reconciled and reunited. Fortes for good men never revolted Tab.
c. 49
. Pauperies in the law, Siquadrupes pauperiem fecerit, etc. Should signify
hurt or damage c. 15.
. Proletarius (a word which a Lawyer in Gellius takes to be of Grammar
learning, and when he was shown it in the tables is content to say; he had not
learned the Law of the Faunas and Aborigines) a poor Roman whose rate in the
public valuation of good was 1500 Asses, or one that did nothing for the
public but get children Gel. l. 16. c. 10. Tab c. 44.
. A famous Grammarian being asked what those words out of the ancient Actions,
( in jure manum conserunt says the tables) ex jure manum consertum mean, says
he taught Grammar. A way of suing they signify, which he had never heard of v.
Gell. L. xx. c. 10. Godwin. antiquit. l. 3. c. 21.
. That retanda flumina in an old Edict, should be rivers to be cleared of trees
growing in the Channel, or upon the banks, and hanging over from retae such
trees Gell. 11. c. 17.
. This of the tables will appear as strange as any thing. QVI. SE. SI. ERYT.
TEST ARIER LIBERI. PENS. VE. FVERIT. NI. TESTIMONIVM. FARIATVR. IMARN BYS.
INTE. STABILIS. QVE. ESTO. Idd. 15. c. 13.
A. Gellius in his chapter where he asks the question upon manum consertum, speaks
thus of the learning of the laws, and the terms, I have thought fit to insert
into my Commentaries whatsover I have learnd from the Lawyers and their books,
because he that lives in the midst of things, and men ought not to be ignorant
of the most famous words of civil actions. Amongst the later terms which are
proper and necessary for the sense they serve many of them would trouble much
our over curious Sirs, they would not willingly be brought to an acquaintance
with them. Such are Suitas. The quality of the heir inducing a necessity of
succession, the definition of which has perplexed some of the Authors not a
little; yet no worse doubtless then the Haecceitas of the Metaphysics, as is
confessed by them, it is unheard of of old, but say they, in those things which
by degrees are received, and become of use, we ought not too strictly to eye
our selves to the Canons of the Grammarians. Alciaet who is known to all the
world, often used the word, superesse rebus; Which is used for overseeing and
managing another business, more then Gellius ever knew, or thought of, where
he blames another false, and strange signification of the word, which says he
was inveterate, and got strength not only amongst the rabble, but in the
Courts, it being ordinary to say bic illi superest, for he is the Advocate of
such one l. 1. c. 22,
, near the last sense.

Secta which is used for Reason, interleverit for deleverit, insidiare, for
insidiari, infecta for corrupta, honestus, for dives, which is a great
depravation, reformare for rescindere, prodere for dimittere, per aversionem
emere, which is to buy by the lump, tenuta seisin, venture a woman with child,
or as Alciate a posthumus; fusiones public Functions. Whosoever shall turn over
the Laws of the Frankes Lombards, Boiorians, and other of the Teutonick
Nations, he will meet Mormoes, and Goblins formidable indeed, such as the most
knowing glossaries must be contented to recite only, or wisely to pass by in
sacred silence, which yet will be read by those who admire not themselves and
their own age too much; who will allow in some proportion both wisdom and
civility to their forefathers and are curious to be satisfied how they lead
their lives, upon what policy and order the Empire of the German Franks and
Lombards rose, and moved, for however governments may begin, Justice and good
laws assure them, give them vigor, and continuance, lasting violence had been
a fire, which suddenly would have burnt their Trophies; these German
Conquerours how fierce soever they seem in their first appearance (of all which
might be said which is related of Mezentius, Dextra mihi deus, etc. Or the
Quadi a part in that Eductis mucronibus quos pro numine colebant, the sword was
their deity) spent the years of their entrance into their Provinces to compose
minds, their first peace and rest from the turmoils of war, was ever dedicated
to the polishing, and smoothing of those foundations, which else laid with too
hasty and too rough an hand would have fallen alone. Augustus was more happy in
his moderation then in his victories, it might be thought he subdued his
Country to preserve it, his peace was so sweetened by the equity and clemency of
his laws, that all the calamities of the triumvirate and its proscriptions were
forgotten, no tears were left but such as the whole world powered out to his
memory. There is its honor due to antiquity, yet there may be met with in the
laws of these people, (though they seem what Du Bartas speaks of Marots
verse, torn Monuments, and age worn Images) that policy, and excellency of
constitution, which if we will not imitate perhaps we can never exceed. It is
observed for the honor of our English that an Earl of Arundel in his travels
to Italy, and the Lord William Howard in his Government of Calice, although
they understood other languages would not speak to any stranger but in their
English. And that Cardinal Woolsey in his French Embassy would not suffer his
attendance to speak any tongue else to the French. And I know not why our
English where it is more pure, and less corrupt where it is a mother tongue
and the best Dialect of a mother tongue should not have the esteem it is worthy
of.

It was made none of the least of venerable Bede's praises that he was learned
in it. A great man before mentioned rather transported with choler against some
of the Profession, and indirectly I think then out of his own judgment is
very angry at the Law, which he says cannot pass the Seas. It were wonderful
if it should, who looks that neighborhood alone should make Nations like the
same things. I have shown already what great agreement there is betwixt the
French and us, enough to make it evident they and we had but one stock, in
Constitutions more ancient then the Civil Law there; and it takes off nothing,
though our Law would not be known in the Courts at Paris. This Author grants
(no man he says can deny it) it is a sacred, both Thing and Title; our
professors will not envy the learning of Brissonius his Lexicon, or his formulae
so much praised; and it is confessed we cannot show any Terms of law like them,
yet are ours to as much purpose; they interpret the words of art of our
homebred Laws, and I cannot tell what is to be required more. All men may
know, that as there have been additionary Laws since the Saxons, so have there
necessarily been additionary terms since, which according to the custom of
the times, when the Law began to speak French, were French: and when they
began, as good perhaps, and as pure French as any then spoken. The leagues and
agreements concerning the Sea betwixt King Edward the first and other Princes
show what the old French was by these words, soffrera, souccours, resceipts,
Pees, Trewes, subgitz, forspris, nadgairts, etc. D. Seld. Ma. Claeus. 267, 276.
The Lord of Argentons History much later manifests what the language was, and
how it has changed. These terms are so interwoven (as the Lord Coke) into the
Laws, they cannot possibly be changed. I will appeal to any man who understands
the modern French, for many of them are yet retained by it, whether any words
can more aply hit the sense which these signify; there is a supposition where
these objections lie, that if the great Lawyers abroad should come hither, much
amazed they would stand at our voucher, cited for a big word like to tear the
ear; but unluckily brought in, it is yet in the French advocare, to vouch, call
in aid in a suit, and certainly was understood by some of the great Lawyers,
Rigaude and Bignon being such as had the word been antique indeed, would not
have been amazed at it. They were not confined within the knowledge of their
own age only, what is much to Bignon's honor, Sir Hen. Spelman acknowledges
himself owing to him for many things in his Glossary. Garrantie is the same
yet with our Warranty, Pleviner to plevin, give surety; saisine is yet seifin,
rebutter to repel, as the heir with us is repelled by the Warranty of his
ancestors. Larcin is theft, felony, robbery; fee demain, or domain,
prescription; Escbet, rent, as we use them; nampt is our naam, half withernam
a distress, briga (with which by this author in another place the professors
of our Laws are reproached, and have the style of his barbarians) has been
continued amongst them ever since Edw. the 3. before which it was but rarely
used, yet is in the modern French, viz. brigue for it, signifying contention or
wrangling. The only man abroad who may seem an adversary, is Hotomanne a
Civilian, very learned, but I believe not at all in our laws; a man of a
peevish heady temper, who writ against his own State, and fled for it: yet is
he not so much an enemy to the Laws of England, as to Litleton's tenures, the
book so called, which very probably he never understood; in his Comentary of
the feudall word in the word feudum, he writes thus: Stephane Pasquier a man of
an excellent wit, etc. gave me an English Litleton, in which the Laws of the
English feuds are discoursed written so rudely, absurdly, and without method,
that it appears easily to be true which Polydore Virgil in the English
History writes, That foolishness in that book contends with malice, and the
study to calumniate. Here is his own judgment seconded with the censure of
that unclean beast Polydore, whofreely indeed (as is said) railes in that book
against the Law; yet no where in it (I think) once naming our most reverend
Judge Litleton. He calls the Laws in just, and the Lawyers or interpreters of
them ignorant, speaking of those of the time of William the 1. upon a
supposition that the most of the Laws were Normanne. He, and his book are said
to be of great account by Dr. Cowel in as much esteem with the students of the
Common law, as Justinians Justitutes are with the Civilians, says the famous
Clarencieux. The Lord Coke says, This is as absolute a book, and as free from
error as ever was writ of humane learning Pres. upon Littlet. r. 2.67. r. 10.
Epist.
, according to the Judgment of a Court before. Litletons word will pass every
where, ipse dixit carries things, as Master Fulbec. Litleton, is not the name
of a Lawyer, but of the Law it self: more then can be said of any Civilian,
one or other. Dr. Cowel blames his Civilians much, that shey were not only
guests and strangers, but infants in their own Commonwealth, that the most know
as little of our Law as the common people; and I cannot imagine how by a sight
of Litleton, Hotoman should know much; it is not unreasonable (notwithstanding
all his learning) to suppose with Littleton alone, he did not understand
Litsleton; it would be taken, as justly it might, either for foolishness or
malice, indeed the greatest possible, for the highest impudence, if any man, so
much a stranger to the terms and Language, at the first sight, merely by
guess, should as slightly condemn the Pandects, (full of contradictions, and
needing exposition and amendment, as is before shown out of the Civilians
themselves) whereas Littleton is as fundamental as any Law can be; and every
sentence of his is a principle. Nor can any man but wonder at the expression of
malice and study to calumniate, the book through (by which we may see how it is
understood) being only a bare collection of special cases, under their titles,
or heads, authentic and binding, because it is made and composed partly of the
customs of the ages before, partly of the judgments of Courts, and of the
Statute laws without any controversy with any man, without any reflection upon
any other law, upon any man's person or works (saving that once he says he had
heard say, There was one Judge Richel who settled an estate intaile with
perpetual remainders, with that clause of perpetuities since used, but against
law, that upon alienation of the eldest son, etc. his estate should cease
etc.) merely aiming at the public good; which makes me think, here must
either be a great mistake in the sense, or of the book it self: Litleton then
was not Litleton now. The uneven ruggedness of the French will not suffer any
man to be eloquent. Laws (as Cicero) ought to be be dear unto us, and to be
prised, not for the words, but for the public profit, and the wisdom of the
Lawgiver. Yet is not the style of Litleton rude, but plain (as the best French
then was plain enough, neither neat nor quick, as will appear by the Lord of
Argentons style noted before, who lived in our Judges age, and writ then) most
befitting a Judge, and the gravity of the subject. To the absurdity of the
writing part of the invective charged in the slander (which is true as is shown
from testimonies of the side of the old glosses) I will reply but this, it
should have shown how, and where; otherwise this is a general charge which has
nothing in it, but the malignancy of an enemy, from whose rash and unjust
censure, the happy memory of our Judge may justly appeal to those who know
him. It is a childish impotency of the mind, out of vainglory to calumniate
illustrious personages, far enough either from honesty or discretion. The
haughtiness of Pompey to reign alone is with the most: nor is it fair to
bequarrel and hate all other Nations because they drink not the Loire or Rosne,
or submit not to I know not what universality: as if Alexanders world were
returned again, not to be ruled, but by one Sun. What concludes here, and makes
up the aggravation, is extended farther by others, and made a cavil (it is no
more) against the Laws, That our Laws want method; Method.
never yet so much as a pretense to abolish laws. How easily the Pandects may
be matched for method, I shall demonstrate by the order of the Common law of
England. After the Curiate laws of Romulus, those of Numa concerning Religion,
the laws of the other Kings, all taken into the books of Papyrius, and
therefore called the Civil Papyrian Laws, the twelve Tables followed, then the
Flavian, Helian, and Hortensian, the Honorary Law of the Praetor: the laws of
the people called Plebiscita, the decrees of the Senate called Senatusconsulta,
the law of the Magistrates, and customs, the laws of the Princes from the law
Royal, the opinions of innumerable Lawyers, many of which are recited by the
second Law of the original of the Law: their volumes were huge, says the
Emperor Proaem. Instit. 5.
. There were as the gloss three hundred thousand Verses, Laws, or answers, two
thousand books and many other Laws, so confused, so infinitely extended, they
were not to be shut up in the capaciousnesse of humane nature. Out of all these
were the Pandects composed and digested, which are well digested; but (as is
said) the Code, and the Authenticks are not. How much more easily might the
Common law be ranged into an exact method, may quickly be found, not being
composed of any such bulk, not drawn out of any thousands of such answers, and
books, enclosed in a dozen or two of small volumes, exceeded in the quantity by
the present Imperial laws, hundreds of times over, the foundations of it, as
of all just and civil Laws, are the laws of God, of nature and reason, and of
Nations: as Dr. Cowel, Our Statutes and Customs are derived (as all just laws
else, and consentaneous to reason) from the Law of nature, and of Nations Inst.
jur. Angl. 25.
. And again, The laws of England, as others over the Christian world are far
enough off from the civil Imperial law, yet are they tempered, seasoned with
the equity of it Praef. ad Inst.
. In his Epistle dedicatory before the Institutions, They are not far enough
off; v. Chap. 2.50 here.
(as very probably some of these Imperial laws might come from Rome to the
Saxons with their Religion) There he speaks thus: After I bad spent some years
in the comparison of these laws, (viz. the Common and Imperial laws) I found
the same foundations in them both, the same definitions and divisions of
things, rules plainly consentaneous, near the same constitutiom: the difference
only being in the Ideome and method; Our Common law is nothing but a mixture
of the Roman and Feudal laws; and in his Epistle to the Reader before his
Interpreter, he says, He has in some towardness collated the cases of both
laws etc. to show that they both be raised of one foundation, and differ more
in language and terms then in substance; and therefore were they reduced to one
method (as they easily, says he, might;) they might be attained (in a manner)
with one pains. I make agreement no argument that laws are the same, where
they have (as it is said) the same foundation: but it may be an argument, that
where they agree in the foundation, where the constitutions are near the same,
where there are the same definitions and divisions of things, they may be
digested into a method alike. Not to look upon the twelve Tables, we may find
a plain resemblance which I attribute to the foundation upon the Law of nature
and Nations, in these Laws. The Cornelian de sicariis and veneficiis, of
murder, poisoning, firing houses: de falso, of forgery; of all kinds of
falsity: Majestatis, about taking arms, raising forces etc. the Cornelian de
injuriis, and Aquileian de damno, of wrong, trespass, damage, battery done;
the Duilian, Maenian, de Coitionibus; the Julian de vi of public and private
force; Majestatis of high treason, to which the Lutatian of public force may
be added; in the digests and clswhere, are Laws of discents, rights and
possession, covenants, and obligations, against deceit in bargains, theft,
receivers, breaking of prison etc. of Code 11. nou. 3.5. Collet.
Churchmen, and their possessions, etc. Besides saying it may be so, to make it
plain, that persons and things, propriety of lands and goods, acquisition of
these rights, injuries, and actions, public and private offenses, Writs,
Courts, pleas, etc. may be listed in order in our Law, as well as any other.
This most learned Doctor in his Institutions has done it, but briefly and
according to the fashion of the Imperial Institutions. Who (says he) shall
think himself happy if he can provoke any man to undertake the larger Volumes;
And Sir Henry Finch, in his excellent book called the Law. There is extant an
Analysis of the Common law done by a reverend Attorney general heretofore,
where our Law is so naturally methodised, and so happily, that not only no law
else, but no Science whatsoever can excel it for the order: though I know want
of method in Laws is no solid objection, nor so considerable as to need an
answer. The illustrious Viscount in his Aphorisms of the Law is of this
judgment, speaking of regeneration, and new structure of Laws, he would have
(he says) the words and text retained, and things orderly done. Yet (he adds)
in Laws neither style nor description, but authority, and the Patron of it,
antiquity, are to be regarded; otherwise (as he) such a work would seem rather
something of the Schools, and a method, then a body of commanding Laws
Aphoris. 62.
. Neither the Philosophers of old, nor their admirers now, are to be heeded in
these things; they may propose things specious, but they are every where
remote, and far off from use: the only notion our ancient Lawgivers, and
professors of the Laws intended. The most of the Law is Historically related in
Annals or yeerbooks, where the judgments of the Courts in the several Terms
of the years are reported as faithfully as they were given, according to the
true account of time as things fell out, in which no method is requisite, or
can be, more then in Histories, where all things of the same kind are not
ranged together, but are set down as they were done. And every Commentator must
follow his text, as he is lead. But those who have writ of one certain subject,
not miscellanists, have curiously enough observed this part. And where the
Annals of the Law (which could not be otherwise, as is said) are thought to
scatter things too carelessly. The cases in them are abridged and digested under
proper heads and titles, By Statham, Justice Fitzberbert, and Sir Robert
Brook, as the Statutes are by Justice Rastall, etc. so that there can be no
reason for these complaints. These objections only show a willingness to
hurt, but are short of doing it. Principles of the laws.
Laws are to be tried and examined by their principles, if there be any thing
unsound there, and dishonest, too cruel and inhumane, they may justly be taxed.
A Doctor of both the Laws speaks thus of the Canon law: The Canon law is
nothing but an beap of ingenious precepts of avarice, under the show of piety;
few things in it are directed to religion and worship, many are contrary and
repugnant to them; the rest are wranglings, strife, business only of pride,
and gain, fancies of Popes, who have accumulated upon the Canons of the holy
Fathers, decrees, chaff of the Extravagants, deelaratories, rules of the
chancery, giving those at Rome power to absolve from obedience, break leagues,
dispense with oaths, with the law of nature, enough (as he) to make of the
house of prayer a den of thieves Van. scient.
. Here is something said; for the sanctions of the sacred Law of the land, may
justly be said contrarily: they commands all those things which are most honest
and most just, if there were no precept, while some other Laws allow directly
the same things, against God, nature, and reason, which ours forbid; as Incest
among the Persians of the brother and sister was more then indifferent,
communion of women praised by Plato Repub. 4.
and amongst our families of love, lending wives amongst the Spartanes,
Polygamie amongst the Mahumetanes and others; with the unnatural love of
boys, which a Frenchman calls the ordure of the Greeks, the bearded
Philosophers approved it; Plutarch censures not Agesilaus for it. Adultery was
commended by the example of their Gods; Thieving among the sober Spartanes, as
Gellius calls them, and Egyptians, and sleight of the hand, from the greenest
youth was honorably allowed by the Laws of Licurgus, not for base gain, but
for discipline of war (as he) all their policy was directed to the wars.
Piracy, and robbery have been glorious, no where heretofore amongst the
Grecians in disgrace, says Thucydides -- This is manifest by some that dwell
on the continent (says he) amongst whom so it be performed nobly, it is still
esteemed as an ornament. The ancient Poets introduce men questioning such as
sail by on all coasts alike, whether they be thieves or no, as a thing neither
scorned by those who were asked, nor upbraided by those who would know much of
Greece uses that old custom, as the Locriozolae, the Acarnanians, and those of
the Continent in that quarter to this day Thucyd. l. 4 v. Justinum l. 44.
. Private robbery the Romans suffered not, but publicly no men robbed more; so
that (as one of their own) if they had restored what they unjustly took away
from others, they must every man have returned to his Cotage again; revenging
of wrongs and feudes are much esteemed by Aristotle and Cicero, exposing of
infants, slaves, freed, or sick men was suffered in the Civil law; parents by a
law of the Tables might sell their children thrice Sect. 18.
. The Lord had power of life and death over his slave Insl. l. 1. gloss.
servitus.
. The Petronian law restreins from forcing them to fight with beasts at their
pleasure, not observed, more then the Edict of Nero which deputed Co^missaries
to hear the complaints of slaves. They put them to death for trifles; Vedius
Pollio threw a slave to be devoured of Lampries (which he fed thus) for
breaking a glass Dio. l. 54.
. If a Lord was murdered by one servant, it was the old custom, says Tacitus,
to condemn and put to death all the slaves; according to which, in the case of
Pedanius secundus, Provost of the City, four hundred innocent men lost their
lives 14 Ann.
. Where law settled quietly, without any awe upon those who are to receive it,
has too many of Draco's Rubrickes of blood it is terrible. Our laws are not
cruelly bloody, they distinguish betwixt intentions, and actions; and actions,
as they have their degrees of mischief, have their degrees of punishment. King
Edgar wills in a law, That in offenses clemency and forgiveness be used as much
as justice, so that punishment may b^ tolerable Ll. Nol. 1. Ll. Cnuti. 1 2. ve.
, a command not forgot, it has continued with the laws; Godlike mercy ever
saving more then justice strikes. Wisdom and mercy, justice, and grace are
joined Beact. l. 2.
, as is observed in the beginning. No free man can by this law be disseised of
his free hold but by lawful judgment etc. In those articles against the most
worthy Earl Hubert de Burgo, he concludes It seems to him, That he ought not
to answer without restitution, being disseised of what he had, since no
disseised man is obliged to answer in any Gourt, etc. Additam. Par. 153.
This is more visible by the law since. As the Lord Cook, if a man be accused
or indicted of Treason or Felony, his Lands cannot be granted to any, not so
much as by promise, no seizure can be made before attainder Inst. 36, 48 Mag.
Char. c. xxii
. Abjuration, challenges to the Jury, Clergy were no small favors of the Law.
If a Felon demand his book, and can not read, and demand it again under the
Gallows and read, he shall have the benefit of it 34. H. 6.49.
. One Indicted of Felony produces a Charter of pardon discordant to the
Jnditement, and to his name, the Court perceiving the King meant to pardon him,
remanded him to sue for a better pardon, 46. Ass. B. and F. Office del. Court.
as if mercy were given in charge to the Justices, they ought of office to take
notice of all general pardons, though the party plead them not, Die. 28.
and there, if all Felonies under twenty shillings be pardoned, the Judges
ought to dismiss him to God (as the Book) who is indicted where the Theft is
under that sum. The Justices heretofore knowing the Felon to be a Clerk, who
took himself not to his Clergy, would not give Judgment to hang him. 22. E.
3.
If the Prisoner for Treason or Felony has any matter of Law to plead, he is to
be allowed his Counsel, after the plea of not guilty, where it will not be
allowed, the Court ought to be instead of Counsel for the Prisoner, to see
that nothing be urged against him contrary to Law and Right. Nay, any learned
man present may give information to the Court in behalf of the Prisoner for
his benefit. 3. Inst. c. 2.
The Judges as in Humphrey Staffords case is observed, 1 H. 7.26, 3 Jus. 29.
ought not to give their opinions before hand (which is condemning a man before
he be heard) the way to make indifferency impossible; whereas (as the Lord
Cook) until the party has made his defense, things may be represented much to
the disadvantage, and a small addition or substraction may alter the whole
Case. In Common Pleas, where the Defendant has accepted the Writ or Title,
where he has lost his advantage by his conclusion, or the issue be found
against him, yet if it appear to the Court that the Plantiffe has no Title, no
cause of Action, Judgment shall not be given against the defendant Plowd. 66
Die. 13.76.119, 120.
. Every restraint of a free man though not within the walls of a prison, is
imprisonment 2. Just. 482. Rot. Pael. 2. H 4 nu. 60.
. No man is to be arrested, or imprisoned against the form of the great Charter
before recited 2. Just. 54.
. No man is to be imprisoned but for a certain cause to be shown ibid. 53.
, to be contained in the Warrant etc. the conclusion of which ought to be, and
him safely to keep, until he be delivered by law, etc. As the fifth of king
Henry the fourth. None are to be imprisoned but in the Common Goal, to the end
they may have their trial at the next Goal delivery, etc. As Justice Fitz
Herbert, to keep a man in prison without coming to his answer is against Law
Na. Br. 118. c.
. The Abbot of S. Albanes would not make a Goal delivery at the time, to save
costs, he lost his Franchise by it 8. H. 4.18.
. The Abbot of Crowland forfeited his Franchise for deteining prisoners after
acquittal, and their Fees paid 20. E. 4.6
, such deteining after the Habeas Corpus is false imprisonment 2. Just. 53.
, there are many provisions for those who are grieved in these cases, by
Indictment, Writs, and Action ibid. 55.
. Though the law requires safe and streit custody, that must be without any
torment, or pain to the prisoner, relief may be had against cruel and hard
usage of a Jailer 3. Just. 35 91, 92.
. The prison, as Bracton, is not for punishment but custody. A certain Priest
arrained in the time of King Edw. the second, put himself upon the Country and
stood at the bar in Irons, but by command of the Justices he was freed from
them Fish. Corene 432.
; and as to irons (says the Lord Coke) there is no difference betwixt a Priest
and a layman 3 Inst. ubi sup.
. No felons coming to answer in judgment ought to be charged with irons.
Brit. c. 5.14. c. 11.17
The law of the Land is a law of mercy, for three causes (as the Lord Coke) 1.
The innocent shall not be wasted by long imprisonment, but speedily come to his
trial. 2 Prisoners for criminal causes brought to their trial ought to be
humanely dealt with. 3. The Judge ought to exhort them to answer without fear,
to assure them that justice shall be duly administered 2 Ins. 316
. The Law has a most tender regard (as is said) of the life of man. By a Canon
of our old English Church he that killed a man in public war was enjoined a
penance of 40 days Council. sax. 383.
. By the Common law killing by misadventure, or in a man's own defense, was
murder founded upon the judicial law, before the Cities of refuge; the
forfeiture of both was as in the case of murder before the Statutes of Marlebr.
and Gloucest. the forfeiture of goods and chattels remains yet. If he that
kills by misadventure escapes, the Town where the Fact was committed is to be
amerced Fitzher. Corone 302 2. Just. 148, 149.
. So where the killing is se defendendo 2. Inst. 315.
. Men's lives are so precious in the Law, that the death of a man cannot be
justified, the Defendant in an appeal cannot justify the death se defendendo,
but must plead not guilty B. Appeal 122.
. A verdict that A. killed B. se defendendo is not good, the special matter
must be set down, that the Court may adjudge the killing to be upon inevitable
necessity Corone 302,
. Maiming, wounding menace of life and member in defense of the possession of
Lands or Goods, is not justifiable. An infant of nine years killed another
infant and hid him etc. the opinion of the Justices was, that he should be
hanged, but execution wat respited, etc. Corone 57 3. H. 7 d. 12
If a man be drowned by mischance in any pit not fenced, the Town is to be
amerced Coroue 304.320. v. 339.402, 421.
, so where a man dyed suddenly of a Fever and was buried without viewing by
the Coronour ibid. 329.
, a Lunatic kills a man he must sue for his Charter of pardon ibid. 351.
. And where the worst of men suffer those punishments which Justice inflicts
(which it were cruelty destructive to Government and Society to forbear) it is
well said to punish the Homicide, and sacrilegious, is not effusion of blood,
but ministry of the Laws; I say, where justice do strike, it is with an
humane severity; the offender with us does not carry to the place of execution
his own Cross; he is not first whipped, then nailed naked to the unhappy tree
(as it is called; we have no Italum Robur, Robur, or strong hold (as it is
Englished) in a stinking prison, horrible for darkness, where malefactors
necks were broke, by tumbling them headlong from the stock of a tree there
fastened in the earth. No rack or brake where the party innocent oftentimes was
tormented till he accused and condemned himself, being hoised upon it, and
fastened with ropes to it, his hands at the upper part, and feet at the nether
part; his joints were not only racked, but the tormentors often burnt and tore
the flesh from his sides with hot plates, and Iron pincers. Those who would
have introduced the Civil law in the time of King Hen. the 6. brought the rack
into the Tower, 3 Just. c. 1.
as a beginning to it. Hereupon, as is observed, the most reverend Sir John
Fortescue Chancellor, or rather chief Justice of England writ in commendations
of our Laws: where he maintains that all tortures are contrary to them. There
is no Law (says the Lord Coke) to warrant them in this land. Although there
were no full proofs against some of those horrible miners in the Gunpowder
treason, yet was it not thought fit, if the discovery could be made any other
way, to take the extraordinary of the rack. Some other legalartes were used,
(yet I cannot tell what could have been extraordinary, or illegal in the case
of such Hellish parricides, who if they could superas evadere ad auras, and
assume bodies, could not much exceed themselves.) Garnet and Hall betrayed
themselves by their own conference, which was permitted to catch them. That
conference is called by the Earl of Salisbury, The finger of God, Thereby (so
he tells Garnet) the Lords had some proof of matter against him; which must
have been discovered otherwise by violence and coertion; a matter (says the
Earl) ordinary in other Kingdoms, but forborne here etc. v Proceed against the
Gunpowder Traitors.
He adds, His Majesty (King James) and the Lords were well contented to draw
all from Garnet without racking or any such bitter torments. We have no
dejectio e soxe, like that headlong throwing down from a rock in the Tarpeian
mount. Nothing like the Gemonian stairs, whether the malefactor was either
dragged, According to Tacitus, Aun. l 5.
and cast into the Teuere, (It is said, there was not so much left of Sejanus
untorne by the people, which the Hangman might fix his hook on, to draw into
the River) or as others haled by the Executioners hook thrust into his throat,
and having his thighs broken, burnt, clad in a coat dawbd on the inside with
pitch and brimstone. We have no sawing asunder from the head downward; no
condemning to a Fencing school, to beasts, mines, or metals; no banishment,
deportation, no most barren Gyaros to confine men to, not so much as relegation
is known in our Laws; No empaling, no wheel. No deflowring Virgins by the
Hangman, before they be put to Quia in auditum, says Tacitus, trium virali
supplicio virginem affici. it had bin far less to have broke the custom, then
to ^^de this ^^k ^o keep it. L. 5. Ann.
death. Before Villainage expired here, the villain might bind his Lord to the
peace, he could not kill him, if he maimed him he might be indicted, fined and
ransomed. By Magna Charta, which is affirmance of the Common law, No free man
is to be amerced, but according to the manner of his offense. Misericordia is
the word used for amercement, there must be mercy in it; saving his countenance
(salvo contenmento etc.) the Merchant saving his Merchandise, the villain his
wainage Chap. 14 Glanu. l. 9. c. 11.
. No amercement is to be set here upon private men, but by affeerours, who are
to affirm upon oath what penalty the offender has deserved, as Bracton; to do
things fairly, neither carried away out of love nor hatred. The Writ of
Moderata misericordia, of moderate amercement is grounded upon this Statute
which it recites, and gives remedy to the party who is excessively amerced. If
the Jury give excessive damages against any man, Attaint lies; usury is not to
run against the heir within age Stat. Mert. c. 56
, (among the Saxons it was unlawful,) hence, where rent is to be doubled for
default of payment, it shall not be doubled during minority of the heir.
Distresses are to be reasonable; and if there be any other chattels sufficient,
sheep, and beasts of the plough are not to be touched. It would be infinite to
go on, I should, as we say, not only want day; but a long life were too short
to make a survey of all the parts to contract all the graces of this body, and
pourtray them, so that they may be a little, and a far off seen. A strong vein
of reason runs every where in the Law but so sweetened with equity and
clemency, it may well be thought made in a paternal government; given by a
common father of a family to his children. By Judah, or Joseph to their Tribes,
ruling but without a sting; Justice must (as is said) pare off unsound parts,
such as else would corrupt and destroy the whole body, no government can
subsist without it.

Quae fecit si quisque ferat jus fi^t and aequum. There is no greater equity
then this, that we should be done to as we do. But how unwillingly the Law
descends to these last remedies may be seen, by the many favors before
recited, allowed to the most heinous offenders, whom yet it does not pity, but
the frailty of man in them. Only is the innocent and honest man beloved, and
safe (as he only ought to be) in the law. He who shall transgress the Laws
(which is not a single impiety, such one as much as lies in him frames a new
Commonwealth to himself, and new laws, as if he had power to free himself
from those bonds, which nature and civil subjection have tied him in;) who
casts off all obedience to peace and justice, who maliciously violates the
sacred inhibitions of restraint, wickedly breaks through all those bars
which no law can prevent (religion and conscience must give the check) if he
fall, or break his neck by the way, the Laws are not to be complained of, the
calamity of his ruin is merely to be imputed to himself, though sometimes the
punishment may be thought severe, it is never new, nor inhumane, never so great
as the offense. One of our terrible judgments (so it is called) is the
judgment in an indictment of conspiracy, the same which was in case of attaint
against a Jury; by which the bodies of the offenders were to be imprisoned in
the common Jail. Their wives and children to be turned out of their houses,
those with their lands to be seized into the Kings hands, to be wasted, and
their trees extirpated, all their goods and chattels to be forfeited, the
Conspirators for ever to lose the benefit of the Law; this was called
villainous judgment. As the Lord Coke inflicted by the Common law; for that
the offenders by salse conspiracy under the pretext of Law, by indictment of
treason or felony, and legal proceeding thereupon sought to do the greatest
injustice by false conspiracy, to shed his blood, who afterward is lawfully
acquitted 3 Inst. 222
. Subtilty which wrests a manifest text of the Law is condemned as unrighteous
Hub. 125.
. So is cunning and malicious interpretation of the Law there. He who wrests a
text of the Law, though to maintain truth, does against distributive justice,
says the Lord Coke r. 10. praef. v. leg. non dubiu^.
, One reason of the severity of this judgment, may be given in the words of
the Statute of the banishment of the Spencers: The Law which was instituted for
the maintenance of peace, and of good men, and the punishment of the evil is
turned (by such courses) to the disheritance of the great men, and destruction
of the people 15. E. 2. 3 ^nst. 222.
If the party acquitted (that we may see how many several ways the law
provides for the innocent man) bring his action against the Conspirators (as he
may) he shall recover answerable damages, all practices to subvert justice,
truth, and innocence are punished by the law; he that will profess himself the
advocate of wickedness and injustice, and declaime against the Law for
suppressing them, deserves to fall into the danger of what he too unjustly
loves. Perjury of witnesses, and subornation were ever odious in the law. The
murderer, perjured man, and adulterer in an old law go together Ll. Cnuti. c.
6.
, perjury was punished by the realsfang or pillory; the punishment of perjury
was too to quit the Country, after forfeiture of movables Fleta l. 2. c. 1.
, then fine and ransom Brit. 38.
, Now forfeiture of a certain sum, and imprisonment 5 El. c. 9.
. Bribery was ever abominable; the judgment against Sir William Thorpe, a
bribing Judge was as in felony. In Fleta, the punishment of a corrupt Judge was
to be excluded the Kings Council for ever, to lose his lands, rents, goods, and
their profits for a year, after to be punished by discretion etc. It came to
fine and ransom. No great Officer, Justice, nor public minister, by a Statute
shall take any gift, or brocage of any person who has to do before him, 11 H.
4.
under the penalty to forfeit the treble, lose his place, to satisfy the party
etc. to offer a bribe was an offense punishable by the Common law. Extortion is
another great misprision, punishable by fine and imprisonment Trin. 6. Car.
reg. in Camara flell.
. It would take up too much time to run over the names of all offenses, and
their punishments. But some are full of Sir Thomas Moors kindness, and think
it too much that a man should lose his life for crimes under murder, as for
theft, etc. for which anciently loss of a hand or leg, or banishment were in
use, V. Council. Berghamsted Council. 197. Ll. Cnuti c. 61 Ll, Ina c. 3^.
AEthelst c. 1.
yet the party taken in the manner hand habend might be killed amongst the
Saxons, he could not buy his crime out; and the Spanish condemning to Galleys
is thought by some the only course, Mr. Daniel will have it, that as yet
(writing of Henry the seconds time) they came not so far as blood, which is not
so, King Henry the first abrogating the weregilde, by which a man might have
bought out his offense made a law (says Haveden) ut siquis in furto vol
latrocinio deprehensus fuisset suspenderetur -- to hang the thief Hoved. Sav 47
1. in H. 1.
, with whom Wigornien sis and Rad. Niger agree after in the latter end of the
reign of king Henry the third, we find a thief who had stolen 12 oxen
beheaded Ma. Par. continat. 1005.
, Capital punishments have not only been in use against homicides, but other
transgressors too, and amongst those who worshipped God rightly. We meet with
no divine precept before Judah, which makes whoredom worthy of death, yet when
he is told, Tamar thy daughter in law bath played the harlot, He answers, bring
her forth, and let her be burnt. We may proceed, says Grotius, by conjecture
of the divine Will, with the help of natural reason, from like to like, and
that which is a law against homicides, may be extended to others as dangerously
mischievous in b^l. 14.
. I will not dispute it whether there be more mercy in death v eadm 94
, cutting off legs, etc. or in the Galleys. I believe the boldness and number
of such malefactors begot the law of death, and those whom death with so much
infamy so often really before their eyes cannot fright, will never think any
torment whatsoever where life is left them (though with more misery then can be
spoken) terrible.

But it is thought horrible and grievous that a man's life (which is invaluable
in the law) should be taken away for a thing of nothing, for 12 pence. Which
says the most learned Knight is the ancient law of the English. Nay for less
(by the ancient law of the English I may say so) King Aethelstanes laws begin
with thieves and speak thus. First that man spare no thief (so I render it
according to the words) who in the manner, having in his hand taken is above
twelve years old, etc above eight ponce c.r.
, either eight pence or twelve pence. The law is full of equity, this king
gives a ram, etc. in the Preface (as the Saxon) worth four pence that which (as
Sir Henry Spelman) sold heretofore for twelve pence would now be worth 20, or
40 s. in the Assise of bread (long after the Saxons) in the 51 of Hen. 3. eight
bushels of wheat are valued but at twelve pence, and although now the 12 keeps
not the old rate but the modern, yet things are prized in trials of life far
below their worth, and no man loses his life but where the thing stolen in
estimate rises to more then many twelve pences. That title of Cosroes amongst
his others, a king who hates war may justly be given to our laws. Peace the
greatest blessing of this life, and without which nothing else can be a
blessing, is everywhere provided for, everywhere charged, and commanded. Peace
is commanded to be kept in the Palace, or Hall of the king, (the forfeiture of
the breach, being the loss of all the offender has, and his life at
discretion) in the church, the house, field, and town, the mulct of wrangling
was made 30.8. Ll. Ina. c. 6. Ll. Alfr. c. 7. Ll Edv. sen c. 4. Ll. Etheldr. c.
6
Every man was to give pledges heretofore of his good behavior, the violation
of Faith so given was punished, and is called breach of the peace. Every breach
of the peace was such violation. Everymans house as the law since expresses it,
is to be his Castle. He who infringed the freedom, or liberty of the house
called r^m soon by house breaking forfeited all he had, and his life was to be
at the kings will Ll. Edm. c. 6.
, Grith, or frithbrice were the terms for breach of the peace. King Cnut in his
laws, first wills, that Gods peace and the peace of the Church be kept, then
his own Ll. Cnuti c. 12.14.
, and again -- We must provide for peace or the amendment of it, most desired
by dwellers, and most odious to thieves c. 8.
. Amongst the Prerogatives of the West Saxon kings, are these, breach of peace,
and house freedom c. 12.14.
. The Statute called Westminster the first speaks Let the peace of the Land be
maintained in all points. The first of R. 2. Let the peace be well and surely
kept, etc. according to the Law of the Land. In the title of the Statutes of
the 50 of Ed. 3. are these words. To the honor of God, and of holy Church, and
quietness of the people. Which used to be the title of Parliaments ^ Inst. 9.
. The Statute of Hen. the 7. concerning Justices of peace has. That the
subjecti may live in surety uner his peace in their bodies, and goods. Inprimis
interest reipub. ut pax observetaer, is a mixime of the Common Law affirmed by
Parliament 2. Inst. 158.
. In all Actions for any thing done against a Statute law, where the words vi
and armis are left out, yet the Writ has contra pacem against the peace r. 9.50.
. Every affraying as Mr. Lambard, or putting in fear is breach of the peace.
The laws do not only make orders for the maintenance of the peace, but as to
the execution of the charge, have appointed general and particular Officers,
and Ministers to manage this part, and to undergo this care. The Lord
Chancellor, Lord High Steward of England, Lord Marshal, etc. Justices of the
kings Bench says Mr. Lambard, had authority enclosed in their Offices for the
conservation of the peace all England over. The Justices of the Common pleas
are said to be conservators only in special places. The Master of the Rolls
was a general conservator by prescription, Coroners and Sheriffs are to be
conservators within their Counties, Justices of the peace instead of the
ancient conservators antiquated, are especially warders of the peace, so are
Tithing men, Borougheads, Constables, and petty Constables in their limits. As
the first of Ed. 3. 1. E. 3. c. 15.4. E. 3. c. 2.
In every County good men and lawful, that been no maintainers of evil, nor
barretours in the Country shall be assigned to be Justices of the peace. As the
18 of that king. Two or three of the most substantial men, with other learned
in the Law, as the 34. A Lord with three or feur of the most substantial, etc.
By a Statute of King Henry the 6. The Justice must have Lands, and Tenements to
the value of xx. l. by the year, he is to be sworn duly, and without favor to
keep, 13. R. 2. c. 7
and put in execution all the Statutes, and Ordinances, touching his Office. As
by the Iaws of all Nations civil, Religion, and the Priesthood have their
privileges and honor so no laws ever favored piety, and the Church more then
these, and this fully and so often, that if it be made by any an objection of
prejudice, it cannot be denied, it must be confessed by all hands. Those of the
Roman new creed have in every age very clamorously and furiously slandered our
Laws, not only as short and imperfect, but as unjust, to be detested by all
the faithful Becket in Ma. Par. 101.
; Such as without a saving the honor of God, and of holy Church Hoved. Savil.
492.
, are not to be sworn to, against the faith, as the Bishop of Rochester, may be
thought to mean. Graft. 1187.
The exemption of the Clergy taken away by the Laws of Clarendon (where yet
only the old Laws were restored) was thought as legal an impiety, as heinous as
could be; yet Bellarmine, though a man more nimble then ten thousand Beckets,
durst not make it of Divine Right, Jure Divine valde conform, is as much as he
thinks it is; Not of Divine Right, that were too high, not of Humane, that were
as much too low, but very conformable to Divine Right, which is a ridiculous
conforformity, and makes it neither the one nor the other. Within five years,
in the time of King Henry the 2. there were above one hundred murders
committed in England by Priests, and men within Orders, so that it was time to
take heed of these exemptions. By which the Clerks were to be for ever beyond
the free years of Pompey dispensed with freed from the Laws. The most reverend
Chief Justice Fineux in the Case of convening Clerks (of which before) asks the
Archbishop of Canterbury (who would have such offenders delivered to the
Ordinary) if this were granted, what he would do with the parties so delivered,
you have no authority, says he, by the Law to determine matters of Felony, to
which no answer was given Kell. 7. H. 8.185.
. The Saxon founders, and indowers of the most of our Churches, left
never-dying Monuments of their Faith and good Works. The Laws of King
Aethelbert the first Saxon King begin with the Church, and make provisions for
that Ll Aethelbertic. 1.
. King Jua has Laws, concerning the life of the Clergy, Baptism of Infants,
hallowing the Sunday: The Churches sceat or part (very unjustly translated
Church seed) Sanctuaries, striking in the Church Ll Ina. c. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. 6. v.
ll. Alfred. c. 2.5, 6, 21. ll. Ed. sen. c, 7.
. King Aethelstane for Tithes, the teothate tenth Ll. Aethelst. proem.
. So have the King Edmund and Edgar Ll. Edm. c. 2. Edg. c. 2.3.
. The same Aethelstane concerning Church-Burglarie C. 5.
. Edmund again concerning repair of Churches C. 5.
. King Cnut for the peace of God and the Church Ll. Cnut. c. 2.3.
. The Council of Aenham a Lay Council, Commands that all men defend Gods
servants, and honor them Chapter 30. ll. Cnut. c. 4.
. As much respect was to be given the Priest as the Thane ibid. c 2.
. The head of the Mass Thegne, and of the Wordly Thegne or less Thegne are
valued alike Ll. Aethelst. Be erum.
. What privileges the Church enjoyed in its possessions may be seen by the
pieces of Charters before recited, and the plea of Pinnedene. I will note one
Law alone of the Saxons for the Churches liberty, which is this. andaenig man
heonan foth cyrican ne thoige. Let no no man make the Church ser. vile, impose
any servitude upon it Council. Aenh. c. 9.
. Let peace be binnaen agum, within her walis Ibid.
. Magna Charta begins, We have granted to God, etc. That the English Church be
free, and have all its Rights and Liberties whole, etc. of which the reverend
Commentator says thus, Ecclesiastical persons have more, and greater liberties
then others, to set down all would take up a whole volume, etc Mag. Chapter 1 Com.
3. v. 2. R. 2. c. 6. R. 2.
They have this privilege, not to serve in person in War. To be quit of
Tolles, and Customs, of Average, Pontage, Paviage, etc. for their
Ecclesiastical goods, and if they be molested there is a Writ given for their
discharge, by which it appears says the same Commentator, This was the
ancient Common Law of England. There is a protection with the clause Nolumus,
where they feared their beasts, or goods, or those of their Farmers might be
taken by the Kings Ministers. They are discharged of purveyance for their own
proper goods. No distress can be made in the ancient indowments of the Church
by any Officers whatsoever. Upon a Statute acknowledged by an Ecclesiastical
person his body cannot be taken. If he had not paid upon a recognisance at the
day. Nolevarifacias lay at the Common Law, if the person had nothing but
Ecclesiastical goods, etc. Where a Capias lies, and the Sheriff returns, that
the party is a Clerk beneficed having no Lay Fee, no Capias should issue to
take the body, but a Writ to the Bishop to cause him to come and appear;
Otherwise had not the word Beneficed been in the Return. No Ecclesiastical
person is bound to appear at Tourns or views of Frank pledge. The Church has
its place in the Parliament Writs: Though it be last named, it is the first
(says the Lord Coke) in intention 4. Jnst. 9.
. The Magna Charta (in the Title speaks thus) For the Honor of God, bealth of
our soul, exaltation of holy Church, and amendment of the Realm; The Title of
the Statute of Confirmation of that, and the other Charter is, Know that we to
the Honor of God, and of Holy Church, generally the Church leads 25. E. 1. 1.
E. 3. 2. E. 3. 5. E. 3. 15. E. 3. 31. E. 3. 47. E. 3. 1. R. 2. 2. R. 2. 5. R.
2. 6. R. 2. 7. R. 2. 13. R. 2. 21. R. 2. 1. H. 4. 4. H. 4. 8. H. 6. 28. H. 6.
39. H. 6. 1. E. 4. 3. E. 4. 1. R. 3. 1 H. 7. 2. H. 7. 3. H. 7. 4. H. 7. 11. H.
7. 12. H. 7. 19 H. 7. 1. H 8. 3. H 8. 4. H. 8. 5. H. 8.6, 7, 12, 23, 24, 25.
, in Richard the thirds Parliament too. Weal, Commonweal, Weal-publick, and
profit of the perple are ordinarily found in the Titles of the Statutes. If we
consider the Justice, Equity, Mercy, and goodness of the Laws (for the tree of
Piety is known by this fruit) the only scope of them being every where to
relieve the poor and oppressed, and to protect the innocent, the Religion and
Devotion of our Forefathers will plainly be visible in them, as their civility
and humanity are, whose memories we ought to honor, unless we will teach our
Nephews how to neglect, and slight our selves, and we cannot honor them more,
then by the imitation of their plain honesty and constancy (it is rather
Tyranny over others then presumption, to yield nothing to all men else, and to
look that all men else should yield to us) this we ought to do. And although
fortune may have too much power over virtue, though nothing be got by it, yet
after death and corruption of the parts mortal virtue perfumes the grave; it
ennobles and by example sometimes refines the posterity, leaves a taste of
Immortality behind it: the Great man's name cannot outlive his Marble, it
moulders away or is plucked up with it: the Good man is his own Monument, he
lives every where: who does not need an Epitaph? Victory over our selves, over
our own passions, private interests, pride, vainglory, rashness, levity, is the
most glorious, and most honest victory, such a Conqueror would undo Caesar,
and such a true line. Here lies a Good man who loved his Country, and never
broke the Laws, makes the Stone, or Brass more rich and precious then those
Egyptian Wonders which have survived their Founders, who is quite forgotten
and buried in them. What will much content some, no doubt by Magna Charta Mala
tolneta, all evil Tolls, Customs, all Praestations and Impositions for
Merchandise Imported and Exported are taken away c. 30.
. By the Statute of the Confirmations of the Charters, the Magne Charta, and
that of the Forests, There is a Grant (so are the words) Not to take aids or
Subsidies but by comman consent, and for the common profit c, 5, 6.
. And again there in the Chapter of the Maletot. c. 7.
. The ill Toll or Charge of 40 s. upon every sack of Wool is taken away, where
are these words, We have granted for us and our Heirs not to take, etc. without
common consent, and good will. By the Statute, called de Tallagio non
concedendo, No Tollage, nor aid was to be set or levied but by common consent
34 E. 1.
. All new Offices with new Fees are within this Statute 2 Inst. 533.
. No man is to be charged by any benevolence, which is condemned by a Statute,
as against the Law 1 R. 3.2.
. He who judges things impartially must confess the English ever to have been
the most happy and most free of all people, while they enjoyed the benefit of
these laws, and are likely yet to continue ^s happy under them for the time to
come. But as some there are, as is noted, who will allow no authority but their
own, not reason it self, nothing without themselves, so some there may be
rather for a Sect, then the truth, more willingly following a great name then
reason, choosing number rather then weight and worth, carried away with
authority as they call it, such as will yield to nothing else. If any such
there be, I will please them, they shall have authority with truth, weight, and
worth together. Not that I bring in other vouchers as if I refused those or
thought them not sufficient, who as have shown before are the true and
undoubted Judges of the laws. In the Council at Oxford, of the English and
Danes held in the sixth year of King Cnut. The English and Danes are said to
agree about keeping the Laws of King Edward the first. Wherefore they were
commanded by King Cnut to be translated into the Latin Tongue; and for the
equity of them (those are the words) to be kept as well in Denmark, as in
England Mat. West. flor. Hist. l. 1. 311. Wigorn. 311.
. Although it is said, the English laws Gloss. ver Lex. Dan.
. were silent, spoke not, in the times of the Danes, which might generally be
true; yet in the reign of of this King, it was otherwise, as appears by his
excellent laws of Winchester full of piety and justice Council. saex. 569.
. These were the famous laws observed by King Edw. the Confessor after, many
of the laws of K. Aetheldred, many of those of the renowned Council of Aeaham,
under the same Aetheldred are amongst them. In the Epistle of King Cnut writ to
the English when he was coming from Rome -- He says, He bad vowed to govern
the Realms subject to him justly and piously, and judgment in all things to
observe. At his return, says Malmesbury, he was as good as his word, For all
the Laws by the ancient Kings, and especially by his ancestour Aetheldred,
given under penalties, be commanded to be observed for ever, which now men
swear to keep under the name of King Edward; not that he ordained them, but
because he observed them Malm^b. de Gest. Reg. l 2. c. 11. p. 75.
. How much the ancient Englishman loved and prised the Common laws is evident
by what has been before said concerning the Magna Charta, and the settling them.
And it is more evident by the odiousness which subversion, and the subverters
of the Laws have lain under in all ages. There is a Writ in the Register (as
before) to take the impugners of the Laws, and bring them to Newgate Regist.
64.
. In the complaint of the Bishops of Henry the thirds reign, against the
strangers Poictouins his favorites, are these words, As also because the Law
of the land sworn and confirmed, and by excommunication strengthened, (this was
the Magna Chaeta) together with justice they confound and pervert Ma. Pa. 396.
. The Earl Marshall Richard complains of these Poictouins to this King, as
men who impooy themselves to the oppression of the Laws and liberties. ibid.
384.
Stephane of Segrave, the chief Justice is charged in another place, with
corrupting the laws, and introducing new ones ibid. 392.
. The same King is told by those Bishops, That if the subjects bad been
governed according to justice and right judgment of the land, etc. those
troubles had not happened. The Statute banishing the Spencers, the father and
son, has this Article: To the destruction of the great men, and of the people,
they put out the good, and fit ministers, and placed others in their room,
false and wicked men of their Covin, who would not suffer right, or law to be
had, -- and They made such men Justices, who were not at all conversant in the
law of the land, to hear and determine things. Empsons indictment runs -- Nor
having God before his eyes etc. falfely, deceitfully, and treasonously the Law
of England subverting 4 Just. 199.
The Articles against Cardinal Wolsey (before mentioned) begin, Has by diverse
and sundry ways and fashions committed high and notable and grievous offenses,
misusing, altering, and subverting the order of the laws. His articles are
there by the introduction said to be but a few in comparison of all his
enormities, excesses, and transgressions against the Laws. These Articles were
subscribed by the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk, the Marquesses of Dorset and
Exceter; the Earls of Oxford, Northumberland and Shrewsbury; the Lords
Fitzwalter, Rochford, Darcy, Mounjoye, and Sandys etc. all which, as those
others, taking subversion to be so heinous an offense, must needs be imagined
to esteem the Laws highly. Lewis of France, invited hither by the Barons in
King John his time, in the entrance to his new principality is made to swear
to restore to every of them the good Laws Ma. Pa. 282.
. As others, to maintain ad keep the institutions of the Country. Those who
desired a stranger for their master, would not be governed by new and strange
laws, amongst the covenants of marriage betwixt Queen Mary of England and
Philip the second of Spain, there is one to this effect: That he (the King
Philip) should make no invasion of State against the laws and customs of the
Realm, neither violate the Privileges thereto belonging Hollinsh. p. 1118.
. And amongst those covenants of marriage treated betwixt Elizabeth of most
happy memory, and Francis (Hercules of Valois) Duke of Anjou; the same care and
wariness is had: one of the conditons is. -- That the Duke shall change
nothing in the laws, but shall conserve all the customs of England Comd. Eliz.
338.
. The Lord Treasurer Burleigh, the Earls of Lincoln, Sussex, Bedford, and
Leicester; Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir Francis Walsingham were delegates
for the Queen: men too wise to tie themselves and others, to preserve those
things which are neither worth a care nor being. The Statute 28 of Edw. the 3
An. Dom. 1363.
speaks thus: The good, ancient Laws, customs and Franchises of the said
Realm. The second of Richard the second 2 R. 2. c. 1
Wills that the great Charter, and the good laws of the land be firmly holden.
The 3d. That the good laws and customs etc. be bolden 3 R. 2. c. 1 v. 5 R. 2.
c. 1 7 R. 2. c. 2. 9 R. 2. c. 1.
. The 4. of Hen. the 7. And over that his Highness shall not let etc. but that
he shall see his laws to have plain and true execution, and his subjects to
live in surety of their lands, bodies and goods, according to his said laws
etc. 4 H. 7.12 c. 9.
The 32. of King Hen. the 8. says, The King calling to mind etc. that there is
nothing within this Realm that conserveth loving subjects in more quietness
rest, peace, and concord, then the due and just ministration of his laws etc.
The first Parliament of King James has -- The fundamental and ancient laws
(which this King, as there is said, expressed many ways how far he was from
altering or innovating,) whereby etc: The peoples security of lands, livings,
and privileges, both in general and particular, are preserved and maintained;
and by the abolishing or alteration of which it is impossible but that present
confusion will fall upon the whole State etc. 1 Jac. reg. c. 2.
Twice in Petition of Right is this expression, and other the good Laws and
Statutes; once the laws and custows, once franchise of the land. The conclusion
is, all which they humbly pray, as their rights and liberties, according to the
laws and Statutes 3 Car. Reg.
. If public authority, authority of Parliaments, authority of the English
Nation in all ages, can make an authentike and valid testimony, by that
authority we see, our Laws are facred, pious, good merciful, and just; their
ends aim merely at the peace and happiness of the Nation, the only ends which
Laws should aim at; and these being had, he must forfeit the Noble reason of
man who desires a change, which whenever it shall happen by the judgment of
a Parliament, like the change of death must be fatal to the State. Though here
is already the weight I promised, and such as all English men should allow, I
will add a testimony or two more of private men, not of the profession, yet no
strangers in the Law, as the most knowing Sir Henry Spelman, Of all municipal
laws, our law plain and without dress as she is, is the most noble Lady,
replete with all justice, moderation, and prudence etc. As Sir Thomas Smith,
the people here are accustomed to live in such sort, that the rich have no more
advantage then the poor. Dr. Cowel a most knowing Civilian, very judicious in
our laws, -- says of the two Benches, They decide all causes religiously
according to the rescript of the Common law Justit. Angt. 24. sect. 2.
: a most learned Knight of our age praises highly our forefathers for their
virtue abroad, and their exquisiteness of counsel and judgment at home,
amongst whom as he (in Livies expression) The commands of the laws were ever
more powerful then those of men, and Justice was administered with that
sineerenesse and judgment, you would believe it to have proceeded from
Papinian himself, of all men who are, shall be, or have been the most skilled
in the laws D. Rog. Twisden praefat. ad Ll. Guil. 1. and Hen. 1.
. Our laws are not written in any general tongue, and so cannot easily be known
by foreigners, but by the effects, long continuance here, or acquaintance, and
seldom so, strangers every where for the most part desiring to take notice of
every thing else, rather then of laws. The French man who wrote the estates of
the world, discoursing of the charges practiced in other provinces in his time,
says, But the liberty of England is marveilous in this regard, no Country any
where being less charged Les Esta. etc. p. sci^ur D. T. V. Y. v. Sir Rob. D
alingt. surv^y of Tuscany.
. The Lord of Argenton as much experienced as any man in his age, or perhaps
since, who had seen Venice and the order of things there, and praises it
sufficiently, yet speaks in his plain manner of England. Now according to my
judgment, amongst all the Seigneuries of the world, which I have had any
knowledge of, where the Commonwealth is best managed, and where there is less
violence used upon the people, it is England Liver 5.
.

It was otherwise of France in the days of his Master Lewis the 11. In many
places so grievous were the Taxes, men, women and children were forced to draw
the plough by their necks, and that by night for fear of the Collectors P. Mat.
Lon. 11.
. If we look upon the Peasants of France flead alive, the Villano, or Contadino
of Italy, either under the Spaniard or Venetian. Where Fruit and Salades Sir
Rob. Dalingtons Survey of Tuscany.
, nay, and Asses dung all things whatsoever pay Tribute but men's sighs, where
one word gabelle is of the largest extent, and more used then all the other in
the Languages (and leave out the chains of the Turkish Galleys, and the most
sad thraldom of those Natives of America under the Spanish Conversion of the
newest Fashion, Baptized but as Bede says of the Protomartyr Albane in their
own blood) we shall find nothing so miserable, so unhappy in Nature. Our
Yeoman, as Sir Tho: Smith, is a free Englishman, a man well at ease, and having
honestly to live. He savours, says a Reverend Church*man of our Nation, of
civility and good manners, living in far greater reputation then the Yeoman in
Italy, France, Spain, Dr. Heyl. Geegr.
or Germany (I may say for some of them more freely, more plentifully then the
Gentry of either Spain or Italy) being able to entertain a stranger honestly,
diet him plentifully, and lodge him neatly. We may read the words of a
Parliament to this purpose (after the discovery of the Powder Plot; No Nation
of the earth has been blessed with greater benefits then this now enjoys 3.
Jac.
, and whatsoever benefits we have received, we owe them all to the Laws, they
are derived to us thence, we can attribute them to nothing else. Honor given
to the Professors of the Laws
As Justice is the most excellent of all virtues, seated in the Will. as more
sedate, and nearer to the reason, its object being the profit of others. So it
is with good cause preferred before Fortitude (as Peace before War) which ought
to be ruled by a certain Justice, and if all men were just there would be no
need of Fortitude. The ancient Chief Justice, whatsoever may be talked of the
Constable, or others, was the Great Officer of State, and as he had more power,
so had he the precedence of all men else. Odo Earl of Kent, Chief Justice in
the time of William the 1. is called Prince of the Palace by Ingulphus Hist.
Savil Edit. 907.
. Sometimes the Chief Justice is called Warden of the Realm, Vice Lord of
England, and Justice of England: as the Alderman of England was most Honorable
in the Saxon times, So was the Justice after, (which was the same,) from the
first time the word is heard of till Henry the third, if we except Hugh of
Bocland, and Ranulphe of Glanville, we shall not find one of these Justices
but he was a Bishop, a Peer, or at least of the Nobility, of one of the
illustrious families. Aubreye of Ver Earl of Guisnes high Chamberlain of
England, Justice, and (as some) Portgrave of London, father of Aubreye of Ver,
the first Earl of Oxford (which family so Mr. Cambden justly, is the most
ancient, (fundatissima familia) amongst the English Earls) as Matt. Paris, was
ready in the variety of causes, exercised in them In Sitph. reg.
. And of Geofrey Fitzpeter. Then dyed Geofry Fitzpeter, Earl of Essex, and
Justice, of great power, and authority, a generous man skilful in the laws,
allied either by blood or friendship to all the great men or Barons of England
Id. in Johrege.
. Henry after king, son of Henry the second, was chief Justice of England. By
the Statute of 31 of Hen. the 8. c. 10.
which ranks the public great Officers: The Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper
is the first man. The great Chamberlain of England, Constable, Marshal, and
Amiral are to sit below him; the Justices are accounted Peers, and fellows of
Peers. Magna Charta says, No free man shall be amerced but by his Peers, and
according to the manner of his offense. It is observed. As to the amercement of
an Earl, Baron, or Bishop, -- for the Parity of those who should amerce them
when this Charter was made that the Justices and Barons of the Exchequer were
sufficient. Bracton, as the most learned Mr. Seldom cites him, says, Earls,
or Barons are not to be amerced, but by their Peers, and according to the
manner of their offense (as the Statute is) and this by the Barons of the
Exchequer, or before the king 1. H. 6, 7 v. D. Spelmver he Baron Scaccer.
. All Judges says (the same Mr Seldom) were held anciently as Barons which
appears in an old law of Henry the first, which is -- Regis Judices sint,
Barons Comitatus qui liberas in eis terras habent per quos debent causae
singulorum alterna prosecutione tractari Villani vero Cotseti vel Ferdingi
(Cocseti vel Perdingi in legibus nuper editis sed perperam) vel qui sunt viles
and inopes personae non sunt inter Judices numerandi c. 29.
. The Barons of Counties who had free lands in them, were to be Judges, not
common base fellows -- hence (as Mr. Seldom) again are the Judges of the
Exchequer called Barons. The black book of the Exchequer makes it manifest, the
Judges of the Exchequer (before Hen. 3. or Edw. the 1. for thereabouts the
Exchequer had its ordidinary and perpetual Barons) were of the Baronage by
these words part. 1. c. 4
. There sits the chief Justice of our Lord the King, first after the King, etc.
and the great men (or Barons of the Realm) most familiarly assistants in the
kings secrets. By the decree of king James 28. May. 10. Jac. reg.
. The Chancelour and under Treasurer of the Exchequer, Chancelour of the
Duchy, chief Justices, Master of the Rolls, chief Baron of the Exchequer,
all the other Judges, and Barons are to have precedence of place before the
younger sons of Viscounts and Barons, and before all Baronets, etc. there the
degree of the Coif, is called an honorable order, the Sergeant is called by
Writ -- The words used to be, we have ordained you to the state and degree of a
Sergeant at Law. Vos and Vobis in election of Sergeants, and summons of Judges
to Parliament (ever applied to persons of quality) are used. One Statute speaks
where he takes the same State upon him 8 H. 6. c. 10.
. And another, At the Creation of the Sergeants of the Law 8 E. 4. ^, 2.
. Which is observed ever to be applied to dignity Rep. 10. Epist.
. The Patrons of causes called ( pleading advocates, and Narratores; Counters
of the Bench or Prolocutors of old, as Paris) Hist. 516. vit. Abb. 142.
all Lawyers were anciently of the Clergy; And those now who are so curious
for neatness of that order, may thank their predecessors for that rudeness
which is so unpardonable by them in the Latin of the Law. No Clerk but he was
a Lawyer (says Malmesbury in Lib. 4. Ed. 1. Savil. 123.
William the second) we read that Mr. Ambrose the Clerk of Abbot Robert of St.
Albanes most skilful in the law, an Italian by Nation, amongst the first of the
lawyers of England for time, knowledge, and manners is sent to Rome; Vitae Abb.
St. Alb. 74.
Adam of Linley, is said to be Abbot John the 1. his Counselor in all his
weighty affairs, a courteous man, honest, and skilful in the laws Ibid.
, after Archdeacon of Ely, (for most of them held Church Livings;) he was after
special Counselor and Clerk, says this this Monk) to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Stephane. John Mansel of whom we read so much in the History of
Hen. the 3. is called the Kings special Counselor and Clerk, as much as
Attorney general since Ibid. 142
. Hence it is that the ancient habit of secular Judges was the same; and yet is
with that of the Ecclesiastics D. Wats. Gloss. ad Paris.
. William of Bussey Seneschal, and chief Counselor of William of Valentia
would have losed (says the same Monk) the stays of his Coife, to show his
Clerkly tonsure, his shaven crown 984, 985 Hist.
. And again he says, The Clerks who such Writs dictate, write, sign, and give
counsel 206. A^^it.
. They are restrained by Pope Innocent the 4. his Decretales, who forbid any
such to be assumed to Church dignities, etc. unless he be learned in other
liberal Sciences. Philosophy and Divinity were laid by (as the words there)
the multitude of clerks ran to the hearing of secular laws ibid. 190.101.
. Hugh of Pa^shul clerk is made justice of England by Hen. the 3 Hist. 405
. So was the famous John Mansel (before) Keeper of the great Seal. There have
been seven Wardens of the Kingdom, or Viceroyes of the Clergy, twelve great
chief Justices, near 160 times have Clergy men been Chancellours, about 80.
of them Treasurers of England: all the Keepers of the privy Scale of old, the
Masters of the Rolls, till the 26. of King Hen. the 8. the Justices of Eire, of
Assise, till Edw. the third, were of that order D. Spel. Epist ad conc^l.
; men whom the Laws were beholding to 1 Inst. ^ect 524. rep. 5. C^wd. 2. Just.
265.
. else they had been told of it. Many great Families have been advanced by the
Law; many of the best and noblest thought it no disparagement to profess it.
Some of our illustrious names may be met with amongst the Sergeants and
Apprentices of our year books as well as in the Heralds books. If like Boccace
his Ghost all those who laid the foundations of their houses, who first broke
through the miste of time, wherein they and their ancestors were hid before,
who first showed their names to the world, were to appear before us in the
habit of their sprouting up, with all their sordid cheats, with all the crafts
and several close arts of thriveing used by some, displayed, and revealed, all
the false sleights of the Town and Country laid open, where every penny is got
oftentimes too too dishonestly, by the unworthiest sins a man can commit, how
would the gaudy offspring curse his own rise, the branch be ashamed of its own
root, virtue alone is honorable, money can neither make men wise, valiant, nor
good. Arts, and Arms only and really innoble, that of all others most
deservedly whose object is merely the good of mankind, which imployes men
continually for the public, for the preservation of the people pacique
imponere morem. The soldier as Cicero, may once profit his Country, the Lawyer
always. Our most Reverend Judges and professors of the Laws have in all ages
Anciently part of the Persian kings title The ophyl.
risen with the Sun, and given eyes to the blind night. But I have offered my
self too far to ungrateful dangers. Here I will stop, and give over. Not that
much is not left out which might have been said of the sacred Law of the Land,
and the administration of Justice here. Much is left out and I wish some more
happy and more able would undertake the whole. It is enough which again I may
protest, that I speak not in the midst of Fetters, and that I have defended
(and the defense could not but be easy) truth only for its own sake, yet I
believe he who knows most, who commands most in language, and Sciences, who
pretends justly a title to the kingdom of the bar or schools, with all his
mouths, and tongues if he had more then one hundred, could not do full right,
would be short and wanting here. Not in our right hands (as is said of those
soldiers in Curtius) but in our Laws, our help, our hope, and liberty lie. We
need not ask for propriety, not for peace, not for order, concord, security,
not for wealth, nor honors, one wish comprehends them all, carries all these
with it, the safety of the laws, is all these propria haec sidona -- We have
seen at large what excellent blessings we have received from the Law, these
blessings may be everlasting if that be made so, I know nothing it ought to
yield to (and our Parliaments have thought so) but eternity; and the change by
that.

FINIS.
The Table.
A.
Aid to Knight the eldest son, etc. 127 Alodium, alodiaries, 129, 130, etc.
Aelfred the King not the founder of the Saxon policy, 85, 86 Aequity, and
judging according to equity, how to be understood, 31, 32 Aescuage 127, 149
Aldermen amongst the Saxons, 98
B.
Barons, Norman and English, ever lovers of the Laws 107, 280 (...) 80 Bocland
140 (...) 80 Britannie and the Britains under the Romans, 71, 72, 73. The Civil
Law the first Law heard of them amongst them, 73, 74, governed by Kings, 72
C.
Casars Commentaries l. 6. concerning the Gauls and their wives, 75 L.
Chancellours Oath, 65 Chief Justice the greatest subject, 159, 288, 289 Church
highly favored by Laws, 273, 274 Circuits of the Judges, 163 Civilians what
opinion they have of the Pandects, etc. 226 Clergy men heretofore Lawyers, 292
Cnut the king composed the law called the law of St. Edward, 88 Counselors,
175 Courts of Justice are of Saxon original, 94, 95, 96 Courts since, 159, 160,
etc. Courts standing and ever open, 165, 166 Customs unwritten why, 89
D.
Delays odious in the law, 169, 170, etc. De rerum venditione, that
constitution set forth at York; 74 Drenches, 143 (...) 80 The Duilian ba^k,
218
E.
Earls amongst the Saxons, 98 Edilinges, 140 Edward the third first changed
the Welsh laws, 76 (...), what, 200 Eleutherius his Epistle to Llever Maur, a
forged piece, 73
F.
Faulehen what, 124 Feudes, 121 Firdfare, 149 Foleland, 129.152 Forstale, 134
Frankalmoigne, 127 Frankleudes, 129, 130 The French Policy and ours much
alike, 126 Fyheren, 124 Frilinges, 126 Fundi limitrophi, 119
G.
Gavelkinde in Germany, 125 (...) 80 The Germans and their institutions, have
over^^owen all Europe, 78, 79, 80 Their laws called salic more ancient then
Justinian 81 Glebal gold, 120, Adscriptitius; ibid. Grithbrece, 134
H.
Henry the eight imposed wholely the English laws upon the Welsh, 77 Heinfare,
145 Hereban, 150 Herefare, 127, 143 Hereot, 127 14 High Court of Justice, 97,
159 Hotoman his censure of Littleton, 240
I.
Infangennethiefe, 134 Judges not to decide causes according to discretion, how
to be intended, 32, 33 Their authority, 199, etc. Assistants to Kings and
Parliaments there, heretofore Barons, 290 Honored, 292, 293 Iuries, trials by
them not brought in by the Conqueror, 92, 93 Justice to obey laws, 33
K.
Kings of Macedon ruled by law, 24 Of Mexico might not be touched, 45 Kings of
England their Oath, 111 Might free men from the Firdfare, Burgbote, etc. 151
Kisses given to Princes, 118
L.
Laudamentum, 124 Laws -- the enemies of them, 1, 2 Necessity of them, 18, 35
Law, what it is, 34, 35 Force is not law, 23, 24, 25 Nor the arbitrary will of
man, 27, 28 Why laws were written, 30, 31 How ancient, 35 Law of the land in
Magna Charta is not waging law, 50, 51 Common Law, 75, excells and may control
Statute laws, ibid. Custom and expirience begot it, 60, 61 It is known and to
be found in books, 60, 65, 66 67 Its antiquity not Norman, etc. 64, etc Laws of
Hoel Dha and the Welsh, 76, 77 Salie Laws, 86, 81, 82 The Saxon laws, 84, the
several kinds, 88 Our fundamental laws Saxon, 90, 91, known by the name of St.
Edwards laws, 100, 101, 102, 104, settled in the great Chaster, 108, 110 then
called Common Law. Letters of the Ionians and Phaenicians heretofore near the
same, 37 Loudes, 131 Liberty what is, 45, 46, etc. Littleton vindicated, 240,
241 Lombards their laws, 84
M.
Manners and privileges belonging to them amongst the Saxons, 133 Method of
our law, 243
N.
Normans themselves ever zealous for the laws of St. Edward, 135, 107, 108 They
as some, received their laws from the Saxons, 112
O
(...) 80 (...), etc. 120 Operae liberterum 119
P
Papinian Judge at York 74 Papists ever enemies to the law^s 67 Parkes 136 Plea
of Pinneden under Will. the 1. 104 Pleadings 209 Polydore Virgil 92, 93
Propriety 2, 3
R
Rectories and glebe-land, whence 151 Relief 127, 131, 147
S
Salbuch in Germany 83 Saxons their policy and government 85, 86 Sac. 134. The
Saxons subverted all things 77, 78 Saxon tongue 215, 216, 217 Sicyon never
changed her laws in 740. years 53 Slaves thrown to Lampries 252 Soc 134 Socage
129 Spaniards retain the German customs 128 (...) 120 Subverters of the laws
66, 67
T
Team 134, 135 Tenures all Europe ever 118 Reasons of them 119, 120 All lands
held of the King 149 Terms of the law 213, etc. Thanes, Thenes. 137, 138, etc.
Tol 134 Tribonian censured by Perrinus 226 (...)
V
Vassi dominici 125 Vicedominus 99 Villeins 153, 154 Vtwara
W
William the 1. his entry not so violent as is thought by some 143, 144 Writs,
whence they issue 162. See 207, etc. anciently the Kings letters there. No man
to answer or be called in question without a Writ 209
FINIS.

