An Exact and Perfect Relation RELATION Of the TERRIBLE, and BLOODY FIGHT:
BETWEEN The English and Dutch Fleets in the Downs, on Wednesday the 19 of May,
1652.

RELATING, How Martin Van Trump the Dutch Admiral, upon General Blagues
friendly salutation, set forth his bloody Flag of Defiance; With the whole
particulars of the Fight, and the manner of the Engagement.

Also, A List of our Admirals ships that engaged in the aforesaid Fight; and
the Names of those those that lost men in this service, with the namber of them
that were slain and wounded on both sides; Together with the sinking of one of
the Hollanders, the taking of 3, and the total spoiling of their whole Fleet;
with their flight to Deep in France, and what happened to the English in the
pursuit.

Being the true Copy of a Letter sent to Mr. Richard Bostock of London,
Merchant.

Published according to Order, and Printed for the satisfaction of all that
desire to be truly informed,

London: Printed for Robert Wood, 1652.

A more particular and exact Relation of the bloody fight that happened in the
Downs, between the English and the Hollanders.
Worthy Sir,
MY Service to you, wishing all happiness; On the 18 of May instant, the
Hollanders Fleet consisting of 42 sail of stout ships, all men of war) came by
the Eastward, and lay by the Lee of the South-fore-land, and from thence sent
two of their Fleet into the Downs to Major Bourn, who was then Admiral (Genesis
Blague being absent) the Captains of those ships coming aboard our Admirals
ship, desired leave of him to anchor their ships in the Downs; the Admiral
asked them why they came into our seas with their Flags up, so near our Navy;
they answered they had orders not to strike their flags to any they should meet
with; whereupon, the Major answered them, that within two days time they should
know whether there was room enough for them to anchor in or not; yet
notwithstanding this, the Hollanders anchored in Dover Road, and rode there
till the 19th. About two of the clock in the afternoon, Major Bourn came out of
the Downs into Dover Road with 10 sail, and Col. Blague from the rest with 13
sail more; the Dutch Fleet seeing this weighe anchor, and stood up to the coast
of France with their Flaggs up, near upon two hours, and then bore up to Genesis
Blague, each ship having a man at the top mast head, as if they intended to
have struck their Flags, when they came within shot of our Admiral, he made
one shot at them for to strike but they refused still coming toward him,
whereupon he made two shot more at them, and then the Hollanders gave him one
shot, still making nearer to him, and coming up to him, saluted our Admiral
with a whole volley of small shot and a broad side of gunshot, and Col. Blague
returned him the like, and bearing up after him they two charged three or four
broadsides at each other, 1, of the Hollanders gave our Admiral each of them a
broad side, before any of our ships came up to second him; then the General of
Foulston came up between the Hollanders and our Admiral, and gave them a
breathing time; and in an hours time the ship called the Triumph came up to
them, and fell up into the whole Fleet. About six of the clock at night the
Dutch Admiral bore away, and Genesis Blague after him; but Van Trump went better
then our Admiral, insomuch that he could not come up with them but followed
them within shot till nine of the clock, in which time, the Hollanders had so
shattered our Generals sails and rigging, that they had neither sheets, tacks,
nor brace, and his fore-sail was all torn in pieces; by means whereof Van Trump
sailed away, and all his Fleet after him; only one of our Frigots boarded one
of them, who had 150 in her; whereof 50 were slain, and the rest wounded and
taken: we also shot another Dutch ship main Mast over board, and took her, she
having 37 guns in her, but finding six foot of water in her hold, we only
took out the Captain, and two more and left her not able to swim, but sunk
shortly afterward.

In this fight we had but 18 sail engaged, because some could not get up time
enough; also one of our fleet had but two guns, the Greyhound was of no great
foree, and two more were but Catches would do no good. Our Admiral received
200 shot, some of which did execution, and many of their own shot; we lost 8
men in the Admiral, five slain out right, three dead since; and had twenty
wounded; In the Reuben there was three men slain; in the Centurian two; in the
Victory two, and in the Fairfax one, the Garland Entrance, and the Worcester
frigot lost not one man, but the Dutch lost four times our number in the two
ships that were taken; besides what they lost in that which was sunk. The
General says some men did not engage at all, and therefore deserve to be
looked upon as undeserving men.

Our ships are all now (God be praised) safe in the Downs, and have brought in
two Hollanders, one of them thought to be an Adviser. I was aboard our fleet in
the Downs and there came six Hollanders that were Merchant men, within a league
of our fleet, whereupon a Frigot of ours came up to the Admiral, and asked
leave to fetch them in; but the Admiral answered that they were men about
honest occasions, and he had no order from the Council of State to meddle with
them, and so let them pass about their occasions.

While I was aboard the Admiral, there came a Dutchman of War, supposing it to
be Van Trump, but the Speaker Frigot quickly fetched him up, and brought him in
to our Fleet.

There are 36 of the Hollanders ships that engaged with our Fleet in the
aforesaid fight, that ride about Deep, every one of them being about* 1000. or
1500. Tun, most of them pitifully torn and battered, and many of them without
either Mast, Sails, or Flags; having lost the company of their Admiral.

Dover, May, 22. 1652. Sir, Your assured Friend, Thomas White.

The Copy of another Letter from Dover of the same Date.
SIR,
I Cannot but intimate unto you some Particulars of a bloody beginning of an
unhappy Breach between the English and the Dutch Fleet, though perhaps you may
have it more fully then we, yet I shall impart what I have seen. Tuesday,
Martin Vantrump came before this Town, and rode in the Road at anchor with his
Fleet, being 41 sail of good ships of War, not a small ship amongst them till
Wednesday at noon, with his Flag on the main top, at which time some shot was
sent from the Castle and Fort, to cause him to strike (as is the custom) but
he would not. At which time General Blake with his Fleet appeared, being in all
25 good ships, of which, 7 of the old Navy ships, and the rest were Frigots,
and other ships of good defense. On sight of them, the Dutch tacked about, and
stood in with the English Fleet, and Trump himself very boldly stood up with
Genesis Blake with his Flag aloft, and coming near, the Admiral shot at a
distance from him (as is the custom) to make him strike, and so at second and
third time shot at him and hit him. To whom Trump answered with one Gun without
shot; then our Admiral shot* 3. or 4. upon which, Trump came up and gave him a
whole broad side, and in stead of pulling down his Flag, put up a red Flag
under the former, and having received the like salute from the English General,
the Fleets on both sides did desperately engage, so that there was the hottest
dispute for the time, that has been this many years, between two such Fleets,
and was conceived by knowing men that it would not end so long as a ship on
both sides could swim on the water. But it pleased God better to dispose
thereof; for it began at 4 of the clock in the afternoon, and ended at past 9
at night, it being dark that they could not know one another. The Flemming
stood off toward the French Coast, and our ships anchored about the place, and
in the morning the Dutch were gone. Our ships came up this morning with their
whole Fleet, having not lost one, and have taken one from the Dutch, and have
sunk another; It was thought their Admiral could not but sink: Just now is come
a collier from France that met them last night; He says, That they have never
an Admiral amongst thew, nor any Flag or Ensign out amongst them all.

A List of those ships of the Parliaments side that chiefly engaged, and the
number of men that were slain out of each ship.
In the Admiral, 20 wounded, and 8 slain. In the Reuben, three slain. In the
Centurion, two, In the Victory, two. In the Fairfax one. The Garland, Entrance,
and Worcester Frigots lost not a man out of them.
What loss the Enemy received is not certainly known; but we sunk one of them,
took three, and totally shattered and spoiled their whole Fleet.

FINIS.

