Peripateticall INSTITUTIONS. In the Way of that eminent Person and excellent
Philosopher Sr. KENELM DIGBY. The THEORICALL PART.

ALSO A THEOLOGICAL APPENDIX of the BEGINNING of the WORLD.

BY THOMAS WHITE Gent.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. and are to be sold by John Williams at the sign of
the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. M.DC.LVI.

Virg. Georg. 2. Happy who things Causes has attained to know,
And all Fears and inexorable Fate
Has trampled under feet: --
The Method of Studying.
Whoever profoundly searches after Truth,
And would not be misled by straggling Paths;
Let him turn on himself his inmost Eye,
And bend into a Ring his ranging Thoughts;
Making his Soul see what she seeks abroad
In her own native Treasures stored up lies:
What the black cloud of Error hid, will soon
Shine clearer then the Sun it self at noon.
Boet. de Consol. Philosoph lib. 3. Metr. 11. The Translatour's ADDRESS.
THis happy Analysis of Nature, which the infinite kindness of my beft Friend,
the Author, has encouraged and enabled some pains of mine own to render plain
English to my self, I dutifully present to my Country: Where so many clear Wits
and strong Judgments (the perfect Aptitude to such a Philosophy) may, through
the want or disuse of Latin, be disabled, or, by the extreme concisenesse of
the Style, and incorrectnesse of the Press, discouraged from struggling for It
in the Original. The Subject, Nature and her general course, is universal
and practically indifferent to all Nations: it seems, therefore, but just her
Interpreter, Philosophy, should speak all languages; at least to that fair
degree of currentnesse, as abstracted Reason it self is, every where,
intelligible. Upon this resentment, the incomparable Sir Kenelm Digby (whose
Expression would I could glory so proportionably to have hit, as my Master may
his Mind) began lately to teach it Our Idiom; which it so soon and perfectly
attained, as clear evidences His to be the truly- Natural Philosophy: What
ingenuous Courage, once thoroughly engaged (and under so sure a Champion) the
same advantageous Way, in the same noblest Field, could resist the temptation
to follow such a Leader and such Success, upon so necessary a Design? In
short, I have dared: nor, I hope, altogether unfortunately; at least, if an
Authentic touch of Illustration, upon most of the knots and obscurities, in
the Original both Matter and Delivery, may excuse the tolerating still some
few Terms, purely out of the stubbornness of their Nature, unreduc'd and,
perhaps, unreducible. These, Reader, are the Translatour's Apology and
Address: the Author's, His known Name and the Work it self.

The Author's DESIGN.
IN what darkness Philosophy lies hudled up, and how perplexing Chimaera's
reduce it to desperation, it is needless to mention: They see it, whoever see
any thing in it. As superfluous, therefore, 'twere to Apologize, why I would
lend it my slender endeavors. Why, such as you see, I offer them, take this
Account.

The main fault seemed to me to lie at their doors, who neither do themselves
nor can endure others should expect any certainty from It. Of these I have
observed two sorts: Some there are that avouch as much of Geometry it self:
some, that attribute this, not to the defect of Nature, but to the difficulty
of the Matter, and the intricatenesse of Natures folds. And, I was about to
provide a preambulatory disputation to the former: when this Dilemma came into
my head, that, They either admit the evidence of a legitimate Syllogism, or
not: if they admit it, they cannot contest against Geometry; if they admit it
not, I saw not what farther evidence there was in Nature able to force them:
They were, therefore, desertours of humane Nature; nor otherwise to be dealt
with, then as Madmen. Turning, then, to the later sort, I saw there is no so
smart proceeding as the Geometrical way; where, when it is asked whether a
thing can be demonstrated? the Affirmer, producing a demonstration, presently
destroys the Problem: So, I thought, I was to proceed by Instances, if I
meant to persuade any thing. Thence sprung this grain of Mustard Seed; which,
to what growth it may hereafter rise, it is not yet evident.

Why I have styled them Institutions, the shortness and concise connection of
the work sufficiently discover. I call them Peripateticall, because, throughout
they subsist upon Aristotle's Principles; though the conclusions sometimes
dissent. That I declare them written in the way of that eminent Person and
excellent Philosopher Sir Kenelm Digby; it is, because, since, in that so
justly-to-beenvy'd Book, Of the Immortality of the Soul, he has dissected the
whole composition of Nature, from the first Notion of Body, to the very joints
and articles of an invisible spiritual Soul, and laid it before the eyes of
all; any other way, then that He had traced out, I neither would nor could
proceed. Whatever, therefore, you meet with, upon that Subject, is borrowed
thence: but so, as that I have transferred only the naked Bones, scarce hanging
together by their sinews; wholly destitute of those Nerves and Colors with
which they are sated there. There look for Nature, where you shall miss
neither Orator nor Philosopher: we only act the part of Abridgers or
Summulists. The other things which are treated through this whole work, ly yet
hid in His Cabinet, expecting the pains of greater leisure. If I have called
this the Theoricall part; I would not, thence, have you expect another
Practical one: for, I meant only to declare, that I touched nothing upon the
Moral. In Logic you have a little; yet, something, unless I Am deceived, more
then need: for, few Precepts are to be prescribed for Use, but a great deal of
exercise. Out of the rest, if I have cut off the intricate and unprofitable
petty Questions; methinks I have deserved thanks.

Do you ask, What fruits I expect? That you should believe there is, in Nature
and in things beyond Nature, a no-lesse connection of Terms and force of
Consequences, then in Mathematics: For, this the Order, and Brevity, and the
invincible firmness, surely, of some Consequences will obtain of an
unobstinate person. This if I shall have attained; since all Science is lastly
resolved into the unity of Definitions* I hope, natural Science will be
rescued from desperation. I have divided the Books into Lessons and very
frequent Breaks: both for the greater clearness and commodity of Citation; as
also, because, conceiving the entrance into these Institutions would be
scarcely open to Novices, without the help of some more skillful, I have called
a Lesson so much as may, at one fitting, be explicated; a Break, that which at
one breath, or with one effort of the Mind and Voice; to afford, betwixt the
Breaks, a breathing space from speaking.

To the Auditors, Questioning is permitted, in that kind as may make them
understand the things proposed; Opposition is prohibited, till they have, once
or twice, run through the whole Work: For, whilst they are yet ignorant of what
lies hid in the things to follow; by forestalling the order, they spoil the
Discourse, whilst they tamper with objecting. The Work is but short; and, for a
little while, the affection of Credulity may be fairly exacted in a Learner,
that he may clearly apprehend the things proposed: When he shall have
understood against what he is to object, there will be liberty enough of
disputing.

You see, a Walk or Garden may serve well enough for this exercise: I have
therefore given you a volume which will not load your Pocket. I have followed
that Method which the necessity of consequences drew on, not, the rules of
Logic prescribed, though yet it be not averse from this. If you blame the
Obscurity, Aristotle's orall Instructions to Alexander.
remember, Acroases are so to be published, that they become not public: that
their penetration may be difficult without a Clue, yet not unpassable to a
resolute pursuance.

THE TABLE.
FIRST BOOK.
Containing that part of LOGIC, which is necessary to Sciences.
LESSON I. OF Propositions, as they are the parts of a Syllogism. Page 1. II.
Of a Syllogism and its Conclusion. 4. III. Of the Predicaments in common, and
the three first in particular. 8. IV. Of the rest of the Predicaments. 13. V.
Of the five Predicables and the signification of words. 16. VI. Of Definition,
Division and Disputation. 21.
SECOND BOOK.
Containing those things which concern the Nature of BODIES, in common.
LESSON I. OF the composition of bulk or Bigness. Page 27. II. Of the Nature
of Quantity and Place. 32. III. Of Time and local Motion. 39. IV. Of the four
First Qualities. 47. V. Of the Elements. 51. VI. Of Mixtion and the Second
Qualities, or those which most immediately follow Mixtion. 55. VII. Of the
manner of Mixtion, and the Passion of Mixed things. 59. VIII. Of Impassibility,
Destruction, and the Accidents of Mixed bodies. 65. IX. Of the Motion of heavy
and light bodies, and the Conditions of Acting. 68. X. Of the Motions of
Vndulation, Projection, Reflection and Refraction. 71. XI. Of the Electricall
and Magneticall Attractions of hot bodies. 76. XII. Of the generation of
Decomposit (or, compos'd-of-compounded) bodies, and Plants. 79. XIII. Of the
more universal parts of Plants. 82. XIV. Of the Accidents of Plants. 85. XV.
Of the generation and augmentation of Animals. 88. XVI. Of the Motion of the
Heart, and some consequents of it. 92. XVII. Of the progressive Motion of
Animals. 94. XVIII. Of the five senses of Animals. 98. XIX. Of the Objects of
the Senses. 101. XX. Of Knowledge and Memory. 104. XXI. Of Sleep and Dreams.
106. XXII. Of Passions, and the expression of them. 109. XXIII. Of the
communicating Affections to others. 112. XXIV. Of the seeming-Rationall Actions
of Animals. 115.
THIRD BOOK.
Containing those things which concern the WORLD, and its greater Parts.
LESSON I. OF the limitation, Unity, and composition of the World. Page 118.
II. Of the Mortality and kinds of those things that are in the world. 121. III.
Of the parts of the Planetary world, and specially those of the Earth. 125. IV.
Of the Sea and its Accidents. 129. V. Of Fountains, Rivers and Lakes. 132. VI.
Of the Air and those things that are done in it near the Earth. 137. VII. Of
Clouds, Rain, Snow, and Hail. 140. VIII. Of fiery meteors appearing in the
Air. 147. IX. Of truly fiery meteors hanging in the Air. 152. X. Of the
generation and nature of Winds. 156. XI. Of Earthquakes and their Effects.
163. XII. Of the Meteors of the other parts of the world and especially of
Comets. 165. XIII. Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, and its Accidents.
168. XIV. Of the Motion of the Earth, and the Causes of it. 174. XV. Of the
Oppositions against the Motion of the Earth: and of its Effects. 177. XVI. Of
the Motion of the Air, with the Earth; and its Effects. 180. XVII. Of the
Causes of the Motion of the Moon and other Stars. 183. XVIII. Of the Primum
Mobile, the Duration and Quiddity of the World. 187.
FOURTH BOOK.
Containing that part of METAPHYSICK, which explicates the Essential Notions
of BODIES.
LESSON I. OF the divisibility of Substance into Formal parts. Page 191. II.
Of the formal parts of Substance, in particular. 195. III. Of the unity and
distinction o^ Bodies, in common. 199. IV. Of the essential Unity and
Distinction of the Elements, and Mixed bodies. 203. V. Of the Essence of
Animals, and of the Soul. 208. VI. Of the Chief Animal and the essential
Distinction of Bodies. 214. VII. Of the mutation of the Individuality, in the
several kinds of Bodies. 219. VIII. Of the proper Action of the Chief Animal.
225. IX. Of the Soul of the Chief Animal, or, of the MIND. 231. X. Of the
Proficiency and Deficiency of MAN, and of his Essence. 236.
FIFTH BOOK.
Containing that part of METAPHYSICK, which treats of SUBSTANCES ABSTRACTED
from Matter, and of the Operation of Things.
LESSON I. OF the Soul's Separation from the Body. 243. ^I. Of the Science of a
separated Soul, and its Unity with the Soul. 249. III. Of the Eminency of a
separated Souls acts, above those it exercises in the Body. 255. IV. Of the
Felicity and Infelicity of separated Souls, and their Immutability. 259. V. Of
the nature of Existence, and its unity with the Thing. 264. VI. Of the
Existence, Simplicity and Eternity of GOD. 267. VII. Of the perfection,
Immutability and Science of GOD. 272. VIII. Of the Divine Volition and Liberty.
277. IX. Of the Divine Names; how they are improperly spoken of GOD. 283. X. Of
the Degrees of impropriety in the Divine Names. 288. XI. Of the Existence,
Nature, and Science of INTELLIGENCES. 293. XII. Of the comparison of
Intelligences to Souls and Bodies. 297. XIII. Of the Distinction, Subordination
and Number of Intelligences. 302. XIV. Of the Action of GOD, Intelligences and
Bodies, severally. 306. XV. Of the cooperation of the Agents to the making of
Substances, a Rational Soul, and to all other Effects. 213. XVI. Of the
Government of GOD, and the Locality of Incorporeall Things. 318. XVII. Of the
Conservation of Creatures, and the Durations of things. 324. XVIII. Of the
Manner of Action, on the Subjects side. 330.
APPENDIX.
CHAP. I. A Philosophical Discourse, concerning the Creation of Heaven and
Earth. Page 341. II. An Explication of GENESIS, concerning the same. 345. III.
A Philosophical Discourse of the works of the two first Days. 348. IV. An
Explication of Genesis, concerning the same. 351. V. A Philosophical Discourse
of the works of the other four Days. 354. VI. An Explication of Genesi,
sconcerning the same. 358. VII. Some Animadversions about the Text of the first
Chapter of Genesis. 364. VIII. A natural Discourse of the Creation of Man.
370. IX. An Explication of Genesis, concerning the Creation of Man. 372. X. An
Explication of the same, concerning the Creation of Woman. 378. XI. An
Explication of Genesis, concerning Paradise. 383. XII. The History of ADAM'S
FALL, out of Genesis. 387 XIII. Of the Punishment of our first Parents: out of
the same. 391. XIV. Of the Evils derived to Posterity: out of the same. 399.
XV. Of the Propagation of Mankind: out of the same. 405. XVI. Of the FLOOD: out
of the same. 407. XVII. Of the Cessation of the Deluge: out of the same. 413.
XVIII. Of the Covenant made with NOE, after the Flood: out of the same. 418.
XIX. Of the second Propagation of Mankind into several Countries: out of the
same. 423.
ERRATA.
Page 56. line. 26. touching. p. 60. l. 7. a constant. p. 126. l. 22. del. to.
p. 144. l. 10. del.;. p. 181. l. 9. turned. p. 230. l. 20. by the. p. 241. l.
10. he is. p. 307. l. 5. immutable. p. 315. l. 9. immutable. p. 344. l. 26. of
a. p. 405. l. last. by them.

Peripateticall INSTITUTIONS. First Book.
Containing that part of LOGIC which is necessary to SCIENCES.
LESSON I.
Of Propositions as they are the parts of a Syllogism.
1. Logic is the Art of Discoursing. Discourse is the Progress of the
Understanding, out of one thought or judgment into another: but in a more
special acceptance of the word, it is A Motion whereby the Understanding, out
of a fit and orderly disposure of some judgments already possessed by it,
deduces and leads it self into the knowledge of something it was ignorant of.
And this Discourse, when it is close and exactly perfect, is, by a Greek term,
called a Syllogism.

2. A Syllogism is composed of three Propositions: A Proposition is a speech
whereby something is affirmed or denied concerning another: Whence, to its
perfection, three parts are necessary; That which is affirmed, That of which
it is affirmed, and That which expresses the affirmation, or the Term which
connects them together.

3. These three are called Notions, or apprehensions, or things as they are in
the Understanding, that is, according to what is common to them in themselves
and in the Understanding: For, as the Statue of Caesar in something agrees
with, in something differs from Caesar; so the Understanding actually possessed
of any knowledge, has something wherein it resembles and agrees with the
Object, other things wherein it is unlike and differs from it.

4. It Is already said that Propositions are, some Affirmative, some Negative.
Now, sometimes it falls out, that an Affirmation is applied to one thing alone;
sometimes to diverse indifferently, as many agree in some one and the same
Notion: This last is called an Universal Proposition; as when we say, Every
man is a living Creature.

5. When the affirmation is applied to one thing alone, that is taken either
determinately, as Socrates, Bucephalus, etc. and then the proposition is called
Singular: or else indeterminately, as when we say, some Man, or Horse, etc. and
then it is called a Particular proposition.

6. Again: since a proposition is either affirmative or negative; and the same
thing cannot* at once, both be and not-be: if, at any time, one proposition
affirms what another denies, such cannot be both true together; and therefore
they are called Opposites or Incompossibles.

7. When the affirmation and negation falls upon the same thing in all
respects, such propositions are called Contradictories; as, Socrates, here and
now, runs; Socrates, here and now, runs not: But when the proposition is
universal on both sides, they are called Contraries; as, All men are wise,
None are wise.

8. Farther: as it is evident, the same thing cannot both be and not-be, at
once; so it is as clear that every thing is, whilst it is: whence, if at any
time a proposition pronounces the same thing concerning the same, it is called
self-evident; as when we say, The whole is greater then a part of it self, for
it is as much as to say, A part and more is more then a part.

9. Wherefore, if it be once known, that the same Notion is identify'd with two
others; it will presently be evident, that those two are identify'd betwixt
themselves: for otherwise, that Notion which is the same with them would not be
the same with it self.

10. Two propositions, therefore, being put, which discover the identification
of some one Notion with two others; a third proposition evidently emerges,
whereby the identification of those two Notions betwixt themselves is declared:
And these three compose a Syllogism.

LESSON II.
Of a Syllogism and its Conclusion.
1. A Proposition being a speech which pronounces one thing of another; and
since, betwixt three, there can be but three Variations, viz. that one be
pronounced of two, or two of one, or one of another, and that again of the
third; there are only three sorts or Figures of Syllogisms.

2. And, a Syllogism consisting of such speeches as connect one Term to
another; since, this third way, the Term which joins the rest falls into the
midst between them, becoming under or Subject to one, and above or Predicate to
the other; it truly and properly connects them: whence, that Figure whose Terms
are thus ordered, is called the First; and it is the chief of all others, for
all the Propositions and their Terms or Notions have a constant and determinate
place and order in the Syllogism:

3. Whereas, in the other Figures it imports not whether of the two Antecedents
be preferred; and, in the Conclusion, either of the Terms may, indifferently,
be the Subject or Predicate, And, if we look more narrowly into it, the other
two Figures will, indeed, appear but distorsions of the first; whereby the
Notion, which, really, is the Middle one of the three, is made one of the
Extremes, because all the three are identify'd. The first Figure, therefore,
alone is according to Nature, and Necessary.

4. And in this first, because the middle notion is once affirmed or made the
Predicate, and once the Subject, the Conclusion cannot be varied, except it be
in respect of the Universality and Particularity, or Affirmation and Negation;
whence the Conclusion becomes either an Universal or Particular Affirmative or
Negative; as uses to be cyphred by these words, Barbara, Celarent, Darii,
Ferio: in which the Vowells show the Nature of the Proposition; A standing for
an Universal Affirmative, E, an Universal Negative, I, a Particular
Affirmative, O, a Particular Negative.

5. And, because these four Differences contein all manner of Propositions, in
which Truth may be looked for; there are only four Moods or forms of
Syllogisms profitable, and they sufficient to deduce it: the rest are all
provided rather for curiosity and abundance then benefit.

6. There is another kind of Syllogism which some call Expository, consisting
purely of Singulars: And because a singular proposition comprehends its Notion
as well as an universal, it is a perfect Syllogism, though little used in
Sciences, and therefore little treated of.

7. Again; since those things which are Circumstantiall to any other thing
either belong to it, or not; and if they belong to it, then either to it alone,
or to many other things as well as it: the propositions, too, which are deduced
out of these, must be some Proper, some Common, some wholly Accidental and
Unconcerning.

8. Amongst which, since Proper ones always express something which has the
Nature of a Cause or Effect, and an Effect cannot exist without an actual
Cause, nor an actual Cause without an Effect; such propositions are fit to
conclude upon any Subject, about which we are making inquiry, that It is, and
cannot possibly but be; to do which we call framing a Science, and the
Syllogism whereby we work thus, a Demonstration, and its Conclusion, Science:
which, if we know why a thing is, that is, if the Demonstration be made from
the Cause, both the knowledge and Demonstration are called a Priori, or from
something going before; if otherwise, a Posteriori, or from something following.

9. Common and Vnconcerning Propositions are both of this Nature, Not to be
applied to the Conclusion but by the Convoy and Mediation of some other closer
relations; which yet, lying hid and being undiscernable, are only capable of
affording an apparent knowledge called Opinion.

10. From which rule, such propositions are to be excepted which assume for
proof the knowledge of another person: for, since Knowledge is adequate to the
Thing it self; it is, as it were, a proper Accident: and the knowledge of a
thing attained by these propositions is called Faith. Which kind of knowledge
may arrive to a certainty, if the Authority assumed be out of all question: yet
it is not Science, because not evident; since the thing appears but in the
knowledge of another, and is undiscernable in it self, being it moves not the
Understanding by it self and things naturally connected with it.

LESSON III.
Of the Predicaments in Common, and the three first in particular.
1. WE have said that Propositions are composed of Notions; and that a Notion
is the thing, according to the being it has in the Understanding: There are,
therefore, so many kinds of Notions as there are several common habitudes of
any thing without or within the Understanding, whereby it may be referred to
any other thing, that is, Predicated of a Subject.

2. Now any thing may be considered both according to what it has in it self or
is in its own Nature, and according to other things which, by consideration,
are drawn in and applied to it. And, as to its intrinsecalls, a thing is
considered either absolutely and in its very self; and so it is called a
Substance, and that which is pronounced of it a Substantial Predicate: Or, as
it is compared to all other things, in that respect wherein all things agree;
and thus we ask, how big a thing is? and what we answer concerning it is called
its Quantity: Thirdly, it is compared to those things which are of the same kind
with it* or to its own particular nature; and so we ask, what manner of thing
is it, that is, how perfect is it in its own nature? and what we answer is
called its Quality: Lastly, it is compared to other particular things; and we
ask, what it is in respect to another? and the answer is called Related or
Relation. It Is plain that, under these four heads, are comprehended all things
considerable in the Nature of any Subject, that is, which are in it self.

3. But, those things, which are circumstantiall to another and may be referred
to it, are either applied with Motion or in Rest. If in Rest, the Predicate is
neither constantly fixed to the Subject, nor the Subject to the Predicate; and
then we ask, where a thing is? and the answer is called it is Place: Or else the
Subject is fixed to the Predicate; as a Statue to its Basis, Liquour to a
Vessel, one that sits to his Chair, etc. and, as before, we ask, where a thing
is? whereto the Predicate we answer is called its Site or Situation: Or lastly,
the Predicate is fixed to the Subject, and we ask, what it has? to which that we
answer is called its Habit, as Garments, Arms, Instruments.

4. In Motion, if the Subject be moved, the Agent always accompanies it; if it
move, the Patient: and, in both cases, Time or the Motion of the Heavens goes
along with them, from which no Motion can be exempt. Of this last, we ask, When
was the Motion? and what we answer is called the Time of the Motion.

5. When the Subject is moved, we ask, by what? and that we answer is said to
Act, and the Subject to Suffer from it: when the Subject moves, we ask, what it
moves? and that we answer is said to Suffer, and it self to Act. Thus, the
reason is evident, why there are just ten Orders or Classes of Predicates, or
Notions, or Beings in the Understanding, which are called Predicaments.

6. Substance is immediately distinguished into Spirit and Body. The differences
of Spirits are unknown. Bodies are either Living, that is, moving themselves,
or Dead, that is, not moving, but moved by others. Living bodies are either
Sensitive, or without Senses. Sensitive are either Intellectual, viz. Man, or
Brutall, Beasts. Man is either Socrates, or Plato, or Xenophon, etc. and these
are no farther divisible; whence they are called Individualls; the rest
Vniversalls, because they are predicated universally of all that are under
them, that is, of every one.

7. Quantity is either Discrete, as Number; or Continued: and this, either
Permanent, or Successive. Permanent is twofold; Extensive, whose perfection
consists in three degrees including one another, Longitude, Latitude,
Profundity; and Intensive, which is Weight. Successive Quantity is contained in
Action, Passion, Speaking, and, generally, in Motion.

8. Concerning the proper nature of Body, because it is Finite, we ask, of what
Figure it is? because it is Alterable by others, we ask, how it is, in respect to
those Qualities according to which it is variable? as Heat, cold, color,
savor, etc. and this either constantly or in Motion; and we answer,
accordingly, either by the Passible Quality or by the Passion: as, in a Fever
to be hot, or to blush for Bashfulnesse, is a Passion; but to be of a hot
complexion, or ruddy countenance, is a Passible quality. Again, because a Body
is ordered naturally to Act and to Suffer, we ask, what it can or cannot do?
and that which is answered is called its Power or Impotency. Lastly, because
every nature consists in a kind of Temperature, we ask, whether it be well or
ill in respect to that; that is, whether it exactly or disproportionately
possesses those things which are requisite to that; and this, either constantly
or for a time? to which the answer is called, respectively, a Habit or
Disposition.

LESSON IV.
Of the rest of the Predicaments.
1. THose things which relate or are compared to another, are either compared
for having some Notion common to both; or for their Acting or Suffering; or
else, by a certain third way, which participates of both these: as, when a
Picture is made like the Original, that neither acts upon the Picture, nor is
the Picture (being wholly of another kind) really like it, yet in a manner, it is
both: and this respect is called of the thing measured to the Measure.

2. And, in this kind, there is one only relation, and that on the side of the
Measured: For a Relation being the Order of one thing to another, and since,
between two things, one may be so ordered to the other, that the other may
either have or not have a coordination to it; it comes to pass that those
things which are in the same order (such as are those two first kinds) have a
relation on both sides, but those that are of different orders, so that,
notwithstanding, the one be ordered to the other, have a relation but on one
side.

3. Besides, it often happens that the Understanding, through Custom or an
imperfect way of knowing, expresses even things that have no ordination, by a
certain relative resemblance; and then it is a mental relation (by schoolmen
called de dici) not a real one: as also, when the Understanding has expressed
the nature of any thing by a Negation, saying, a Man does not see, or has no
hair; and then gives a positive being to this Notion, saying, a Man is blind or
bald; according to the natural Aptitude or Ineptitude of the Subject to the
denied Quality, it is called a Mental Negation or Privation, respectively.

4. Wherefore, since, by these only ways, the Understanding can so vary any
thing which it knows, that a change may remain on the Objects side, and enter
into the consideration of it, as belonging to the thing known; there can be
three only kinds of Mental Beings: For, the disputes of the Moderns concerning
such entities, are but gay Trifles, and the contemplation of an erroneous
definition.

5. There is a kind of Relations, not unjustly, called Intellectual, which
follows a thing in the Understanding in virtue of the real quality of mere
Understanding; and these relations are of a Logical Nature, as those Terms of
Universal, Predicable, Subject, Antecedent, Consequent, and the like: And
these Relations as much follow out of things, in that respect, as they are in
the Understanding, as Likeness fallows a thing in as much as it is white, or
Equality because it is Quantitative: This, therefore, is called Intellectual,
because the Understanding is called Intellect, and in no other respect.

6. An Agent and a Patient clearly express two causes: which, yet, the
Understanding (distinguishing, and finding parts differently respecting the
effect) Logically and to serve its turn for Demonstration, divides into four.

7. And finding, in the Agent, that it can and that it does Act; the
Understanding call's that whereby it does or can* act the Efficient cause, and
that which moves or makes it to act, the End: Likewise, in the Patient,
distinguishing what it is that suffers, and what it suffers; it call's that the
Form, this the Matter: satisfying, thus, these Interrogations, From what? Why?
By what or How? In what?

8. Plato adds an Idea or Exemplar: but, it is clear, that what wants an
Exemplar cannot work without it; and consequently, there is not yet an
Efficient cause. The species of these, and indeed of all the last six
Predicaments, are little used, and therefore omitted.

LESSON V.
Of the five Predicables, and the signification of Words.
1. HEnce it is evident, there are two kinds or differences of Predications: For
some Predicates of the same line or Predicament comprehend others, and are
predicated of them as an Universal of a Particular: But Predicates of distinct
lines are predicated of one another, as a thing superadded is predicated of
that to which it is applied.

2. Predicates of the first kind are said to be predicated in quid or as the
what; being such as answer to the question, what a thing is? And, if the
predicate comprehends the full answer to that question, it is called a Species:
but, if it only contains a part, so that other common considerations are
comprehended under it, it is called a Genus; whose compart or partner, equal to
the Species, answers not directly to the question What? but, with the addition
of what kind or what in particular? supposing the answer to the question What
already made by the Genus: and this is called a Difference.

3. The other kind of Predication is applied to some things necessarily
connected with the Subject, which are called Properties: and are strictly such,
if they appertain to it alone and always; but, more at large, if they be
deficient in these conditions. Sometimes it is applied to things, which may be
both joined to and separated from the Subject, without destroying it; and such
are called Accidents. Thus are there five, commonly called, Predicables, or
Porphyries five Terms.

4. But, since Notions are not communicated, but by the means of Words; and the
same word sometimes is applied to several Notions, sometimes to one only: as
often as the same word, in the same signification, that is, meaning the same
Notion, is applied to more, it is said to signify or be spoken Vnivocally.

5. A word which serves for several Notions has this property either by
chance, as when in one Language it signifies one thing, in others another; and
then it is called purely Equivocall: or else, of set purpose, it is transferred
from one Notion to another; and then it is Equivocall by design.

6. And, of this kind are those words which, by necessity or upon occasion, are
transferred from one Notion to another, by reason of the Connection of the two
Notions or things, or in consideration of their being Cause and Effect to one
another: As, when healthful, which signifies the quality of that temper which
is just fit and convenient to a sensitive Creature, is transferred to signify
the quality of Urine, because such a quality in it is the effect of a due
temper in the Creature; or to Meat, because it preserves and produces that fit
temper: Or else for Proportion sake: so the expression, to stand at the Helm,
is transferred from a Ship to the Governor of a City; because, according to
proportion, he does that in the City which a Pilot does in a Ship.

7. And, in such kind of words, the later signification includes the former:
as, if you would explicate Urine as healthful, you must say, it is such an
Urine as is the sign of health in the sensitive Creature; if, the Governor of
a City as standing at the Helm you must say, it is he that does that in a City
which a Pilot does in a Ship. These words are said Analogically, or by Analogy,
to signify more things.

8. And thus the word Thing or Being is extended to those ten lines or
Predicaments before explicated: For, since a Thing is that which has a being,
the first Predicament alone justly challenges to it self the title of a Thing
in this signification; that is, as Thing signifies An individual substance,
which Aristotle call's the first Substance, Suppositum or Hypostasis, and, in
rational Substances, the Person; for these names signify the same.

9. Whereas the rest have no being, but are only Affections and certain
determinations of what has a being: for example, Socrates or Callias to be Men,
is to have a being and to be Substances; but Callias 's being of the same
Nature with Socrates, which we call a relation of identity, is not at all
distinct from them, and consequently can have no being but in them, and that
their being; yet, it is not according to this Notion that They have their being:
This Identity, therefore, has a being, not because it, according to its own
notion, gives a being, or is that whereby a thing has a being; but, because
it is a Notion which explicates a thing, that, according to another Notion, has
a being.

10. Hence it appears why a consequence holds negatively, from a Substance to
all other things; but positively, from other things to a Substance: For, that
which is not, can neither be the whole nor part of a Thing; and, if it be a
part or a whole, if fitted to its Own Nature, if applied to others, certainly
it is.

11. It Is as evident, if any never so little mutation be made in the Substance,
the whole is changed: for, the Substance being that Notion whereby the thing is
what it is; and every mutation in Substance changing that Notion; by every
change made in the Substance, that is changed whereby this thing is, and
consequently, this very thing.

LESSON VI.
Of Definition, Division, and Disputation.
1. TO know whether a word be spoken univocally of more things, we must look
whether it be predicated, still, according to the same Notion: now, a Notion is
evidenced by a Definition. A Definition, therefore, is a speech composed of
more Notions, which, taken together, make up that one Notion which before was
not known.

2. Since, therefore, a Definition is the very Notion defined, resolved, as it
were, into parts: it is clear, it can neither be more ample nor narrower then
that which is defined.

3. Again; it is plain, that, to ask a Definition is nothing but asking what
they mean, who understandingly use a word: wherefore, since some words express
Notions that are common to all mankind (as, those of the ten Predicaments) it is
evident that, in these and such like, we must observe, what the Common People,
who make up mankind, mean by such a word.

4. But, of Proper Names and Terms appropriated to any Discipline, to ask the
Definition is to ask, what the Masters of that Discipline mean by such a word?
for these are, as it were, the Creatours and Causes of the words.

5. Again, it is evident, he that asks a Definition ought to collect the usual
sayings of the intelligent users of this word, that concern the thing as it is
expressed by this word: which, if they be all gathered, it is as demonstrable
the Definition is made right, as any cause can be demonstrated from its
effects; since, it is plain, those sayings depend from the notion of the word as
from their cause, and consequently, the Notion of necessity appears in them.

6. But, if it happen to appear out of such sayings, that the word has more
significations then one; amongst those that are made by design, it will easily
be seen which is the principal, because that signification will be included in
all the rest: as, the soundness of Meat or Urine include the soundness of an
Animal.

7. Again, since those things which are demonstrated concerning another are,
either in the thing it self, or else are effects or causes of it; both which
appear in the thing it self, and are conformable and proper to it: now, a
Definition explicates the thing it self: it is clear, that whatsoever is
demonstrable of the thing is rooted in the very Definition: Whence, a
Definition is a certain principal Instrument of Science; and all the solutions
of difficulties depend chiefly upon Definitions.

8. To make a Definition right, the Art of Distinguishing must be learnt. For,
a Term being proposed to be defined, out of what has been said, it is easy to
find in what Predicament it is: which once known, all that remains is, by
dividing the Genus, to descend by degrees, till you come to the particular in
question; when, presently, you have the Definition. And if, as it sometimes
happens, many several Genus's have a share in the thing to be defined; this
same course is to be pursued through them all.

9. But care must be taken, to divide by proper differences, that is, such as
include in them the thing to be divided; seeing they are nothing else but more
or less of the very Genericall Notion: for accidental differences are
infinite, and besides the intention of him that asks for a Definition.

10. Have a care, also, the Division be made by Contradiction, that is, into
parts contradictory one to another; for so the Divider may be sure he
comprehends the whole Genus. Lastly, these rules being observed, the fewer
Members there are, that is, parts into which the Genus is divided, the more
exactly you proceed. That Division, too, whereby Accidents are distinguished
from their Subject, is very useful to Sciences: for, when it appears that a
Concrete, that is, a thing which comprehends several parts or Notions, is the
Cause of any effect, by this Division you come to that Notion, according to
which, precisely, it is the cause; which must necessarily be connected with the
effect, simply speaking, and consequently, the effect may be demonstrated out
of it a priori: For example, if it be known that Policletus made a Statue;
separating the Accidents, 'twill appear that he made it, not as White, nor as
Musical, nor as Policletus, but as one skilled in such an Art; and hence you will
collect, that All skillful in that Art can make a Statue.

11. Out of a Division and Definition made aright, there arise two sorts or
Species of self-evident propositions: For, as often as one of the Terms is a
direct part of the definition of another Term, the Proposition is clear; as, if
a Man be a Reasonable Creature, he is a Creature: Again, in a Division truly
made, it is plain, the parts may divisively be pronounced of the whole; as, when
we say, a Number is either Even or Odd. Whoever aspires to Sciences must be
assiduous in these; but, above all, in the practice of Defining; for, all the
connection of Notions is found in Definitions, and the connection of Terms is
that which makes Science.

12. These, too, chiefly detect the snares of Equivocall terms, which are the
very Bane of Science; especially those which are caused by Analogy. Now,
Equivocation is displayed, by looking into words what way soever connected; as,
into Causes, effects, contraries, superiors, inferiors, etc. wherein, if once
any thing be found, which agrees to one and not to the other, the Equivocation
is discovered: As, if a Voice and a Saw be both said to be sharp, but the
Contrary to the Voice is flat, to the Saw, blunt; it is plain that sharp is not
predicated of them both in the same signification, and therefore it is
equivocall.

13. As for our modern Disputes, it is to be observed, that the Defendant either
puts a false Conclusion; or, if it be true, he holds another incoherent with
it; or, at least, if there be no opposition among his Tenets, yet he is
ignorant of the Antecedents and Consequents to his Thesis; or, lastly, he is
perfect only at this Thesis. In the two first cases, he may be convinced, if
the Disputant behave himself well: in the third, too, if the Disputant can
bring him about to yield to some falsity in those things he is ignorant of, he
may easily convince him.

14. In the fourth case, one must dispute Critically, that is, either something
afar off must be sought for, and foreign to the Question, which the
Defendant is not obliged to be skillful in; and clapping Authority on the back
on it, to fright him into the admission of a falsity; which is the trick of most
of those that dispute out of Medium's from Theology and the Divine Omnipotence:
or else, one must argue out of common and logical Notions, in which both the
terms are ambiguous, and Equivocation easily hides it self.

Peripateticall INSTITUTIONS. Second Book.
Containing those things which concern the nature of BODIES in common.
LESSON I.
Of the Composition of Bulk or Bigness.
EVclide having demonstrated, El. 6.
that it is possible to divide any undivided line, Pr. 10.
into full as many parts, as any other whatever has been divided, that is, into
parts beyond any number assignable, that is, into infinite: there is no farther
doubt but a Body or Magnitude is divisible without end.

2. Whence it follows, that one indivisible in quantity, added to another,
makes it not bigger: For, if it did, a finite number of indivisibles would
constitute quantity; and consequently, a Body would not be divisible without
end.

3. Again: since any Multitude increases by the addition of one to those
already supposed, even though 'twere infinite: and yet the addition of one
indivisible, to whatever presupposed number, makes it not greater: it is clear,
that neither an infinite multiplication of indivisibles is sufficient to make
quantity; and consequently, that a Body or bigness is not composed of infinite
Indivisibles.

4. Moreover, since it is manifest that, if any two parts actually exist in a
Body or Magnitude, even all the parts into which a Body is divisible do
actually preexist in it, too; and since it is plain, if a Magnitude were divided
into all it were divisible into, the remains would be purely infinite
Indivisibles: it is perfectly manifest that no two parts do actually exist in a
Body or Magnitude.

5. It Is urged against the divisibility of a Body in infinitum, that there
would be infinite parts in it; and since an infinite can never be measured, no
part of a body can be passed over in a finite time; and consequently, there can
be no Motion* Aristotle answers, that an actual infinite can never, indeed, be
passed over, but in an infinite time, too: but that the parts of a Magnitude
are only, potentially, infinite; and, therefore, nothing hinders but they may
be passed over in a finite time. Galilaeus replies, As any two halfs do not,
therefore, require less time to pass them over, because they are not
separated: so neither can infinite parts (supposing them in a Magnitude) be
passed over in less time, because they are but possible, then if they were
actually or in effect.

6. It Is answered, that if, in the potentiality of a Magnitude, there were,
really, infinite parts, whereof every one, limited in themselves and distinct
from one another, had a determinate bigness; they would indeed require an
infinite time to be passed over: But there is no such matter: for, the parts of
a Magnitude have so undetermined a quantity, that they may be bigger or less,
according to the proportion to the whole wherein they are taken; whence, since,
the more are put, the less they are, it comes to pass that they never exceed
a certain determinate sum, which is the Magnitude of the whole, how high
soever they increase in Number.

7. Again: it is objected against this assertion of no parts being actually in a
Magnitude: First, that it is against the credit of our Senses, for, we see
diverse and several parts of a Table or Stick; our hands, too, and fingers are
many.

8. It Is answered, by denying that we see many parts of a Table or Stick: for,
if we saw they were several, our sight could distinguish one from another, and
we could just tell where one ends and another begins: since, therefore, the
nearest immediate parts are separated, only by an Indivisible; and an
Indivisible cannot be discerned by sense; it is evident, it belongs not to the
Senses to distinguish one part from another.

9. And, whereas it is added, that we see two Hands and many Fingers of the same
Man's: it is true, indeed; but a Hand or a Finger signifies not a part actually,
but in potentia or possibility: For, if a Hand or Finger were cut off from the
rest of the Body, it were, now, no longer a Hand or Finger, since it would be
no more an Instrument of taking any thing, which is of the very definition of a
Hand or Finger.

10. It Is objected, thirdly, those are actually distinct, of which
Contradictories can be verified: But, it is truly pronounced of diverse parts of
a Magnitude, that this is seen, touched, hot, cut, etc. whilst the
contradictories to these are as truly said of another part; nay, it is really
true, that this part is not that, as the Hand is not the Foot, an Eye is not an
Ear: Wherefore, these parts must needs be actually distinct.

11. It Is answered, that Contradiction is only in respect of our Understanding;
wherefore, the Contradictories have only a notionall repugnance in the Subject,
as it is in our Understanding. Since then, the parts have a distinct being in
our Understanding; from thence it is that they are capable to sustain
Contradictories: Which to make plain, instead of this Proposition, This part is
seen, touched, warm, etc. let us say, The thing, according to this part, is
seen, touched, warm, etc. and not according to that; is it not clear the same
thing sustains Contradictories as it is diversely apprehended by the
Understanding, because the Understanding by this reflection, according, makes
the same thing diverse Subjects.

12. The like it is when we say, a hand is not a foot: for it signifies that a
Man as having the faculty of taking any thing, is not a Man as having the
faculty of walking. And the same rule, we see, holds in abstracted Notions;
for, though we say, an Animal is rational, yet we say, Animality is not
Rationality.

LESSON II.
Of the Nature of Quantity and Place.
1. PArts, then, not being actually in a Magnitude, it follows, that Extension
or Divisibility is not accidental to it, but the very nature of Quantity:
Whence, we see, as often as one asks, how much there is of such a thing; for
example, a way, a piece of Cloth, Liquour, etc. we answer, so many furlongs,
else, ounces, etc. that is, by the parts into which they are divisible. It Is
plain, therefore, that the very nature of Quantity is Divisibility.

2. Hence, again, it is clear, that it is not to be enquired how the parts of a
Magnitude come to be united: for, since more cannot be made of any thing, but
what first was not more, or, one; it is evident, that what is divisible is, in
that very respect, one; and out of the very nature of Quantity its parts derive
an unity.

3. Nor is it less manifest, that nothing, besides Quantity, is extended and
divisible: for, it is not intelligible, that any thing can be divided, and yet
have no Divisibility: Wherefore, that they call Imaginary space is nothing at
all, nor has it any distinguishable parts; much less can it be a means of
distinguishing other things, by its own distinction.

4. It Is objected, Before the Creation of the World, there was a certain
possibility of a World; and a greater of the whole world then of any part; nay,
even now, without or about this world, it is possible other Bodies should be
created, bigger then this world: Yet, such a Body cannot be created, but some
parts of it must be more distant from this, then others: Therefore, a greater
and less distance from the world is imaginable; and consequently, an Imaginary
Space.

5. It Is answered, There is, indeed, a possibility of such a world: but, it is
either in the Power of God, and so is nothing else but his very Essence; or, in
the Idea of some understanding Creature (and is only the mere conformity of the
Predicate with the Subject, or of one part with another) which says, there is
a world, or such things agree well together. But, without the world there is no
distance, now; though there would be, were any new Body created: for, since
Distance signifies extension and parts; and a Body is composed of parts; it is
plain, that, a Body being created, Distance too, is created: But, to imagine
Distance abstracted from a Body is manifestly against this first principle of
Reason, which denies that the same can be a Thing and no-Thing.

6. Again, it is evident, there is no such thing as a kind of infinite Magnitude
or Vastness, wherein all Bodies are: for bodies would not be counter-extended
with such a Magnitude; and consequently, since Bodies are Quantitative things,
that would not be such.

7. Out of what has been said, it is plain, there is no empty place in the
world; that is, there is no hollow body, wherein there is not another Body:
for, it being determined, that Distance is a Body; it is manifest that, taking
away Body, all Distance is taken away: Since, therefore, it is plain, that
distant things are joined by taking away the distance; if, out of a hollow
body, that be taken away which keeps the sides asunder, the sides remain
conjoined, and the Body is no longer hollow.

8. Whence it appears, the wonder of those that ask, If all the Air should be
taken out of a vast hollow sphere, and nothing else should be done, what would
follow? is irrational; and signifies just as if they should say, If the sides
of the sphere were joined, and nothing else done, would they be joined?

9. If, then, all quantitative things are joined together, they are Continued:
For, things continued are no otherwise, so, but, in virtue of the Quantity,
which is in either part: since, therefore, in these, there is Quantity on either
side; whatever quantitative things are conjoined must be continued.

10. Out of what has been said, the Notion of Place is collected: For, it
appears to us, that is, to Mankind, that Place is an immovable Vessel, which
some bodies go out of and others enter into: moreover, that the Earth is
absolutely immovable, and that Heaven and the Stars observe a constancy in
their Motion, and so give a ground, on which the notion of immobility may be
founded; whence, a Vessel, by respects to a determinate part of the Earth and
of the motion of the Heavens, will gain an apprehension of immobility. To say,
therefore, a Body is in such a place, is as much as to say, It Is in a Body
which has such a situation to the Earth and to the Heavens; for example, it is
at such a distance from such a Mountain, toward the beginning of Aries, or the
Sunrising.

11. And, that this is true, appears out of those explications of Place,
whereby, usually, answer is made to the Question, Where is such a thing? For,
we answer by such things as, in our apprehensions, are immovable: in the last
resolution, by the parts of the Heavens; next, by Mountains, Rivers, Cities,
Houses, Trees, etc. and more immediately by Walls and things fastened to Walls,
or rather, by immovable things within the House, as Beds, Cupboards, etc. It Is
plain, therefore, that Place is the Body which next encloses the thing within
it; as it is conceived to be in a certain site to the rest of the world, or its
fixed parts.

12. You Will object, there is nothing constant in the world, able to make a Place,
besides Imaginary Space. It Is answered, Place is a word, signifying according
to the will of the first imposers, and therefore signifies a thing as it is in
our mind, or under Notion; wherefore, you must not require something really
immovable, but which may appear such: Now, even Motion it self, if it be
constantly the same, appears to have a kind of immobility; and so, it is
sufficient that the Sun constantly rises in one part and sets in another, to
determine Place, without any need of Imaginary Space.

13. You Will object again, This Definition does not agree with all things that
are in Place: for it neither agrees with Angels or separated souls, which yet,
it is clear, are in a Place; nor with the World it self; nor with Qualities* or
parts of Substance, which are in a Place, too. We answer, it is clear indeed
that spiritual substances are in a Place, but it is not clear what signifies,
to be in a Place, when we speak of them: but certain it is, that it signifies
not, to be in a Place after the manner of Bodies, which alone is, properly, to
be in a Place; since Mankind, to whom belongs the imposing the name of Place,
never saw spiritual substances. It Is as certain that, either the world is not
in a Place, or, if it be, (as some endeavor to explicate,) it is by its parts;
that is, because every part is in a Place, it may, in a kind of forced sense,
be said to be in a Place. But, Forms and Qualities to be in a Place, signifies
they are the Forms and Qualities of Bodies which are in a Place: Whence, all
these are said to be in a Place analogically, and not in their primary
signification.

14. Nor imports it, that the Vulgar think that to have no being, which is
nowhere: for the Vulgar are not the composer of Sciences, as they are the
imposer of Names: wherefore, we receive the signification of Names from them,
but not the truth of Propositions.

15. Having determined then, that Place is something extrinsecall to the thing
in it; and seeing that an extrinsecall change cannot be made without some
intrinsecall one, too, (since the extrinsecall denomination is not another
thing, different from the intrinsecall quality of the things which concur to
the denomination) in every change of Place, some intrinsecall Mutation must of
necessity intervene: But, the change of Place is, immediately, a change of the
application of the sides of the thing moved, from the sides of the Place whence
it parts, to the sides of the Place whether it passes: wherefore, the Place and
the Thing in it being, really, the same quantitative thing, we must say that
Local Motion materially, is Division, that is, the first and, principal act
of Quantity or Divisibilty; and, formally, the denomination of a new site of
the Universe, as has been declared.

16. It follows, out of what has been said, that, since it is of the very Nature
of Quantity, to have its parts extended and one out of or beyond another, it is
impossible two Bodies should be in the same Place; for so, one, in respect to
the other, should not have the Nature of Quantity: As also, if the same Body
were situated in two Places; since 'twould make a double distance, it would
have the force and effect of two Quantities, that is, be double it self.

17. The objections against these Positions are Theological, and not hard in
Theology; and therefore, are to be referred thither.

LESSON III.
Of Time and Local Motion.
1. NOw, among Locall-Motions, it is evident, the Motion of the Heavens,
especially of the Sun and Moon, is most notorious and common to Mankind; as
also, (at least, to our apprehensions) most constant and equal: Wherefore, it is
the fittest and best qualified for the measuring of other Motions: and so,
experience teaches, that it is applied to this use; for the Hours, Days, Years,
etc. are certain parts of the Motion of the Sun.

2. This motion therefore, as it is made use of for the measuring other motions,
we call Time: and, comparing motion to Time, we say, one is swifter or slower
then another.

3. You Will object, this is an ill Definition of Time: for, before the World was
created, there was Time; and yet, no Motion of the Heavens. If the Sun, too,
should stand still, Time would not, therefore, cease to pass on: Wherefore,
Time is not the Motion of the Heavens. It Is answered, Before the creation of
the World, there was no time; however we may imagine Time before the World, as
we do Place out of the World: but these Opinions are ill grounded in the Fancy.
And, if the Sun should stand still, it is plain, there would be no Days and
Years, etc. that is, if it should stand still for ever; for, if it stood but
for a little while, it would only make the Day longer. But, it is to be
observed, that the Motion of the Heavens is not Time, as it is in it self, but
as it is the Object of our apprehensions; whereby we form a certain quantity of
Motion, which we may apply to all other Motions, and even to the Motion of the
Sun it self.

4. To the question, therefore, Whether time would pass on were the Sun or
Heavens immovable? it is answered that, abstracting from our apprehensions, it
would not: but, because there would still remain in us a power of measuring
other Motions, by the Motion of the Heavens which we formerly apprehended; we
should measure Motions by Time passing on in its Essence, not in Existence,
that is, by the Notion and Nature, not the actual Presence of Time. Time,
therefore, would not, really, pass on; yet we should make use of it as if it
did.

5. You Will object again, The Motion of the Heavens is divisible, as the space
wherein they are moved: But Time consists of Indivisibles; for, It has no true
being but the present, which is always indivisible. It Is answered, Time is
divisible without end, just as Motion is: But, what is said, that nothing of
Time is present but an instant, is false; for, we say, the present Day, Year,
Age, etc. for, Time being Motion, as in our apprehensions, the Understanding
can make as much of it present as it pleases, by taking a whole part after the
manner of one Entity.

6. But an indivisible part of Time is never present; for, there is no such
thing: the working, only, of our Understanding makes Instants, not as a part of
Time, but as the end of one part and the beginning of another: Whence, we never
conceit an instant In Time or Motion, but when we mean there is no more Time or
Motion, An Instant, therefore, is a kind of not-being of Time: Wherefore,
what is said, that nothing of Time is present but an Instant, is to be
understood, that Nothing of Time is present together and at once, because its
nature is Successive; nor can it have any existence, as a kind of Thing or
Being, but as the variation of a divisible Thing as it is divisible.

7. Again; it being apparent, that some things are more easy, others harder to
be divided, or (which is the same) some are more, others less divisible: if
that which causes the Motion forces a less against a more divisible, the more
divisible must of necessity be cut asunder, and admit in the less divisible
between its parts: wherefore, a Division will be made, and consequently, if the
other requisites concur, a Local Motion; for, the less divisible will
change its place. If, therefore, the same less divisible be impelled, with the
same force, against any thing more divisible then the former; 'twill separate
it in less time, and consequently, 'twill be moved faster.

8. Now, the less divisible is called, Dense; the more, Rare: and, because
Divisibility is the very nature of Quantity, the rare will have more, the dense
less of Quantity: and these are the first differences that can be expected in
a Quantum or Magnitude, they being made by more and less of Quantity in a
quantitative Thing.

9. But, because, out of what has been said, it appears that the rare, in
respect of the dense, is that which is divisible, and contrarily, the dense is
the divider: by how much greater the proportion of density is in the divider,
to the rarity of what is divided; by so much the division must needs be
quicker, and the Motion swifter.

10. In like manner it is, too, for matter of the Figure or shape: for, one
figure being apter to divide then another, (since, we see Artificers choose
sharp figures to cut with) by how much the figure is more apt (supposing all
other circumstances proportionable) so much swifter the Motion will be.

11. Lastly; because, in dense things of the same figure, the comparison of
density to the figure is greater in great things, (because, in Bodies, the
Solid is multiplied in a triple proportion, Euclid. El. 6. Pr. 19. El. 12. Pr.
18.
but the Superficies only in a double; that is, of two similary Globes, etc. if
their Diameters be as 2 to 3, their Solids will be as 8 to 27, but their
Superficies only as 4 to 9.) it comes to pass that, (other circumstances being
supposed equal) of bodies that are alike, the greater move swifter then the
less. It appears, therefore, that, in respect to the same Medium, there are
three conditions in a Moveable, which make the Motion swifter, viz. bigness,
density and figure.

12. It follows, out of what has been said, that there can be no Motion in an
instant, by an Agent of a finite power: for, the space wherein it is made being
divisible without end; if the motion were in an instant, the Agent could move
the movable through a space assigned, while the power which moves the Sun could
not move that never so little a space: since, therefore, space may diminish
without end, it is necessary the power be increased without end, and
consequently, be infinite.

13. Again; since a greater power is required to move the same movable more
swiftly through the same Medium; a movable cannot be transferred from a less
to a greater degree of velocity, in an instant, by a finite Agent: For, since
some power is requisite to give it a greater velocity, even in the same time;
and the proportion of time to an instant is infinite; the power to give it such
a velocity, in an instant, must be infinite.

14. Whence, it is evident, that every Movable which is raised from rest to
motion, passes through infinite degrees of slownesse, greater then that degree
whereto we suppose it to be arrived. For, since every assigned degree is
divisible into infinite ones which are between it and rest, nor can a finite
Agent raise the Movable from any of those to an assigned degree, in an instant;
much less can it transfer it from rest to an assigned degree in an instant.
Consequentially to these positions, Every movable that is reduced from rest to
motion, at the beginning, increases in velocity: but, since to every finite
Agent, there corresponds a certain determinate degree of Effect, beyond which
it has no power; when it arrives once to that degree of velocity, it will stand
at it, and the Motion will increase no farther.

15. But if, to the difficulty of the Medium, there be added an Agent moving a
contrary way; according to that Agents power the velocity of the former movable
will be diminisht, or the movable be even forced to rest, or to an opposite
Motion. And thus it appears how Motions begin and end.

16. Lastly, it may be concluded, speculatively speaking, that any weight
whatever may be moved an assigned space, by never so little a power: For, since
the power must, of necessity, be multiplied to increase the velocity; as much
as it fails in velocity, so much may be abated in the power. Assigning
therefore a Bulk to be moved and a power to move it; suppose another power
which may be able, in a certain time, to move this bulk such a determined
space; and, by how much this later power is greater then the first assigned,
so much increase the time in which the movable should be moved through the
proposed space; and because, now, the effect is so much less, it will not
exceed the power assigned.

17. I said, this is speculatively true: because, when one should go about to
reduce it to practice, an extremely little power could not be preserved so long
time, as were necessary to the effect.

LESSON IV.
Of the four First Qualities.
1. OUt of what has been said, it being concluded that Rare and Dense are the
first Differences, and that they by consequence, like Quantity, are varied with
endless Differences; seeing, too, that there is a perpetual Tumult as it
were, in the world, of heavy things descending toward the Center of the Earth:
there must, of necessity, be some degree of rare Bodies so easily divisible,
that it needs nothing, but this very impulse, to separate their parts, and
carry them, the nearest way to the Center.

2. Such bodies, therefore, will spread themselves without any limits about the
Earth, unless they be hindered; whence, they will have no proper figure of their
own: but when they encounter with a denser body, upon which the impulse that
divides them, has not the like power; there they will stop their division, and
receive a figure from that.

3. They will, therefore, be easily terminable by others bounds, hardly by
their own: But, on the contrary, Bodies, upon which the motion of gravity has
not such force, will be easily terminable by their own bounds, hardly by
others. Now, this, Nature and Aristotle have assigned for the notion of
Dryness, that, of Moisture; wherefore, these will be dry bodies, those moist.

4. It appears, therefore, both that all bodies, that have a Consistency, are
dry; and that, if there be any so rare, that, by all others, it will be
repelled from the Center, (that is, rare in the highest degree) that, too, is
dry; for, its parts take not easily their ply, that is, are not spread by the
falling of heavy bodies, but are carried by their own Motion: Yet, that which
is dense in the highest degree will be more dry; because the rarest receiv's a
figure partly from those without it, partly from it self.

5. But, among moist bodies, that which is rarer is moister; as more yielding
to the gravity which divides it.

6. You Will object, that Dust and Fire accommodate themselves to the bounds of
other bodies; and, therefore, must be moist. It Is answered, Dust is not one
body, but many: besides, it does not so accommodate it self; since, if it lie
free, a heap of Dust is full of Air, by which it is rendered so easily pliable.
Fire, too, has a proper motion, and is reflected, when forced by a hard body;
nor does it wholly accommodate it self, as appears in light and the flames of
Furnaces.

7. Again; since, by the same motion of heavy bodies, rare ones must
necessarily be pressed against dense, and dense against rare: if a very rare
body be so forced against a dense, that it be constrained to make its way;
since, it is divisible into minutest parts, and it is easier to make a narrow
then a wide way; it is plain, the rare body will bore it self a world of little
passages and paths, and consequently, will dissect the dense, which opposes it,
into an infinity of little parts.

8. Whence, it follows, that, if there were many heterogene bodies, (that is,
of a different nature) shut up in the dense body; all, now being set at
liberty, by such dissection, will, by their proper motions, gather themselves
to their own Parties, and be separated, every one, from those of another kind.

9. But if a dense body compresse a rare one, 'twill let nothing escape out of
it; but, whatever if finds, it condenses and crowds into a narrower room.

10. Dense bodies, therefore, have this nature, to gather together heterogene
bodies; that is, they are cold: and Rare bodies, to gather together homogene
(or bodies of the same kind,) but to disperse heterogene; that is, they are
hot. For, Nature and Aristotle have given us these notions of hot and cold.

11. And among rare bodies, it is apparent, the rarest will be the best
dividers, that is, the hotest: but, among dense bodies, those will be the
coldest, which most straightly besiege the rare bodies, and those are such as
are most plyant to their parts; whence, they which are, in some measure, moist,
too, will be the coldest.

LESSON V.
Of the Elements.
1. WE have deduced, therefore, out of the most simple notion of Quantity,
dissected by the only differences of more and less, the Rarest body, hot, in
the highest degree, and dry, but not in the highest degree; the Densest, dry,
in the highest degree, and cold, but not in the highest degree; a Heavy or
less rare body, moist, in the highest degree, but not so hot; lastly, a
Moderately dense body, cold, in the highest degree, but temperately moist.

2. These same bodies, in as much as Motion proceeds from them to others, are
active; but, in as much as they sustain the action of others, they are passive;
changed, thus, in Name, not Nature.

3. This property also, of an Element, they have, that they cannot be
compounded of other things, and all things else are compounded of them: they
being established out of the first Differences which, of necessity, are found in
others. There are, therefore, four ELEMENTS.

4. You Will object; Since Rare and Dense vary the Quantity, by the very nature of
Quantity there will be infinite degrees; and, thence the number of the Elements
will neither be four nor, indeed, finite. It Is answered; Men do not determine
the kinds of things, according to the fruitfulness of Nature; but, by gross
and sensible differences, according to the slownesse of our Apprehension.

5. Thus, therefore, a Rare body, which makes it self and other things be seen,
we call Fire: One that has not this virtue, and yet hinders not other things
from making themselves seen, we call Air: A Dense body, which absolutely
excludes light, we term Earth: One that partly admits it and partly repells it,
we term Water.

6. Not, that wise men esteem these very bodies to be truly Elements, which we
are conversant with round about us: But that, these mixed bodies obtain that
name, out of the predominancy of some Element in them, which they would
deserve, if, drein'd from all dregs, they were entirely refined into the nature
of the Predominant.

7. The Elements, therefore, are Bodies distinguished, purely, by the
differences of rare and dense: and they are collected into four kinds or heads,
under the terms we have given them.

8. Moreover, it is evident, that no bounds or figures do, properly, belong to
the Elements, out of their own principles, that is, precisely by their own
nature: for, since they are nothing but quantitative bodies, affected with such
a rarity or density; the nature of Quantity still remains, which is every where
divisible and terminable, and consequently, figurable as one pleases.

9. But, whether there be not some greatest possible bulk in every one of the
Elements, out of the very nature of density, depends upon Metaphysicall
principles. Nevertheless, out of their common operation, a Sphericall figure
is most agreeable to Earth and Fire. To Fire, because its nature being to
diffuse it self, with the greatest celerity, out of a little matter into a
great breadth, it must of necessity spread it self on all sides, that is, into
a Sphere.

10. To Earth, as being the Basis and foundation, about which moist bodies
diffuse themselves; and, by so doing, mold it into a Globe.

11. But, that Fire flames up like a Pyramid, proceeds from the resistance of
the Air incompassing it, which it is forced to penetrate with a sharp point.

12. Again; since the Elements are opposed to one another, only by the
differences of rare and dense: it is evident, their transmutation into one
another is nothing else but rarefaction and condensation.

13. It Is plain, too, that dense things, being forced against rare, do
compresse them, and, if there be no way to escape, do necessarily condense
them: which condensation, if it be enough both in time and degree, will, of
necessity, change that which is condensed, into that Element to which such a
density is proper.

14. But, a rare body compressed, if it get out, diffuses it self a main out of
those straights: whence, if any dense body, that is rarifiable, stick to it, it
carries it away with it, and rarifies it: It Is plain, therefore, that 'twill
turn it into the nature of the rarer Element; if the other circumstances
concur which are necessary to Action.

15. Out of all which, we may collect, that one Element cannot be changed into
another, without being transferred through all the intermediate degrees: as if
you should endeavor to rarifie Earth into Fire; first you must raise it into
Water, then into Air, and at length into Fire.

16. Less. 3.
For, as we have demonstrated, above, Numb. 13.
concerning velocity, that a Movable cannot be raised out of one into another
determinate degree, but in time: so, with the same labor, the same may be made
evident, concerning density; since, the nature of Quantity is equal and
constant in both; and Velocity is nothing but A certain density of Motion.

LESSON VI.
Of Mixtion, and the second Qualities, or those which most immediately follovv
Mixtion.
1. SInce that part of the world, which is exposed to our knowledge, is finite;
and any never-so-little bulk infinitely repeated, exceeds the greatest
possible: it follows, that the singular bodies of this part are finite, and
some actually the least: nay, that, according to the order of the World, bodies
cannot be divided beyond a certain term.

2. There will be, therefore, in each of the Elements certain minutest parts,
which are, either not at all, or very seldom, farther divisible. When,
therefore, the Elements are forced one against another, the sides of the rare
ones must, of necessity, become united with the sides of the dense: but, when
they come to be divided again, it is impossible they should not leave some of
those minutest parts sticking to the dense bodies.

3. For, since, in the same Quantity, the dense part is less divisible then
the rare; that, too, which is compounded of rare and dense, in the same bulk,
is less divisible then the rare part of the same quantity: It must needs be,
therefore, that the rare Elements must stick, by their minutest parts, to the
dense which they have once touched.

4. Hence, it is evident, that the minutest parts being rubbed off on every side,
by the ouching together of diverse Elements, mixed bodies must necessarily be
made. For, if two dense parts touch one minutest rare; since the minutest is
indivisible, there naturally emerges a Compound of the three, as hardly
divisible as are the dense ones themselves.

5. Whence, we have the first Distinction of bodies: For, since the Elements
are four, and may be joined together by bigger or less parts; as often as great
parts of one Element redound, the body is called by the name of that Element.

6. Thus have we several kinds of Earth: and, in this sense, all consistent
things have the notion of Earth; all visible fluid things are called Waters;
and there are many kinds of Airs and Fires.

7. But, when a body, that has the consistency of one Element, is full of
minute parts of another; the substance of one Element gets the denomination of
the other's quality: Thence proceed the degrees of temperaments, hot, cold,
etc. and in one and the same kind, too, reduplicated differences of the
Elements; viz. of Earths, some are Earthy, some Watery, some Aeriall, some
Fiery; and so in the rest, even to the lowest species.

8. It appears, again, wherein consist those qualities, which distinguish
bodies, as to their consistency. First, the notion of liquid and consistent
plainly follows the nature of rare and dense: and soft is a middle between
liquid and hard; but hard, being that which resists division, clearly refers to
density.

9. But gross and Massive appertain to the quantity of parts: for gross is
not, so, divided into minutest parts, as to be able, by its subtilty, to enter
into the least pores or crannies; and Massive has no pores or passages in its
body, but speaks parts constipated and thrust close together: Both of them
plainly express a certain notion of Density.

10. As for Fat, and tough, and viscous or slimy, they have this common to them
all, To stick where they touch: but fat, in lesser parts; viscous, in greater;
tough, properly, holds its own parts together, and cleaves not so much to
others.

11. They, therefore, consist of moist and dense well mixed: from moist they
derive the facility to unite; from dense, the difficulty to be separated.

LESSON VII.
Of the manner of Mixtion, and the Passion of mixed things.
1. THese things being supposed; because there are two Active qualities, heat
and cold, which are most eminent in Fire and Water: let there, first, be a mixed
body of Earth, Water, and Air, upon which Fire be supposed to act: and, since
there is no mixed thing so compacted, but, at least, some parts of Fire may be
forced and fly away through it; and they, in their passage, are joined to the
parts of Air or Water: it is apparent that the Fire will carry away some of
them with it; whence the Compound will become more compacted and solid.

2. Again; because the parts of Fire are extremely subtle; wherever they find
a resistance in the solid parts, weaker then their power of dividing, that way
they will escape, and that, not alone, but laden with watery or airy parts: so that
they will leave the Water and Air to be united with Earth and between
themselves, by the smallest parts that are possible.

3. Whence, two things come to pass: One, that the Whole becomes a like and
equal throughout, all the Elements being mixed by most minute particles in
every part: The other, that the Elements become less divisible from one
another in this whole; which is, to be rendered constant and permanent body.

4. Let therebe, therefore, in another body, the natures of Fire, Air and
Earth blended together; to which let Water be added from without: and, first,
you will see all the sallies blocked up, and the Pores coagulated by virtue of the
cold, so that the Air or Fire cannot easily steal out.

5. See, again, the Water with all its weight and force, pressing the nearest
parts of the Compound on every side: whence, they are forced to compresse and
streighten themselves, and shrink into a less and less place, to make room
for the water; and this, not in the surface alone, but even in the minutest
parts, as far as the water can pierce; which so much the farther it can, as its
parts are rendered more subtle, by the re-active power of the Air and Fire.

6. Behold, therefore, its parts being, even thus, condensed, a consistent and
hardly-divisible body made; which is, to be a certain natural species of
Physical mixed body.

7. Hence, again, the causes of passions are apparent: for, we see some
compounds suffer from Fire a liquefaction and dissolution into minute
particles; as, into Ashes and powder: others, on the contrary, grow hard:
others, again, converted into Flame.

8. The reason whereof is clear: for, if the power of the Fire extends it self
only so far as to dilate the humid parts which hold together the dry; it comes
to pass that the humid parts become larger and more rare, and consequently,
the whole it self is rendered more divisible and subject to be diffused, by its
own gravity, into the best ply toward the Center; which is, to be liquid.

9. But, if the power of the Fire be so great, as to carry away with it the
humid parts; then the dense ones remain resolved into minute particles, without
a medium to unite them. And these operations are effected, sometimes by the
mere force of the fire it self; sometimes by means of some instruments, whereby
the humid parts are either increased or decreased, according as the Artificer
has occasion.

10. But, farther, if humid parts were redundant in the Compound, and Fire were
so far applied, as only to restrain the excess, by exhaling those parts which
were superfluous; the connection of the humid with the Earthy parts will be
less dissolvable, and the proportion of the Earthy to the humid, greater;
whence, the Compound grows hard.

11. Water, too, by pressing upon it, pierces and enters into the Compound it
encompasses, sheir's off its lighter and dryer parts, which it mingles with the
whole dry body, and amplifies the humid parts: whence, it makes the body
flaccid and loose, and next door to dissolution.

12. Some it utterly dissolv's; as salts: for, they are composed of certain
minute parts, betwixt which Water easily enters; and, so little they are, that
they swim in the water. There becomes, therefore, a kind of fluid body,
thickened with little heterogeniall bodies swimming in it; to which if Fire be
applied, by exhaling the superfluous humid parts, it remains salt, as at first.

13. But, sometimes it happens, that something is mixed with the salt and
water, which has a power of separating the watery parts from those little
swimming bodies, and of pressing down and precipitating them to the bottom:
for, when the supervener has aggregated to it self the parts of that humid body
wherein the dissolution was made, that which was mixed with them (if it be
heavier then water) descends; for, before, it was sustained by its conjunction
to the water which was lighter.

14. There are bodies, too, which grow harder and are petrified by the mixture
of water; either because there wanted moisture to make them coagulate, as it
happens in dry or sandy bodies; or because, by the addition of the extrinsecall
moisture, the superfluous humor is sucked out, in which their inward parts
were dissolved and rendered flaccid; or, lastly, because the pores of the
Compound being constipated without, the internal heat better dries the inward
parts.

15. But, when the redundant parts are so very minute in themselves that they
are easily rarifyable, they are diffused into Flame. And these parts are such
as we call fat or aerie, which consist of a thin moisture compacted with
minutest dense parts.

16. It falls out, too, that, when the fiery parts within are many and happen
upon a convenient moisture, they multiply and increase themselves without any
apparent extrinsecall cause, and open themixt body it self, so that the Vessel
cannot contain it, but it boyls and runs over; as we see in the Must of wine
and of other fruits: and this kind of action is called Fermentation.

17. Sometimes, too, it blazes out in Fire and Flame; as appears in Hay, and
other dry bodies moistened and crowded together: which comes to pass, by the
fiery parts of the dried bodies turning the humid parts into fire, and, at
length, by their multitude and compressure, raising a flame.

18. Passion or suffering from Earth is when, either by its weight or some
other pressure and hardness, a change is made; which, even by this, is
understood to be a division, and, commonly, is wrought two ways: For, either
the parts of one body are entirely separated, by the interposition of another
body of another nature; or else, only some are joined to others of the same
nature, as it happens in liquids when they are swash'd up and down.

19. The first of these divisions is made several ways; by breaking, cutting,
cleaving, pounding, and the like; the other, by hammering, drawing, impression,
bending, compression, and the like: all which appear in themselves to be made,
by the motion of hard and dense against soft and rare bodies.

LESSON VIII.
Of Impassibility, Destruction, and the Accidents of Mixed bodies.
1 THose bodies which are esteemed not to suffer at all, that is, no loss; as
Gold, though it melt, yet consumes not; the Asbestus stone is purified by
flames and not endamag'd; Hair grows not more flaccid, that is, its parts are
not more loos'ned, with water; the Adamant is so called, because neither the
hammer nor fire can master it: These have got a name, through the
unskilfulnesse of Artificers.

2. For, the Moderns have found out how a Diamant may be resolved to dust, nay,
even melted: as also, how to make Gold volatile: the Asbestus, in the very
stone, both suffers from a very violent fire, and, when divided into hairs, is
able to resist only a moderate one.

3. It appears, consequentially, what must necessarily follow, if fire be
applied to a confirmed and established body: For, since some parts of a Compound
are moister then the rest, the first efficacy of the fire will be exercised
upon them; with which, if there be any fiery parts mixed, those first fly out
with the fire, and are called Spirits.

4. The next are the moist and more insipid parts, and they are called Phlegm:
Then, the more concocted parts, in which Earth, Fire and Water are well mixed;
and they are called Oils or Sulphurs, and need a strong fire to extract them.

5. That which remains uses, by the Chemists, to be washed in water: wherein
they find a more solid part, which sinks down, and this they call Salt; and a
lighter part that swimms a top, which they throw away as unusefull;
notwithstanding, it is dry in the highest degree, and very efficacious to fix
fluid bodies.

6. But, if a Compound of these two be thoroughly baked in a very strong fire,
the moisture of the Salt is liquifi'd, and the other being clasped into it,
and, as it were, swimming in it, so condenses it into a porous body, that it
remains always pervious to fire: and such a body is called Glass or vitrify'd.

7. Whence, it is clear, that these bodies are in part, made, and, in part,
resolved or extracted by the operation of Fire: and that they are not Elements,
but Compounds, containing the nature of the whole, as appears by Experience.

8. Out of what has been said, it may be understood, what a mixed body is, viz.
A body coagulated of rare and dense parts, in a determinate number, bigness,
and weight.

9. And, when many such unite into one, a certain homogeneous sensible body
emerges, serviceable for man's use; though it be seldom so pure, as to be
unmixt with others.

10. Hence, again, it appears, that it concerns not a mixed body, of what Figure
it be: since, with the same proportion of parts, it may be of any; especially,
when one body is composed of many little ones. All things, therefore, receive
their figure from the circumstances of their Origination.

11. For, since the same things must be produced after the same manner; and
those that are diverse, different ways: the variety of manners occasions the
variety of figures.

12. For, that which equally dilates every way, becomes spherical; that which
dilates irregularly, becomes like a Bowl; that which faints in growing longer,
becomes like a Top.

13. That which cannot extend it self in length, becomes parallelly flat; that
which is, in some part, defective in breadth, becomes a hexagon, a quadrate,
etc. that which cannot dilate it self in breadth, becomes oblong. And thus, at
large, and in general, it is evident, whence proceed the figures of mixed bodies.

LESSON IX.
Of the Motion of heavy and light bodies, and the Conditions of Acting.
1. FRom what has been said we collect, that, since the Sun either is Fire, or,
at least, operates like fire, beating upon Earth, Water, and all other bodies,
with its Rays; it summons out little bodies, which, sticking to its Rays, are
reflected with them and moved from the Center toward the Circumference.

2. By whose motion, all the rest must, of necessity, press toward the Earth:
and because the Motion of dense bodies is so much the stronger, the denser they
are; and descending bodies, the more they descend, the more they repel less
descending ones; there must be, wheree're the Sun has any power, a Motion of
dense bodies toward the Center and of rare toward the Circumference; as
experience teaches us there is.

3. Whence, first, we see, there can no where be any pure Elements: since, at
least, the Rays of the Sun and the bodies carried about with them are mingled
every where.

4. We see, too, that dense bodies are heavy, and contrarily, rare are light:
and that there is not any inclination requisite in bodies, toward the Center;
as is evident by the experience of Pumps, by which, with an easy motion, a
great weight of water is raised; or, as when we suck a Bullet out of the
barrel of a long Gun.

5. We see, moreover, that, since this tumult, of little bodies ascending and
descending, swarm's every where: place any body in it, it must needs be pressed
upon by others every where about it; and the bodies, which are aside on it, must
perpetually pierce and enter into it, if they find in it lighter bodies which
they can repel from the Center: Whence, this tumult is even within all bodies,
and, by virtue of it, all bodies are mingled.

6. Whence, again, it must needs be, that the thin parts of every body consist
in a kind of perpetual expiration; and consequently, that every body, more or
less, operates upon and affects other bodies which approach it round about, or
acts in a Sphere; as we see by experience, in hot, cold, odoriferous, poisonous
bodies, and in Animals, etc. Every body, therefore, has a certain Sphere of
activity, by this motion; and its action depends upon this action.

7. Again, therefore, since its action is not effected but by an emission of
its own parts; it is plain, it cannot act upon a distant thing, but by a Medium;
as also, that it suffers from that upon which it acts, if it be within that is
Sphere of activity: the emanations of the one running, by lines different, from
the emanations of the other.

8. Again, it is evident, that, since these emanations are certain minutest
particles; in a denser body more will stick to its parts, because its pores are
narrow and hard to pass through: wherefore, with greater labor and time, and
at the cost of more little particles, a dense body receiv's the nature and
similitude of the body acting upon it, retains more strongly, and works more
vigorously then if it were rarer.

9. And, hence, the nature of intension and remission is evident; viz. because
there are, within the same space, more or fewer of these particles: as also,
why, in a denser body, a quality is more intended.

LESSON X.
Of the Motions of Vndulation, Projection, Reflection, and Refraction.
1. It Is consequentiall to what has been said, that Water, stirred and altered,
by any violence, from its planesse and equidistance from the Center, will not
suddenly cease its motion and return to rest, though that extrinsecall force be
withdrawn: For, since, by that violence, some of its parts are raised higher
then they should be; it is manifest, that those higher parts, by the course of
common causes, must press toward the Center, and, consequently, thrust others
out of their place: wherefore, the motion will continue, 'till every one be
restored to its own proper place.

2. And, because there is no motion without a concitation and a certain degree of
velocity; therefore, by the very stop of the motion, a new motion will be
occasioned, but weaker and weaker still, till it quite faint away.

3. It Is plain, too, that the very same must, of necessity, happen in Air, if
its parts be either condensed, or stirred out of their right place.

4. Again, it appears that, if it be thus with the Air, the same must be
expected, too, of any weighty moveable that is carried in the Air: For, since
the reason, why such descend not perpendicularly, is, because the progressive
motion or the causes of it are stronger then the causes of descent, at least in
part; and, since the moveable has, of it self, no inclination this or that way;
it must needs follow the motion of the Air that is next it. But, since a dense
thing moved is carried more forceably, then a rare body in which it is; the
rare body it self, as it gives a beginning to that is motion, so, again, it
receiv's an advance from that: whence it comes to pass, that both the Air and
the moveable continue their motion longer then the Air alone would.

5. Hence, again, it appears, that Movables (in all other respects alike) the
denser they are, the longer they retain their Motion.

6. It Is plain, therefore, why Pendents by a third fastened above wave up and
down, if they be raised from the perpendicular and then let drop: for, with
their first descent, they move the Air, following it when it ascends and
returning with it when it returns, but with a new and a weaker impulse: and so
proceed still, till they can stir it no longer.

7. It appears likewise, that, if a Moveable be violently struck against a hard
resister: because the Air before it must, of necessity, yield, and that which
follows it pushes it on; it will follow the Air before it, that is, 'twill be
reflected from the hard Resister.

8. And this, making equal Angles, at least without any sensible difference:
for since an oblique motion is resolved into two perpendiculars, which are in a
certain proportion, by virtue of the moving causes, and the Angle is caused and
emerges out of this proportion; it must needs be that, this proportion
remaining, the Angle of the result or reflection must needs be the same with
that of the impulse or incidence: as in light, where the reflection diminishes
not sensibly the force; but, where the reflection notably weakens the force,
the angle of reflection will be proportionably lessened.

9. But, if the Resister do but partly resist and partly admit, that which is
obliquely moved will be refracted (as they call it) from the resistance toward
the contrary part; that is, at the entering, toward the Perpendicular falling
from the mover upon the Superficies; at the going out, from the Perpendicular;
as experience, conformable to reason, witnesses.

10. You Will object, that Refraction of light and dense bodies is very different.
I answer, all the Experiments I have ever heard of, conclude no such thing.

11. The cause of Restitution is, that those bodies which recover themselves
again are changed from length to breadth: but, it is known, an extrinsecall
superficies, the more equal dimensions it has, the greater Quantity it is
capable of; whence, the more the longitude exceeds the latitude, so much the
more the parts of the imprisoned body are compressed, whose motion is so much
the swifter as they are the more spirituous, and so much the easilyer, too,
they are dilated and rarifi'd after they have been compressed and condensed by
the circumstant causes: and this is that we call Restitution.

12. But, it ordinarily happens that, if they stand too long in bent, they
recover not themselves again afterward: because, either the condensed parts
are rarifi'd, by the expulsion of some of them; or else time has begot some
stiffnesse, by the concretion of the parts pressed together, so that now it is
not so easy for them to return to their former habit.

13. This doctrine is evident, to the very sight in Flesh; which, being
pressed, becomes white, the Blood retiring; but when that returns, it comes to
it self again and recovers its color. But Steel, above all things, most
swiftly restores it self, because it has a many extremely spirited particles
imprisoned in it.

LESSON XI.
Of the Electricall and Magneticall Attractions of hot bodies.
1. OUt of what has been said, it is again deduced, that, since there is a
perpetual issue and sally of some parts, out of bodies abounding with intense
heat; and, thereupon, a certain Orb of Steams: other little bodies must, of
necessity, flow in, after the same manner, to the body it self; and
consequently, there must be the same tumult about every such body; Les. 9. 2.
as we spoke of about the Earth.

2. Hence, we see that hot bodies naturally attract those things which are in
the Air about them: Thus, we believe hot Loafs, Onions, Apples, Dogs and Cats
etc. draw infection to them, that is, the pestilent vapors which fly in the
Air.

3. But, seeing that Emanations strike the Air with a certain kind of
agitation; those things will be easilyest moved with this agitation and brought
to the body, which are most solicited by this stroke, that is, those which are
most conformable to the particles that sally out.

4. To which may be added, that such parts, too, will stick faster and easier;
and, when they are united, foment the natural heat of the body; which causes
this motion: Thence, we see that Poisons are more easily sucked out of infected
bodies, by other dried poisonous things; but, best of all, by those very bodies
to whom the Poison to be sucked out is proper.

5. But, when the parts returning are any way viscous, little light
heterogeniall bodies stick to them, too, by reason of their gluyness, and
return with them; as may be seen in Electricall bodies, which little straws and
dust fly to: And sometimes they rebound again, with a kind of Impetus or
vehemence; whence appears, that the Steams of such like bodies are very
spirited, and start out with certain impetuosities.

6. Out of these things, it appears, that there is, in a manner, a double
nature of every mixed body; one, as it were, perfect and fit to be evaporated;
another, as it were, imperfect and wanting more concoction; which two must, of
necessity, be opposed to one another, by the differences of more and less.

7. Now, if we suppose a body so composed in its own Nature, as to be placed
between two fountains, as it were, of such Steams; it must, of necessity,
attain such a disposition, that, on one side, 'twill be apt to receive the
one's Emanations, on the other, the other's, and to eject them, again, by the
contrary sides.

8. It will, therefore, have contrary virtues in its extremities; but, in the
middle, an indifferency, at least, in comparison to the Ends.

9. Again, its Emanations will be carried (against the course of other bodies,
which return to their own fountains) still directly on toward their opposite
fountain: and the body, too, if it hang so freely that it may more easily
follow its Emanations then leave them, will it self be carried along with its
Emanations.

10. But, if it cannot bear them company, and yet be placed obliquely to the
fountain, and at liberty to turn it self; with the same force 'twill turn it
self to the fountain.

11. Moreover, as the fountain acts upon it, so this body it self will act upon
another body of the same kind; but more faintly.

12. Wherefore, since we find by experience, that a Loadstone receives virtue
from the Earth, as we have explicated it; and suffers and acts thus from the
Earth and upon Iron, respectively; and besides, the searchers into its nature
declare, that all the rest of its wonderful motions depend on these: the
reason of Magneticall Attraction is evident, out of what has been said.

LESSON XII.
Of the generation of more compounded Bodies, and Plants.
1. Less. 6. n. 4.
1. It Is plain, out of what has been explicated above, that, not only the
Elements are blended together to compound a singly-mix'd body; but also many
mixed bodies are united into one more-compounded body: For, since, by the power
of their gravity, moist bodies (which we call Waters) run down from higher to
lower places, and, by their running, press the bodies they meet, loos'ning
partly their little particles in passing by, and partly tearing them off along
with them; the Water becomes thickened and full of dregs, with many minutest
bodies of diverse natures.

2. This Water if it rest in any cavity of the Earth, those little bodies sink
down in it; and, whether by heat evaporating the humid parts of the water, or
by cold binding them together, they coagulate, by their clamminesse, into one
body appearing homogeneous through the littleness of its parts: which, being
imperceptible, are so equally mixed in every the least sensible bulk, that they
show every where throughout the same uniforme nature. And, this is the most
simple generation of demix'd bodies.

3. And these bodies, by the fresh access of more water, are increased; more
of the like matter being added to them by approximation or juxtaposition, as
they term it in the Schools.

4. But, if some such thing happen to coagulate, after the foresaid manner, in
some concavity not far from the superficies of the Earth; of so tender a
substance and with so much heat, that it should ferment within it self: it
must, of necessity, suck into its very body any moisture about it, and dilate
and concoct it.

5. Wherefore, such a body must needs be increased, out of a certain
intrinsecall virtue, and with a kind of equality in all its parts, after that
manner as they call by intrasumption or receiving in: and so Tartufoli,
Potatoes, etc. grow under ground, without shooting any part of themselves above
the Earth.

6. But, if the heat overcome, and be able, by increasing it, to thrust out
into the Air, too, some little particles of this body; which must be of the
more subtle ones, that is, the best mixed of hot and moist: this body will
have heterogeniall parts, growing together and subservient to one another; and
becomes a manifest Plant, having a root within the Earth, and a blade or a
stalk above ground.

LESSON XIII.
Of the more universal parts of Plants.
1. It Is evident, again, that a Plant, being exposed to the Sun and wind,
becomes harder and dryer, at least, as to its exterior parts: whence, it comes
to pass, that the Moisture drawn up out of the root, either by the power of
the Sun or its own natural heat, more and gentlyer irrigates and waters its
inward parts.

2. Whence proceeds, commonly, a threefold difference in the substance of a
Plant: for, the outermost part is hard and called the Bark; the innermost is
soft, as being that which is last dried, and is called the Marrow or Pith;
lastly, the middle is the very substance of the Plant.

3. But, when Moisture flows in greater abundance out of the root, then can be
raised up perpendicularly, which is the hardest course of all; it breaks out at
the sides, splitting the bark of the Plant, and makes it self a kind of new
trunk of the same nature with the former, which we call a Bough, or Branch.

4. But, since the Plant receiv's a heat' variously tempered with moisture, by
the Sun: it is plain, when the moisture is best digested, it must necessarily
break out into certain Buttons or Nuts; which are concocted by degrees and,
from their original hardness, grow softer by the flowing in of more subtle
moisture, and participate in another degree, the same differences which are in
the Stock, to wit, a Skin, Flesh, as it were, and Marrow.

5. Only, because some parts of the juice are too earthy and, therefore, grow
hard; these commonly coagulate between the Flesh and the Marrow, the Sun
drawing out their moisture to the exterior parts.

6. These Buttons, being found in the more perfect Plants, use to be called
Fruits; and that which has the place of the Marrow in them is the Seed of the
Tree.

7. It appears, again, that, since the temperaments of heat and moisture are
varied without end; there must be, too, infinite other things, as it were,
accidental to Plants, besides what we have mentioned.

8. Whence, we see upon some Berries, upon others Thorns, upon some Joints,
upon others other things growing; according to the diverse natures of the
particulars that concur to the breeding them.

9. Leafs are, universally, common to almost all; and are nothing but little
distinct sprigs, the distances between which are filled up and distended with
the same-natur'd moisture: for, it is evident, the substance of wood and almost
of every Plant consists of certain thrids, as it were, compacted together; as
appears plainly, in the rending them asunder. Moreover, if, before they stick
well together, a more abundant moisture flows in; it distends these fibers,
and, while the leafs are yet straightened and shut up, makes them enwrap one
another as it were, cylindrically, like a bark.

10. When they peep into the Air, by little and little, the fibers grow stiff
and straight and stretched farther out, and the leaf unfolds it self; becoming,
according to the order of the fibers, broader one way, longer in the middle,
and, as it declines from the middle, the figure still abates in longitude: they
are split, where the fibers do not join together: to conclude, from them and
the moisture which connects them, the leafs receive their figure.

11. It appears, again, that Flowers are a kind of leafs; but of the more
spirited and oily parts: therefore, they are light, odoriferous, and
short-lived, and, in Trees, they are the forewarners of the Fruit.

LESSON XIV.
Of the Accidents of Plants.
1. OUt of the figure of the parts, the figure of the whole Plant is fitted and
proportioned. The Trunk, which is the principal part, most commonly grows up
like a Cylinder, or rather like a Cone, because upwards still it grows smaller,
and abates in latitude.

2. When it deviates from this figure, the reason may be easily collected out
of the figure of the root or seed. Those which have a weak stock or Trunk do
not grow erect, but either run upon the ground, or else are raised up and
sustained by others, and get a spirall figure, like the winding about a
Cylinder.

3. For, the natural motion of Plants being upwards, by force of the heat and
sting out of the Earth; and the Trunk, by reason of its weakness, not being
able to bear much: it bows toward the Earth, and strives to rise again as much
as it is able; and so imitates the figure of a serpent creeping. But, if the
stem cling to some prop that may help it upwards; it elevates it self, not
directly, or in a straight line, but, as well as it can, winding round about
the sides on it.

4. Again; because we see there is both a kind of annual and diurnall, as it
were, flux and reflux of heat from the Sun: some Plants are but of a day's
life; as certain Flowers, which, the same day, blow and wither.

5. Very many last not above a year; and then are repaired again, either by
shedding their seed, or by the reviving of their fountain, the root; or else by
the very temperature of the soil. Others of a more constant substance, do not
only sustain themselves, but increase for many years. Others, again, even
out-last Ages.

6. All have the same reason of their life and death: their life and increase
consists in a due proportion of moisture with heat; where this fails, they
faint and consume away.

7. A Plant dies, either because the Sun, sucking the moisture out of the upper
parts of the Earth, has not left wherewith to moisten the root: or, because too
much moisture overflowing the root without a proportionable heat, has too much
dissolved and diffused the virtue of it; so that the Sun supervening has
extracted its very radical heat, before it could increase and supply it self:

8. Or else, because, by little and little, earthy and feculent parts, cleaving
to the root, have obstructed the passage of the moisture to the inward parts of
it: And this way of death, because it follows out of the very action of life,
seems more properly to bear the denomination of old Age and a natural way to
death.

9. Out of the same principles, it is apparent, why several parts of the same
Plant produce such contrary effects: For, since, in the nourishing of the Plant
there is a kind of perpetual streining and separating of the parts of the
Aliment, most of the parts of the same nature must, of necessity, run together
to one and the same place and part: Whence, the several parts of the plant are
composed of heterogeniall particles of the nutritive moisture; yet, more or
less sated, too, with the temper and seasoning imbibed in the root: Thus,
therefore, it is consonant to reason, that a Plant should be composed of
contraries and things that have contrary virtues.

10. The same way we come to understand the Sympathy and Antipathy which is
found in diverse Plants: for, since it is certain that every Plant, to its
measure, has a certain Orb of vapors always encompassing it, (as is evident,
in some, by the fmell issuing from them,) and some Plants must needs consist of
contrary natures; if the weaker happen to be planted within the Sphere of the
stronger, that corrupts and kills it with the strokes of its vapors which
besiege it; but, if the stronger be of a nature that is a friend to it, by the
same strokes it grows more lively and fruitfuller.

LESSON XV.
Of the generation and augmentation of Animals.
1. ANd because, the more fervent the heat is and the moisture more figurable,
(that is, in a certain proportion, neither resisting division, and yet easily
consistent) the Plant is divided into so many the more members and joints: it is
evident, if there be so much heat as to exhale fumes out of the moisture, and
make it actually fluid, the little branches, through which it flows and wherein
it is contained, will of necessity become hollow. And since, by force of the
heat, the Moisture is refined into watery and oily parts, the earthy remaining
still below: it comes to pass that there are found three, as it were,
several, but subordinate, fountains of Moisture in the same Plant; and, from
every one of these their branches, and, in them, their own proper Moistures are
derived.

2. Among which, those that savor of Water are the more remote, and more fit
to form the exterior parts of the Plant; and the enclosed humor is more apt
for those effects which are performed by rarefaction and condensation.

3. Those which savor of Oil are fitter for Augmentation; as being of a kind
of middle nature, and conformable to all the parts. Lastly, the Earthy, for the
Conservation of the whole Plant in a due temperament, by the mixture of heat;
which the more solid parts are more susceptible of and longer hold.

4. Again, because the watery parts are very thin and, as it were, in a middle
between Water and Air, in those long and narrow channells; it is clear that
they are both extremely passive of every impression from without, and transmit
it to their fountain or head.

5. And, because their head has a connection with the principal fountain; for
the most part, the same passion will pass on even to that: in which, the heat
being very acute and spritely, and, consequently, capable of sudden motion; a
change in the Plant, proportionable to its nature, will necessarily follow the
impression made upon it.

6. This Plant, therefore, will have these two qualities: to be stirred up, as
it were, and irritated with all occurrences from without; and this very
principle or head thus irritated, will have power to move any part of the Plant
out of its present site into another, according to the manner and measure of
the irritation.

7. Which two, making up that whereby we distinguish living Creatures from such
as have no life, namely this, that, upon all occurrences from without, they can
move themselves; it is evident, that the name of an Animal or living Creature
agrees to this Plant: We have, therefore, an Animal, consisting of three
principles, a Heart, a Liver and Brain; watered with three rivers, of the Vital
and Animal spirits and the Blood; by the three various Channels of the
Arteries, Veins and Nerves.

8. But, because all things are increased by the same things whereof they are
made; and all mixed bodies are composed of the Elements; it is clear, that
Animals may be increased by all bodies, so that they be furnished with fit
instruments to make the necessary transmutations.

9. But, some bodies are of a harder transmutation, others of an easier:
wherefore, bodies ought to be chosen fit for the food of the Animal; and those
that are chosen should again be resolved into parts, that the best may be taken
and the worse rejected; and this, as often as is necessary, that is, till such
are chosen as, by mere concoction and mixing with the humors of the Animal,
may be reduced into a substance like it. Now, whilst the fibers are distended
with this moisture, both they are strengthened by it and the spaces between them
are filled up: and, thus, the Animal becomes bigger.

10. And, because this is brought about by concoction; those bodies which have
not yet arrived to the degree of the Animal, must needs be the most connaturall
Aliment.

LESSON XVI.
Of the Motion of the Heart, and some consequents of it.
1. AGain, because the Heart has heat and moisture in it, and moisture boyls
with heat, and is turned into fumes; it is manifest, the same moisture does not
remain constantly in the heart, but, being resolved by the heat, is cast out by
the motion of the Heart, swagging down and shutting it self with its own
weight, till it is opened again and swelled with other moisture flowing into it.

2. There is, therefore, a continual flux of moisture through the heart;
which, heated in it and then cast out to be dispersed through the Animal,
conserv's it in a due temperament of heat.

3. Out of what has been said, may be understood, what a Disease and the Cure
of it is: for, when any part is indisposed, so that unwholesome vapors fume
out of it, they, mixed with the blood, overrun and discompose, as much as they
can, the whole body and the very Heart it self.

4. And, according as these vapors do more frequently rise to such a bulk,
that they are able vehemently to assail the whole Animal; so much the
frequenter are the Fits of the Disease. And thus, some are continual, and
others have intermissions; some every other day, some tertians, some
quotidians, etc.

5. And the true nature and Method of Curing is, To seek out the part
originally ill-affected, and apply remedies to that.

6. Thus, too, it appears, how Physic expells one certain determinate humor
out of the whole body: for a Drug, etc. being concocted in the Ventricle, which
has a power of dissolving and rendering fluid a certain humor of the body, its
virtue is diffused through all the Veins by the fore-explicated Motion of the
Heart; whence, it comes to pass that, being provoked to stool, that humor
rather and more then any others follows out of all the members; or, if the
Physic be diaphoreticall, that will sweat out more then any of the rest.

7. Lastly, it is clear, since an Animal is a Plant; by the highest concoction,
a Seed or compendium of its nature may be framed in it as well as in Plants:
which, duly ejected into a congruous ambient body, may spring up into a new
Animal.

8. Now, this seed coagulates first into a Heart, then into a Brain, and at
length into a Liver: out of every one of which their own proper little Channels
spring; as is observed by those that pry artificially into these things.

LESSON XVII.
Of the progressive Motion of Animals.
1. OUt of what has been said, it may evidently be concluded that, since the
Heart is moved naturally and, by its motion, presses out a fumy humor, which
they use to call the Spirit, into the Channels connected with it self and into
the bodies joined to it: and the Flesh is fibrous, viz. certain parts
constipated together of a world of minutest fibers sticking to one another: and
since, if a connaturall moisture, especially being warm, get into such a body,
it makes it swell and, of thin, become thicker, of long, shorter: It comes to
pass that the Members, whether consisting of such fibers or knit together by
them, attain some kind of local Motion, by that irrigation from the Heart.

2. Again, the Channels, especially if they are extremely little, will swell,
too, and become shorter.

3. Since, therefore, it is apparent, that there flow abundance of Spirits from
the Heart to the Brain; and again, that, from the Brain through the whole body,
mostsubtilly-hollow nerves are extended to all the members, and lose themselves
by their dispersion, as it were, in the Muscles: It Is plain, the Muscles will
swell with these spirits, as often as the Heart overflows; and consequently,
become shorter, and the parts adhering to them be drawn backwards to the head
of the Muscles; and, which clearly follows, all the extremities of the body be
moved, from the motion of the Heart, according to what is convenient to its
nature.

4. It follows, too, how certain other members, which have no Nerves but only
fibers, have motions of their own; which consist almost in nothing else but in
contraction and dilatation: For, the fibers being made shorter by their
irrigation, they draw the body with them into that figure which follows out of
their contraction; which, when the fibers are transvers'd, is dilatation, when
other ways set, contraction.

5. Again, hence appears how the progressive motion of an Animal is effected:
For, an Animal which is moved by walking, whilst it stands still, has the
Center of its gravity set directly to the Center; but, when it sets a foot any
way, it inclines the center of its gravity, and consequently its whole body,
that way; till, transferring the other foot, it sets it down too: and this
often repeated is walking.

6. But, one that leaps, when he has contracted the superior or fore-parts to
the inferior or hinder-parts; suddenly pouring out spirits through convenient
Nerves, he thrusts the fore-parts forwards, with such a force that the
hinder-parts follow them.

7. Something like this is the creeping of feetlesse Creatures: for, fixing
their breast or some other part, they bow their backbone or that which serv's
in stead of it, and so draw the hinder to the fore-parts; then, fixing some of
their hinder-parts to the Earth, they advance their fore-parts, by straightning
again their back.

8. Swimming is made out of leaping: for, it being effected by the Instrument's
first being crook'ned and then straightned again; by the resisting Water the
body is pusht forward: and, the same happens in flying.

9. Now, the body being heavier then the Medium in a certain proportion, and
consequently, obliged to spend a certain time in descending; and the
adventitious Motion making the Medium strain with more vehemence against that
motion of the body downwards, or according to the center of its gravity: it is
plain, such a body will not sink.

LESSON XVIII.
Of the five senses of Animals.
1. OUt of what has been said, it appears, that there are certain Channels
spread through the whole body of an Animal, full of a kind of aerie humor; and
that they are long and narrow: whence, the least impression made in any
extremity of the body must needs, in a moment, run to their fountain, the
Brain; and, thence descend to the Heart. These channels, therefore, being any
way obstructed, the Animal is sensible of nothing without.

2. And, since bodies that make impression, either do it by their immediate
selves, or else by the mediation of some other body; and, those that act by
their immediate selves, either do it in their proper bulk, or broken into
parts, or by natural emissions; and those bodies, by the mediation whereof
universally one body acts upon another, are either Air, or Fire, or light
which we see every body bandies against another: It follows, that an Animal, if
it be perfect, may be affected these five ways by the things about it.

3. And, because it is evident that these five ways are distinct; the Animal,
too, it self will have five distinct dispositions, by which it will be apt to
receive these five impressions; to choose the things that are congruous and
refuse those that are noxious, both in its food and other things belonging to
its conservation.

4. Again, because these impressions are different; it is fit the Organs that
are to receive them be placed in several parts of the Animal: Animals,
therefore, have five Senses.

5. It Is apparent, too, that the Senses are nothing but certain different
degrees of Touches: For, the parts of the same body must needs make only a more
subtle stroke, of the same nature with the stroke of the whole.

6. And, hence, we distinguish the differences of Tastes; so, as, that one
pricks, another cutt's, another brushes, another smooth's: the differences of
Smells, too, are akin to Tastes.

7. But, the differences of Sounds are the same with those of Motions;
distinguished by swiftness and slownesse, by bigness and smalnesse, Lastly,
it is evident, that Fire or Light make strokes too, by its Activity upon other
bodies.

8. It appears, farther, of what nature the Senses must be, and where situated.
For, the Touch, being to receive the excess of those qualities whereof the
body of the Animal consists, requires nothing but a middling kind of Moisture,
or the natural quality of that vapor which fills the Channels; and therefore,
like them, it is diffused through the whole body.

9. The Taste, because it requires a Moistness which may dissolve the minutest
parts, needs an abundance of Moisture, and a site where the food may be
dissected. The Smell, by which Air chiefly enters into the body, requires a
site and Organ where the vapors may stick, that, being constipated together,
they may act the more powerfully.

10. The Hearing and Sight require a situation near the Brain; in an eminent
place, where Motion and Light may come to them more pure; and Organs, which may
multiply Light by refraction and Motion by reflection.

11. Nor is it less evident, that the Sensation is perfected in that part of
the Organ, where chiefly resides that virtue for which the Sense was made; that
is, to transfer to the Brain the action of a body without: If the black of
the Eye, the hammer of the Ear, the pulp of the Nose do this; the Sensation
also must be placed in them.

12. It appears, too, why the Senses are believed to consist in a kind of
Spirituality and abstraction from matter: For, since they are ordained by
nature, only that the Animal may be moved; the stroke of sensible things is so
thin and subtle, that it changes not the quality of the Organ sensibly, and,
therefore, it is not believed to be material.

13. And, hence, too, the Sensible object is commonly believed to be in the
Sense, not as something of the same nature or contrary to it, but purely as
another thing; by which mistake, Sensation is thought to be a kind of knowledge.

LESSON XIX.
Of the Objects of the Senses.
1. LAstly, it appears, wherein consists the being Objects of Sense: for,
Touchable things, it is plain, are the first Qualities, or those which are
immediately derived from them: Tastable things, conformable to nature, are
Sweets; and must necessarily consist, as the nature it self does, in a moderate
heat and moisture, or, of the degree proper to the Animal.

2. From this temper, other Savours incline, too much, toward cold and heat,
or moisture and dryness: as salt, sharp and bitter things taste too much of
heat; restringent, crabbed, of cold; sour, bitter and sharp, of dryness;
insipid, of moisture. Proportioned to this is the account of Smells.

3. Sounding things are dry and trembling, which are easily waved up and down:
but, soft things hinder Sound.

4. Since Colors strike the Eye, their nature must consist in a virtue to
reflect Light; that is, in a density and constipation of parts, and in having a
many-corner'd figure: And these commonly favor of cold and dryness; and their
opposites, of moisture and heat.

5. Lastly, Light it self (and dilated flame, if we will suppose it repelled from
the Object to the Eyes, must necessarily do the same as Light) will represent
the figure of a thing by intershadow'd strokes upon the Organ, and strike, more
or less, according to the nature of that which reflects it: if it pass
through a triangular glass, it will receive and carry to the Eye the same
varieties, that is, differences of Colors.

6. But, that light, too, does those things which are proper to fire, (viz. to
dry, to burn, to be reflected, refracted, collected, dispersed, produced and
extinguished,) is so clear, that it cannot be doubted but light is fire.

7. Nor imports it against this, That it seems to be moved in an instant, That
it fills the whole Air, That it penetrates solid bodies, as glass, etc. for,
these things seem so only, through the defect of our Senses; which perceive not
its motion, nor those little spaces by which the Air is separated from the
light, nor the pores of those bodies through which it passes.

LESSON XX.
Of Knowledge and Memory.
1. FArther, it appears, that these Motions, when they strike against the
destined part of the Brain, in which knowledge is produced; though it be fatty
and clammy, according to the nature of the Brain, yet are they repelled from
it, because frequent new impulses charge upon the same point.

2. Those little bodies, therefore, retreat thence, carrying away with them
some little particle of the Brain which sticks to them; and wander up and down
in the ventricles of the brain, till they rest upon the bottom or stick to the
sides.

3. Whence, being rubbed off, as it were with a brush, by the motion of the
Spirits, when there is occasion; they swim again, and are brought back to that
part which is the fountain of knowledge.

4. The first stroke produces Knowledge; the later, actual Memory; which, if
it be made by design, is called Remembrance.

5. Again; since Motion requires that the Nerves be well filled with Spirits,
and that the extrinsecall parts be strong; but Sensation needs only a clam and
clear disposition of the Humor contained in those Nerves: it is plain, both
that there may be Sensation without Motion, and Motion without Sensation.

6. It appears, too, why the Memory is set a work by the Similitude, as also by
the connection of Objects: For, since, in a liquid body, things that are alike
naturally gather together, and are apt to stick to one another; and, since
those things which enter together and at once must necessarily attain a kind of
connection, which is easily preserved in the clammy nature of the Brain; when,
by any means, they are brought again to the fountain of sensation, they must
needs meet there together, and in a kind of Order.

7. But, since contraries use to enter together into the internal sense, and
make one another more taken notice of; it is plain, if Hunger provokes the
Animal, 'twill remember Meat, if Thirst, Drink, if Seed, the Female. Whence, it
appears, that Passion and Will stir up the Memory: as also other causes, too,
which, by pouring in spirits, sweep or brush, as it were, the Brain; and for
that these causes do this by accident, they are all comprehended under the name
of Chance.

8. It appears, again, that they, whose brain is of a thin and hot
constitution, easily apprehend, conjecture happily, opine rashly and
changeably: they, whose disposition is more dry and thin, have a good Memory
and rememberance too, but opine lightly and changeably.

9. They that have a temperate Brain, have the best judgment: since, they look
upon many things, before they establish their Opinion; and, for the same
reason, they are not changeable.

10. Lastly, since, by the strokes of Objects, some little particle is still
taken off and carried away from the brain: when the same returns again, it must
needs appear that we have been sensible of that before.

LESSON XXI.
Of Sleep and Dreams.
1. IT appears farther, that, since the Nerves must needs be distant from that
part of the brain wherein Sensation is produced; it may fall out, that, the
motion by the Nerves being obstructed, there may yet a Motion proceed, from
some part of the brain to the knowing part: and then, some things will appear
to the Animal to be, as if it had received them by its Senses, when yet it did
not receive them.

2. This stopping of the Senses is called Sleep; and such apparitions, Dreams:
An Animal, therefore, will sleep and dream sometimes.

3. But, because there is no necessity, that all the Senses or Nerves must be
stopped at once; 'twill happen, that an Animal may partly sleep and partly wake:
Whence, it comes to pass that, the Nerves of the Tongue being left unstop'd,
some talk in their Dreams; and, if the Nerves for hearing, too, be unstop'd,
that they answer to those that speak to them; or, if there be no obstruction
toward the Marrow in the Backbone, they walk, too, and use their hands.

4. When, therefore, some of the Senses are at liberty, Dreams may be provoked
by them: another way, by some natural disposition, which affects the heart,
and makes a motion in the brain conformable to that impression: or, lastly, by
much precedent thinking, objects may be stirred up and down, too, in ones Sleep.

5. But, a Man being in a manner quiet in his Sleep, he happens sometimes to
judge more truly of things he sees, in his sleep, then when awake: For the Soul
undisturbed, of its own nature, more clearly perceiv's the force of the Objects
playing up and down before it, to discover Truth; and unperceiv'dly orders
them: Hence, it comes to pass, that, sometimes, we discern, in our Sleep,
future or absent things, which we could not find out nor pierce into, by
consideration, or discourse, when we were awake.

6. And, the same may be the case of Fools, Mad and Melancholy persons; though
it is very rare and to be esteemed prodigious, and they have a great many
falsities mixed withal: whence, neither are these apparitions to be confided
in; nor is it possible there should be any Art of Divination by Dreams.

LESSON XXII.
Of Passions and the expression of them.
1. FArther, it is deducible, that, since impressions made in the Brain are
conveyed, by a short and open way, to the Heart; they must, necessarily have an
effect, too, in the Heart, conformable to the natures of both.

2. Since, therefore, the heart redounds with hot spirits: as we see a little
drop of red wine, dropd into water, diffuses it self into the water and changes
it, according to its nature; so, the impression of these little bodies will
have the like effect upon the fumes of the heart.

3. Hence, again, it proceeds, that the motion of the heart, through these,
becomes sometimes freer and better, sometimes worse; and that these very
qualities pass into the Pulse, whence, according to the variety of Passions,
the Pulse varies.

4. Again, Passions must needs differ by dilatation and constriction: for, by a
conformable Object, the Spirits of the heart are made more rare, whence, the
heart more freely enjoys its motion; by things disagreeable to Nature, the
Spirits become more crasse and heavy, and the heart is, as it were, oppressed.

5. Again; since an absent Object does not equally affect, with a present one;
these motions will be more remiss in its absence then in its presence: whence,
we deduce four differences of Passions; Joy and Grief, for a present good or
evil; Hope and Fear, for them absent.

6. Anger is, in a manner, mixed of a present evil and future good: and, it is
the most violent of all the Passions; because, so mething that is contrary to it
falling into an abundance of hot blood, produces a most swift effect; just as
when something moist and cold falls into molten Metal.

7. Again, because the Spirits, flowing at that time out of the heart to the
brain, retain that nature they had received in the heart; in the brain it self
they gather to them those Phantasms that are conformable to them: whence, the
Animal must, of necessity, be much fixed upon that thought, and not easily admit
any other then such as are conformable to its Passion.

8. And, because the heart is joined to the Pericardium, and the Pericardium to
the Diaphragm; and the Diaphragm is furnished with an eminent Nerve, and is
moveable within it self: it comes to pass, that every motion of the heart
flow's, by the Diaphragm, into the neighboring parts of the body, and all the
motions of them all return again, by its Nerve, to the brain; and, so, beget a
sense of that grief or pleasure which the heart is affected with. Whence, too,
without any external Sensation, but by thinking only, an Animal may be
delighted and encouraged to action.

9. Again, because, by repeating either the strokes of Objects or very
Thoughts, there grows a great multitude of Phantasms of the same thing, in the
brain; and, in like manner, the heart often agitated by such like causes in a
certain motion, gets an aptitude to be easily moved so: there grows, both in
the brain and in the heart, a certain constancy and facility of knowing and
doing; in which consists the notion of Intellectual and Moral habits, as far
as they are grounded in the body.

10. Lastly, since, by the motion of the Diaphragm, the breathing is altered;
and breathing, expressed out of a hollow place through a narrow passage, is apt
to yield a Voice, by reason of the multiplication of its processions,
occasioned by the reflection of the cavity: it comes to pass, that the Voice
of Animals is altered by the variety of their Passions; and so, in grief, they
express one Voice, another in hope, another in joy.

LESSON XXIII.
Of the communicating Affections to others.
1. FArther, it appears, that, since, all Sensations (whether of those things
which affect the body from without, or those we are sensible of because one
part of the body affects another,) are produced in a certain site to the Organ
of Sensation, that is, in a right or the natural line of Motion, from the
Entries of the Nerves to the place of Sensation: It follows, that, when we
think of the same things, they must be in the very same site and posture;
whence, it comes to pass, that, in Dreams, and in Distraction of mind we seem
to see the very things themselves before us.

2. It Is apparent, therefore, they are in a fit situation for this, viz. to be
pressed, by the motion made by the heart, into the same Nerves: whence it
follows, that, by the thinking on any Object, the nerves are just so moved as
when the Senses convey it; and consequently, the same action is apt to follow.

3. And, thus we see, Laughing and Gaping, etc. proceed from seeing others do
so; as love and hatred from hearsay.

4. Hence, it comes to pass, that blearey'dnesse and other distorsions of the
Members are often derived from beholding others: that contagious Diseases, too,
(for which some disposition in the body prepares the way) are attracted and, as
it were, sucked in, by fear: and, that other Diseases, which the retraction of
a humor to some certain parts produces, are introduced by mere sight or
imagination only.

5. Again, because the members of the body are connected, and the exterior
depend upon the interior; these operations cannot be produced, but that,
byconnection, the exterior members must some way be changed: and thus, we see,
all the Passions show themselves in the countenance and actions of Animals;
upon which depends the principles of Physiognomy.

6. Again; because usual Motions render the Organs apt for such motions: it
comes to pass, that, in generation, the like dispositions are often transferred
to the issue, and the Offspring becomes like the Parent, both in its natural
operations and those which depend upon Sensation; nay, even in some trivial
things, too, as in Warts, in hookednesse of nose, and the like.

7. Moreover, since the issue in the womb derives its nourishment from the
Mother, it is no wonder if the desires of the Mother, at that time, pass into
the issue: as, if they long for wine or whatever other food or pleasure, that
the issue should suck in such a disposition as to be obnoxious to the same
things all their lives.

8. Again, since such longings fix a vehement resemblance of the things in the
Fancy; and terror, too, or any violent passion does the same; and that image
is made by Motion: it is no wonder that the Spirits of the Mother tremble with
the same motion, even as far as to the Issue it self; and that, as light with
its stroke, paints in a glass the reflected Image of a body, so this Image
should, in the little tender body of an Infant, and wherever it finds matter
apt to preserve it, leave an image fixed in the flesh, as it were a Mark of that
desire.

9. And, because, too, the Infant is never more tender then at the first
commixtion of the Father and Mother's Seeds, and women, in the conjugall act,
especially some, are very passive: it is no wonder, if a violent apprehension of
their's, in that conjuncture, often changes the complexion of the Issue; the
Female Seed receiving a kind of proper stamp, from the image which possesses
the Mother's fancy.

LESSON XXIV.
Of the seeming-rationall Actions of Animals.
1. It Is plain, again, that Animals must, of necessity, operate
seeming-reasonably, or like Reason: For, since the work of nature is the work
of THAT REASON which framed nature; the effects of Nature must needs be the
works of the same Reason, and resemble the manner of Reason's working.

2. Again; some of their operations must needs exceed those which Reason works
in us: For, since they spring from a REASON which transcends ours, it is but
consequentiall, that they should transcend the effects of our Reason; as
appears in Generation, which we understand not how it is done, even when we do
it; as neither could a Man tell the hours of the day as a Clock does, which
yet is it self but a work of our Reason.

3. It appears, too, whence proceed the Antipathies and Sympathies of Animals:
viz. partly, out of the natural disposition of contrary qualities, Less. 14.
n. 10.
as in Plants: partly, out of an apprehension of evil joined with the Object;
which sometimes takes its rise in the Parents, and is transmitted to the Issue,
out of the disposition of the Parents body.

4. Farther, the virtuous Actions of Animals, as those of ove of Glory,
Gratitude, Generosity, etc. are nothing but such material impetuosities;
which, because we feel in our selves joined with virtue, we, therefore, believe
to be just so, too, in Animals.

5. Lastly, their concatenated and orderly-proceeding actions are the effects,
partly, of foregoing actions, partly, of the disposition of the circumstant
bodies; as they may find by experience, whoever have the leisure to observe a
Dunghill Hen: The admiration of which actions ought not to stop at the Animals,
but at their Maker; who has framed such a concatenation, out of which the
Effect follows after so many Causes.

6. And, thus much may suffice about Animals, in common. MAN three things raise
above the Crowd: in his Internal Sense, That he can order, and rummige for,
and own, and use the Instruments of Knowledge: in his Tongue and Voice, That
they do not purely express his Passion, but even his Mind, too: in his Body,
That he has Hands, an Instrument not fitted to any one determinate operation,
but destined to a kind of universality of Acting. But, in these three, there is
nothing requires a Comment.

Peripateticall INSTITUTIONS. Third Book.
Containing those things, which concern the WORLD and its greater Parts.
LESSON I.
Of the limitation, unity, and composition of the World.
1.THe WORLD we call, the Collection of all existent Bodies. That this is not
infinite, it is evident: For, if any longitude be infinite, that very notion
imports that it has infinite parts equal to one another, (paces, suppose, or
feet); and consequently, from an assigned point in that line, some one foot
will be, by infinite others, distant; and so a term assigned, and limits fixed
at both ends, to a line which is called infinite.

2. If you answer, some one foot is infinite intermediate ones distant from an
assigned point, but that foot cannot be assigned; as some one horse is
necessary to ride on, yet no determinate one: It Is replied, indetermination and
infinity are qualifications or manners of a thing in potentia or possibility:
and so a horse is undetermined whilst he is yet but necessary, that is, in
possibility, not in act.

3. Nor makes it against this, that there are infinite objects in the
understanding of the Intelligences: for, admit there were, we are not sure they
are there actually distinct, and not after the manner of one.

4. You Will say, Suppose Quantity to exist as great as it is possible, and 'twill
be infinite: it is no contradiction, therefore, to suppose it infinite. It Is
answered, that, since, supposing any Quantity, how big soever, yet one may
always suppose a bigger; there is no Quantity so big as may exist: whence,
this is an implicatory proposition, that is, such as couches contradiction in
it self; as taking the manner of possibility to be the manner of act.

5. Again, it is evident, there is but one World: For, since there is no space, by
which two worlds could be separated one from the other; and quantitative bodies
joined together, even by that very conjunction, are one; all quantity whatever
must, of necessity, by continuednesse, conspire into one bulk.

6. Again, it is collected, that the World is not composed only of minute
bodies, by nature indivisible: for, since an extrinsecall denomination is
nothing, but the intrinsecall natures of the things out of which it rises; and,
if there were only indivisibles in the world, all the intrinsecalls would
remain the same; since the same things always afford the same denomination,
'twould be impossible any thing should be changed.

7. And, hence it follows, that there is still some liquid substance,
wherever there is any local mutation: and therefore in Heaven it self, the
Spears cannot be so contiguous that there intervenes not some liquid and
divisible substance between them.

8. Since, therefore, a whole, after it is divided, is no longer what it was;
every divisible substance, in that very respect, is mortal. Wherefore, every
moveable body must needs be either corruptible it self, or joined to something
that is corruptible.

LESSON II.
Of the Mortality and kinds of those things that are in the World.
1. It Is inferred, that all Corporeal nature wherever is corruptible; since all
participate the same nature of Quantity: whose differences being rare and
dense, and, out of their permixtion, the Elements and all mixed things being
derived, the differences of all quantitative things, that is, bodies, must
needs be proportioned to these we see amongst us; that is, there may be
Elements or mixed things differing, indeed, in temperament, but the same and
entirely agreeing in the common notions.

2. Again, since the differences of mixed things, Vegetables and Animals, both
from one another and among themselves, are condivided by the opposition of
contradiction; that is, by this not being so much as that; as, mixed bodies are
either vegetable or not vegetable, and vegetables are sensible or not sensible,
etc. though we cannot tell whether all our kinds may be found in the other
parts of the world; yet, certain it is, that no other kinds can be found, which
may not be reduced to these amongst us.

3. It Is objected, Since the Notion of a body is, to be moveable; bodies, to
which a simple Motion is natural, must be simple: now, we find three simple
motions in nature, upwards, downwards and circular: the former two of these
oppose one another, and consequently, both they and the bodies, whose they are,
destroy one another and are corruptible; circular motion, therefore, because it
has no opposite, must be incorruptible, and so the Heavens, too, to which this
motion is proper. It Is answered, since a body is a mover moved; and to be a
Mover is a nobler Notion then to be moved; the differences of bodies are rather
to be deduced from that of being Movers, then from this, that they are moveable.

4. Again, it is false, that the subjects of simple Motions must be simple
bodies: for, both all mixed things are carried upwards and downwards, and two
Elements are assigned to either of these motions; and, which is most
considerable, these motions agree to these bodies, by accident, not out of
their natural disposition. It Is false, too, that the third, viz. circular, is
a simple Motion: for, Aristotle himself acknowledges it to be compounded of
thrusting and drawing; and it is manifestly carried on according to two
perpendiculars at once, and at least four times reflected, and has a great
difformity in the proportion of its carriage: Whence, it appears, if we were to
judge from the nature of their Motions, the Heavens must needs be no simple but
a most compounded body.

5. It Is objected, again, there would have appeared, in so long time, some
change in the Heavens, if they were corruptible. It Is answered, there is no
necessity of that; as it is not credible that, if one were in Heaven, he would
discern the Changes we suffer: But, again, many things have appeared, as more
at large shall be showed hereafter. Moreover, Light is concluded to be the same
with Fire; and that our very Eyes witness to be spread every where over the
visible world: but, where there is any one Element, there, Aristotle
acknowledges the rest, too; and indeed, with the same Eyes, we discern an opake
body reflecting the light.

6. It Is objected, Animals cannot live in the Moon; not Men, particularly,
because, in it, there is not a variety of Earth and Waters, nor rains, nor
clouds: Add to this, a most vehement heat; the Sun shining continually upon
the same part for fifteen whole days together, and never receding, in latitude,
above ten degrees from the part illuminated.

7. It Is answered, If there be a kind of grosser Air, as it is observed, there
will, of necessity, be Water: for these gross vapors are made out of Earth,
and have the nature of water before, though perhaps the Clouds are not so big
as to be taken notice of. Besides, the Almains have observed something like a
vast cloud in the Moon. The extreme heat is moderated, by the height of the
Mountains, the lowness of the Valleys, the abundance of water and woods: as we
see by experience under the Equator, from which the Sun is at farthest about
twenty three degrees distant; and, but about ten only for half the year, from
the middle between the Equator and the Tropic; yet this hinders not but those
are most happy regions.

LESSON III.
Of the parts of the Planetary World, and especially those of the Earth.
1. THe greatest part of the world, which we have some kind of knowledge of,
consists of the Sun and six great bodies illuminated by it; and some lesser
ones, which are, in a manner, members cut off from the greater.

2. The bigger bodies are counted by Astronomers, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the
Earth, Mercury, Venus: which, it is certain, (of the rest by evident
experiments, of Mars and Saturn by their parity to the rest) are opake bodies,
illuminated by the Sun.

3. Mercury is believed to have appeared like a spot under the Sun. Venus
appears horned like the Moon. Jupiter; suffers from the Stars accompanying him
and they, reciprocally, from him. The Sun alone shines of it self.

4. Moreover, since light is Fire, the fountain of light is the fountain of
Fire, too. The SUN, therefore, is a vast body, consisting of Mountains and
Plains which belch out fire; and, as Aetna, Lipara and Hecla are never without
flames, and especially the Vulcanian Mountains of the new world, so, much less
is the Sun.

5. Both the clouds of ashes (vapour'd out in vast abundance) and other bodies
mixed with them, which make the Spots in the Sun; and the fountains of flames,
observed, sometimes more fiercely sometimes more remissely, to blaze out,
witness this to be the nature of the Sun.

6. The whole body, therefore, of the Sun, or, at least, as deep as is
necessary, must needs consist of some matter resembling to bitumen or Sulphur;
and be intended by nature for nothing but an Esca and food of flames,
serviceable to other bodies.

7. And, since we have the same Actour upon the other six Bodies, the effects,
too, must needs be analogous upon an analogous matter, as we have already
proved that of all other bodies must be: amongst these, the Earth, by which we
are nourisht, is the best known to us.

8. This, our very senses tell us, is divided into three parts: A solid
Substance, which we call Earth; a liquid but crasse one, which we call Water;
and aninvisible one, which we call Air.

9. The Earth is not a Loadstone: first, because it hangs not on any other;
for, the Stars of the Eighth Sphere are at too great a distance, to look for
any Magneticall action from them: secondly, because that virtue in it which
attracts the loadstone, is not diffused through the whole body of the Earth,
but rests only in the bark of it, as it were: thirdly, because, if it were a
loadstone, it would join to some other body, as the loadstone does to Iron; nor
would it be carried about in any place or with any Motion of its own, but
proceed to join it self with that other. The parts of the Earth are Mountains,
Valleys, Caverns, Plains.

10. And, since, we know, Fire will make water boil and swell, and dilate
whatever other bodies are mixed with the water; we see, too, that the Earth,
both within in its bowels, and in its superficies, is furnished with heat to
concoct Metals and juyces: as, in our bodies, when the heat abounds with
moisture above the just proportion in any part, it breeds warts and wens and
blisters; so, hills and mountains must, of necessity, rise out of the body of
this great Mother.

11. This is evidenced both by ancient and modern Experiments, which tell us of
Islands cast up in the Sea: we hear of cinders belcht out of Aetna and
Vesuvius; for the most part, falling upon and increasing the Mountains, but
sometimes, too, raising fields into Mountains: and, hence it is, that
Mountains, for the most part, engender Metalls and are full of wholesome
herbs, as is generally observed.

12. Hollow places, whether upon the Superficies of the Earth, which we call
Valleys, or Caverns within its bowels, proceed from two proper causes: the
sinking and settling of the Earth into those places, which the matter for the
Mountains left vacant; and the washing away of that matter which, by rains and
torrents, is carried otherwhere, especially into the Sea. Thus, the Channells
of Rivers are made; thus, between vast and very high Mountains, the Channells
of the Valleys are deeper: Hence, in one place, the Earth is hollowed away, in
another raised.

LESSON IV.
Of the Sea, and its Accidents.
1. THe parts of water are Sea, Lakes, Pools, Rivers, Fountains. The Sea is but
one; since, all those parts, whereof every one is called a Sea, communicate
among themselves, either openly, or by hidden Channells: as, the Caspian
discharges it self into the Euxine; for, otherwise, twould overflow with the
constant tribute of such great Rivers.

2. That the Main does not overflow, is because of the amplitude and vastness
of its surface: whence, it comes to pass, that as much is licked up by the Sun
into clouds and winds, as is poured in by so many Rivers; as will be evident to
one that shall observe how much the Sun, in one day, draws up out of a little
Plash.

3. Hence proceeds its saltness: for, since the salt which flows in out of the
Rivers makes not them so much as brackish; neither could they infect the sea,
were it not that, the sun sucking up the lighter parts, the salt remains in the
rest.

4. Moreover, the salt, which the sun must necessarily make upon the top, out
of the concoction of the land-floods which fatten the River-water, does not
sink down to the bottom; both by reason of the motion of the sea continually
mingling it together; as also because, the deeper the water, the salter and
heavier it is, unless some special cause interpose, as perhaps in the mouths
of Rivers.

5. From the abundance of salt, the sea gets both density and gravity;
moreover, that it will not extinguish flames very readily; as also, by a
multiplied reflection of light, to sparkle and flame, as it were, when it is
stirred.

6. The same, too, is no little cause of Sea-sicknesse, (besides the very
tossing, which, of it self, is a cause; as appears in those who are sick with
riding in a Coach); for, the stomach, being offended with the saltness,
strives to cast it up; as appears by that salt humor we often are sensible of in
colds.

7. Hence, too, comes it, that the sea is not frozen; the mixture of salt
hindering the freezing wind's entrance: For, where the sea is congealed, it is
not the seawater, but the snow falling on it, which makes the sea seem frozen;
as our Contrymen, that go Northern voyages, witness. Yet, others report
that, near the shoars, a sharp wind will freez the sea in some, even hotter,
Countries.

8. But, when vast Rivers flow into narrow Bays, they must needs overflow into
larger seas: whence, of necessity, there must needs be a kind of perpetual
flux of some seas into others; as, of the Euxine into the Propontis, of this
into the Mediterranean, of the Mediterranean into the Ocean. The reason is,
because the lesser sea, with the same quantity of water, is more swelled and,
consequently, has a higher level of water: Again, the power of the sun drinks
more out of a larger sea then out of a narrower; whence, it is more easily sunk
low to receive the adventitious waters.

9. Out of the sea, the sun, like fire out of a boiling pot, extracts
continual vapors; which, either in Rains or Winds, it disperses over all the
Earth: for, all those Winds, which we feel cool from the Ocean in the Summer,
though we perceive it not, yet, both their extraction makes us confess they
are moist, and their density and softness, savouring a similitude of and
derivation from Water.

10. The Earth, therefore, heated by the Sun, being sprinkled with these,
whether in Rain or Wind, (for the Earth, being once hot, a great while retains
it) dissolves it self into Vapors: and so, by little and little, they are
raised to the higher parts of the Earth; where if they feel the cold of the
Air without, or, by any other cause, are coagulated into bigger parts, they
become Water, and by degrees, break themselves a passage through and flow down
upon the lower grounds.

LESSON V.
Of Fountains, Rivers, and Lakes.
1. ANd, because the causes of evaporations are continual, Fountains, too,
continually flow; which, joining together, make Brooks and Rivers, and, when
they have watered the whole surface of the Earth, restore to the Sea the
superfluous moisture, to repair again the Earth with a new distillation.

2. Let him, that thinks not the Rainwater sufficient for this, imagine the
Mountains, out of their innate heat, are more pory then the rest of the Earth,
and hollow, as we have said; wherein there may be receptacles of water: out of
which the heat, that is every where mingled, often draws vapors, which it
transmits to the top of Mountains covered with Rocks; whence, afterward, water
starts, as it were, out of bare Rocks.

3. That this is the generation of Fountains, the stones and earth at a
Fountainhead, all deaw'd like the cover of a boiling pot, are an argument:
also, the thinness and subtilty of the vapors so raised through the Earth;
and certain herbs, too, nourisht by such like vapors: by observing all which,
the Water-finders search for Well-springs.

4. Of Fountains, the famousest are Baths, that is, hot ones. The Author of
the Demonstrative Physic, ripping up some fountains, both learnt himself and
convinced others, by the very course of nature and by experiments Masterly
made, that cold Water, full of a salt (which he calls hermeticall) with a
mixture of Sulphur, will grow hot.

5. The same may be seen in watered lime; and in Tartar, with the spirit of
Vitriol infused in it: The cause of all these is the same, viz. The fiery
parts, fettered, as it were, in dry bodies, being set at liberty by the mixture
of a liquid body, dissipate into vapors that liquour, it consisting of parts
easily dissolvable.

6. Hence, it appears, why cold fountains, sometimes of the same favor, are
next neighbors to hot ones, viz. because they pass not through the same salt.

7. Why some are more, some less hot, viz. either through the abundance of
this salt, or through its nearness to the mouth of the Fountain.

8. The same Author evidenced the constant lastingnesse of the heat to
proceed, from the natural reparation and recruit of the same salt; when,
extracting the salt, he found the remaining mud seasoned again within three
days: not by the raining of salt down out of the Air (as that Author thinks)
but by the nature of the Earth's being such that, mixed with Air, it turned
into salt, or, salt was made of the moist Air and that Mud.

9. It appears, again, why some Fountains have wonderful virtues, either in
benefit or prejudice of our bodies: why others convert Iron into Copper: others
petrifie sticks and whatever is thrown into them: why some yield gold, others
silver.

10. Namely, because, flowing through several sorts of Earth, they rub off
along with them little particles and dust; so minute, sometimes, that they are
not discernable from the very body of the water, and then the water is reputed
to have such a virtue; sometimes they are visible, and then the water is said
to carry some such thing in it.

11. Of Fountains flowing out, Brooks and Rivers are made; whose running, they
say, requires the declivity of one foot in a Mile: Their reason is, because a
line touching the Earth, at a Miles end, is raised nine inches; Artificers,
therefore, add three inches more, that it may conveniently run; (whence, the
fountains of Nilus should be almost a mile and half higher then the Port of
Alexandria); but erroneously: for, when ever the water running behind is so
increased, that it be able to raise it self above the water before, this rule
of declivity changes.

12. Among Rivers, it is strange one should swim upon and, as it were, run over
another; as, Titaresus upon Peneus, Boristhenes upon Hypanis: The reason is,
the gravity of the one and the lightness of the other; or, they will not mix
out of some other cause, as, if one of them be oily.

13. The overflowing of Rivers in Summer proceeds, either from the melting of
Snow shut up in Valleys, or from an abundance of Rain, falling in a far-distant
Climate, and therefore not suspected by us; as is evident, in Nilus, Niger, and
some others of no name and scarce any better then Brooks.

14. Fountains, if they emerge into a hollow place of the Earth, beget a Lake:
and, if this cavity happen in any elevated Superficies of the Earth, whether in
a Mountain or a high Plain; it comes to pass, that sometimes great Rivers flow
out of Lakes: And sometimes vast eruptions of waters, without any appearing
cause; when a Lake emprison'd in the bowels of a Mountain, suddenly overflows
and opens it self a way.

LESSON VI.
Of the Air, and those things which are done in it near the Earth.
1. THe Air is evidently divided into two parts; that which is habitable by
Animals, and that above: this last has no limits we can know of; that first is
contained in the Sphere of Vapors which ascend with a sensible heat out of the
Earth, that is, as much as the Sun cherishes with its heat and renders fit for
the life of Animals: This, therefore, is comparatively hot; the rest
comparatively cold, which the Snows and cold winds about the highest Mountains
testify. A third, which they use to call the Middle Region, there is none;
since the place of Meteors is very uncertain, some residing near the Earth,
others above the Moon.

2. Out of the Globe of Earth and Sea, by the power of the Sun, little bodies
are raised up, of the minutest bulk; which, the Sun deserting them, sometimes
fall down upon the Earth like drops, and are called Deaw; some drop from hard
by, others from a great height; for, all night long vapors descend, and the
higher more slowly, both because they are higher and because every drop is
less: Hence it is that Chemists rather choose the Deaw that falls last, as also
the summer Deaw, these being the purest and subtilest.

3. From this Deaw it is, that the night grows cooler toward daybreak; though
the first Drops breaking and diffusing themselves, intends the same cold by the
expiration of their cold parts.

4. The drops of Deaw, especially the least, are perfectly round: the cause
whereof is, because the water of Deaw is very tender, and encompassed in and
bound together with a skin, as it were, by the more viscous Air about it.

5. As we see, therefore, Bladders blownup become round, because in that figure
they are capable of most Air: so, every fluid body, when it is straightned,
must of necessity mould it self into a round form. And, this seems the cause
why Quicksilver so easily runs into little spears: for, since the least fire
will vapor it away, the least cold, too, must needs compresse it.

6. Some Deaws are sweeter then the rest, especially in the hotter Regions;
whence, a kind of Honey may be licked from the leafs of Trees, and the Bees are
believed to make their honey out of Deaw; also, the Manna, in Calabria and
Arabia and other hot Regions, is a kind of Deaw; Cloves, too, and Nutmeggs are
thought to derive their sweetness from a kind of Deaw which falls in the
Molucco Islands: Now sweetness proceeds from a concocting and digestion of
Moisture, into a certain oily softness and equability of parts.

7. Frost is congealed Deaw. A Fogg or Mist, properly, is the expiration of the
Earth or Water out of a certain Vent made by their native heat: For, we
sensibly perceive Foggs rising out of moist Valleys, Lakes, Rivers and the Sea:
they presently fill all our Horizon: then, for the most part, they rise either
in the Morning or Evening, seldom when the Sun shines hot: they rise, too, in
great abundance, out of some certain place. All which agree not to Vapors
extracted by the Sun.

8. And, because they expire out of putrid water, they stink and beget a Cough.
But, that which uses to rest upon Mountains and in Woods, especially when it
rains, is another thing: for those are really Clouds, not Fogs, which either
fall or are sustained by the leafs of Trees; whence, in certain Islands, we
read there is no other water, then what is so gathered and distilled from Trees.
Some Mists are purely watery; others have a kind of slimy muddynesse withal,
derived out of the quality of that body whence they are sublimated.

9. The Nets we see in trees and hedges, as also those thrids that fly up and
down sometimes, are made by the parts of the Fog growing together; or, of
little bodies, too, raised up by the Sun: minutest humid bodies gluing together
other minutest dry ones; that we may learn, out of these rude principles, how
Silkworms and Spiders Webs and even Flesh it self is woven.

LESSON VII.
Of Clouds, Rain, Snow and Hail.
1. HItherto, we have kept near the Earth. But, if the Sun drives the vapors
higher, they are gathered into Clouds: Now, a Cloud is a swarm or heap of
minutest bodies elevated by the Sun; of such a crassitude and thickness, that,
like a solid body, it either reflects or deads the Light.

2. That it is no solid body, is plain; both from the tops of high Mountains,
upon which it appears like a Mist, and does not much wet those that go into
it; as also, from its generation, and rising up in minutest bodies.

3. And the reason is plain, why they hang above; namely, because of the
littleness of their parts, as, we see, Dust thrown up stays a great while in
the Air: Besides, the motion of the Air hinders their descending; wherefore,
in a high wind, we fear not the Rain, which, as soon as the wind is down,
presently falls.

4. Now, that which makes it fall is the forcing those little bodies into a
straight place; and, therefore wind brings Rain, because it thrusts the little
drops one against another and makes them bigger.

5. Besides, the wind it self is often incorporated with the Vapor and, by
sticking to them, makes those particles, which before were too little, now to
be big enough and fit for descending: as, when a warm wind rushes against a
cold vapor, or contrariwise: and therefore, cold winds in the Summer and warm
ones in the Winter chiefly bring Rain.

6. But, because those things that are raised out of the Earth ascend, not
only from the Superficies, but out of its very Bowels, too, through the
pores: nay, they are expelled and thrust out from the bottom of the Sea, and
the Earth under it; the Seawater forcing whatever is dissolved in the bottom,
lighter then it self, to ascend: And, because there is a perpetual vicissitude
of Vapors, bandy'd from the Poles to the Equator, and from the Equator back
again to the Poles; these Consequents follow:

7. That little particles are drawn up into the Air and Clouds, of all kinds
of Earth, clayey, stony, nitrous, bituminous, metallic, and whatever other
sorts there are: again, of all sorts of Plants, Trees, Roots, Animals: all
which being hurried up and down in the Clouds from one part to another, are
scattered; and, if any where they come to find a convenient receptacle and
nourishment, there such things or creatures are produced.

8. But, because some are apt to be formed suddenly; (as, Froggs easily grow
out of Mud; and, it is told by a man of credit, that a certain Chemist, in a
quarter of an hour, brought certain seeds to grow): it happens sometimes, such
as these, too, rain out of the Clouds.

9. So, it rained Wheat, some years since, in the West of England, or rather,
something like Wheat; and the same, I believe, those other miraculous rains are
to be accounted, viz. that it rained not blood, but a red water, something
crasse it may be; and not Iron, but a kind of ironish stone; so, too, not
Flesh, but something like Flesh may have rained other where: For, we are wont
to call things by the names of others which they resemble, especially when
something of miracle is joined with it; so greedy we are of seeming to know or
have seen something more then others.

10. Snow and Hail seem to be accidents of Rain; with this difference, that
snow is rain whilst it is yet in such little parts that it cannot descend; but
Hail is it congealed, when it is in such drops as are apt for descending: For,
that the generation of Snow is higher then that of Rain, the tops of Mountains
witness, covered all the year with Snow; which they could not be, were they
ever drenched with Rain.

11. And, that it is congealed in minutest particles, is evident, to one that
considers it, both from the height of its place and the very nature of Snow;
for, the flakes are not of one continued body, but, as it were, ashes or little
dusts made up together: Its whiteness, too, proves it, that is, its eminent
virtue of reflecting light: for, suppose a world of little spears, smooth and
extremely minute, made up together into one body as little as can be visible;
and, because every one of those unequal Superficies are apt to scatter light; in
its proportion, from every point, that quantity must needs appear extremely
white.

12. The Rine, too, witnesses it, and a kind of snowy-hail we sometimes see
like Coriander Confits: for, certain minute particles of snow are easily
discernable; and, if one look very curiously upon a flake of snow, one shall
discern a composition without end, as it were, of distinct bodies coagulated.
Lastly, the whiteness of Froth proceeds clearly from the same cause.

13. Hence, the doubts about snow are easily resolved: as, why the vapors
should not rather immediately fall down in Rain, then turn into Snow; since
there needs a less intense cold for Rain? For, either they are admitted to be
first in the degree of Rain, before they become Snow; but descend not, because
the parts are too little yet: or it must be said that Rain does not signify
every moisture, but a dropping one, such as is not in so minute particles. The
cause, too, of its softness is plain; for, even Diamant dust, if it be small
enough, will be soft.

14. Again; why it is often sexangular, or rather like a Star with six rays?
For, since six other equal circles just encompasse and enclose a Circle; if
Snow be composed of little Spears, the first composition will have six
jettings out, to which those things may stick which, in motion, are apt to
touch and stop against what they encounter: Such a compound, therefore, is apt
to be formed into a star-like figure.

15. The cold, if it has been very intense and dry, slacken's before Snow,
because of the Snow's moisture; especially, if it come with a gentle, a South,
or Westwind: as also, because a snowy cloud more compresses and straightens the
Air near the Earth; whence, the Vapors which rise out of the Earth, being
thrust and crowded close together, grow warmer; and thus, too, Snow, lying upon
houses, makes the upper rooms warmer, by hindering both the entrance of the wind
and the issuing of the vapors. In the same manner, also, it protects the Earth
and Roots from the cold.

16. But, the warmness, which is felt after the fall of Snow, proceeds from
the free action of the Sun, which before was restrained by a gross cloud
interposed against it: as also, because the cold wherewith we were infested,
whilst the cloud hung over us, lies now, as it were, subdued and imprisoned
under our feet. That the falling of Snow hinders Sounds, it is, because it
deprives the Air of its agility.

17. Hail is Rain congealed in falling: it receives a figure either from the
drops, or from the wind and the collision of the drops now growing hard, or
else by chance or the concurrence of accidental causes.

18. Those that discern monstrous forms and shapes in it sometimes, polish and
finish up, by the help of their imagination, certain rude lines: as it is often
seen in Stones and whatever other figures.

19. That it so soon melts, the reason is, because there remains in it more
water, then of the dry vapor; the wind or congealing Air having light upon
great drops: For, that this is the cause of congelation, our expecting Ice and
a Rine the next day witnesses; to wit, when the wind is grow'n sharper by the
cold of the night.

LESSON VIII.
Of fiery Meteors appearing in the Air.
1. WHo'd expect Fire out of water? Yet we have it sometimes out of the Clouds,
and even out of Rain: Nay, in a very Tempest, there stick to the Masts things,
the Ancients called Castor and Pollux; a wonder familiarly seen by the Mariners.

2. But these and many such like seem rather to relish the nature of vapors
that reflect light, then of Fire: for, both (Will of the wispe, or) Ignes fatui
do not burn nor flame out, but only shine; as also those Dioscuri (or Castor
and Pollux) have the form of a globe, which is not the figure of Fire. Again,
Flames, in a thin and tenuous matter, are not long-lived; as appears in
Lightning, and in a Candle, which we see sometimes blaze up, enflaming the
smoke about it; but suddenly extinguish again and retire to the Wiek: The
flames, too, which belch out of the Vulcanian Mountains are often but
short-lived.

3. Be this therefore a sure rule; wherever the figure is determined and
constant, it is no fiery or flaming matter: For, the way of Fire is, to brandish
Pyramids upwards, with an uncertain motion; the crasser matter pressing
downwards.

4. Besides, an Ignis fatuus has been found fallen down in a slippery viscous
substance full of white spots: The same, too, is the matter of Falling-starres;
as, both a learned man has found it; and amongst our selves, when any such
matter is found in the Fields, the very Contrymen cry it fell from Heaven
and the Stars, and, as I remember, call it the Spittle of the Stars.

5. Ignes fatui (or Wills of the Wisp), then, are a certain viscous substance,
reflecting light in the dark, evaporated out of a fat Earth, and flying in the
Air. They commonly haunt Churchyards, Privyes, and Fens; because they are
begotten out of fatness: They fly about Rivers, Hedges, etc. because in those
places, there is a certain flux of Air: They follow one that flies them and fly
one that follows them; because the Air does so: They stay upon Military
Ensigns and Spears; because such are apt to stop and tenacious of them: In the
Summer and hot Regions they are more frequent; because the good concoction
produces fatness.

6. Flammae lambentes (or those we call Haggs) are made of Sweat or some other
Vapor issuing out of the Head; a notunusuall sight amongst us when we ride by
night in the Summer time: They are extinguished, like flames, by shaking the
Horse Mains: But, I believe rather, it is only a Vapor reflecting light, but
fat and sturdy, compacted about the Mains of Horses or Men's Hair.

7. Cardanus tells of a certain Carmelite, that as often as he thrust his head
into his Coul, it flamed out; and that it is usual enough in Spain, for
sparkles to fly out of woollen garments rubbed upon ones head: Nor doubt I but
these are real fire such as uses to fly out of Wood, Canes, or Flints, by
rubbing or striking them, for these and such like are full, both of fire, and a
certain vapor which is fuel for it; whence, when many hot parts light upon a
considerable part of the vapor, they scorch and kindle it; whereupon, after
such a production of fire, there remains in some an offensive sent, as of
burning.

8. The Hair of Horses, and Cats, as also Sugar rubbed together in the dark, are
said to produce the same effect: The Eyes, too, of some are said to sparkle,
viz. when they shine with spirits, and reflect the light as if they were
glass. Yet doubt I not but the Eyes may, by some preternaturall disposition,
yield real light; it seeming evident in Cats.

9. But, that the most part of these are idle stories, I collect from this
experiment, that it has seemed, even to my self sometimes, that my Chamber was
all light; and I saw every thing plainly: when, notwithstanding, I have often
caught my self in it, and found mine eyes shut all the while; and that my
memory within, was working upon those thiings which I thought I saw: and
sometimes I found that I erred, too, imagining some things to be in this or
that Place, which indeed were not.

10. Falling-Stars are a certain viscid or slimy matter, raised out of the
Earth in very minute parts, and coagulated in the Air; which, when, in its
fall, it comes within our sight, beautifies all its way with reflected light:
Yet, sometimes, it falls not downwards; but, being carried traversly by some
motion of the Air, it is called a Gliding star, 'till, either being dissipated,
or by some other Accident, it is seen no more.

11. Caprae, Trabes, Bolides, Faces, Dolia, Clypei, (as the Ancients call
them), or whatever other names such Meteors may have; whether they are real
fires, or only certain Clouds brighter then ordinary; neither is it deducible
clearly enough out of Histories, (they relating scarce any thing save that they
burn in such a figure; but that they take burning for shining it is very
credible, even from hence, that they mention no tokens of their burning); nor
have I ever met with any very curious observer treating of this subject.

LESSON IX.
Of truly fiery Meteors, hanging in the Air.
1. THe true fires, therefore, are Lightnings, Dragons, and those they call
Fire-Drakes: For, first, they have not a clear brightness, as falling and
gliding Stars have (which is almost a sure sign of reflection), but a dimmed
one (from the condition of the matter) as it were with smoke, as we see in our
fires; though this rule may fail on both sides, unless it be prudently
applied: Again, they are short-lived: Thirdly, the ashes of Dragons are often
seen, and the effects of Lightning are well known. The Nature of Fire-drakes is
like that of Lightning or the blazing of Candles; so that it is, unquestionably,
a sudden kindling of an oily vapor; and it varies its figure with every
motion, as fire uses, according to the various dispositions of the combustible
matter. To apprehend the Causes of these things,

2. Let us imagine the hottest days effect that upon the Earth, which, upon a
Chymicall matter, the most intense heat does, that, after the gentler, is
applied to extract Oils, that is, the most glutinous and crasse moisture:
Suppose that, out of fat and soft grounds, they raise Vapors, not liquid, but
compacted with a deal of dense matter, not without a vast abundance of fiery
parts imprisoned in them.

3. That these Vapors can neither be elevated into a very high station, nor
long sustained above: That, yet, to the proportion of the heat, they are
carried higher (according to the nature of the Region and of the concurring
causes) in one Climate then in another: And that, through the motion and tumult
of the Clouds, these vapors meeting with one another, being of a glutinous
substance, stick together and are constipated; that, being constipated, they
are kindled, and, being kindled, either break out or are thrown out.

4. Again; this matter, being the heaviest of all that are elevated, will be
hurryed downwards, as we see in Golden-gunpowder: for the dilating of the fire
makes and applies an impression of the adhering matter, that way which the
matter leads: It breaks, therefore, through the Clouds, there, where it is
easiest descending; and being, in the time of its passage, for the most part,
directed obliquely, because the Cloud is thickest toward the Earth, it is, so,
hurried to us.

5. When nothing but the flame approaches us, it is said to lighten: when,
without Thunder and in a clear season, any lightnings appear, we say it flashes.

6. Hence, it is apparent enough how Thunderbolts come to be darted out of the
Clouds: For, the fire in the Clouds being extreme violent, it bakes a light
stone, like a Pumice or those which are made in furnaces for Metalls: and that,
having the fire still adhering to it, and being light of its own nature, is
carried, like an iron kettle or earthen Porringer in water, and descends with
violence.

7. Again; it is evident how Thunder is caused: For, that most sudden
rarefaction of Fire cannot be made, without a most swift compression of one
Cloud to another; nor this, without a mighty noise, such as we hear at the
sudden extinguishing of a violent and intense fire, and at the dashing
together of the waves of the Sea in a Storm.

8. From the different matter of the Lightning there happens the variety of
different effects: As, when, the Purse or Scabbard being entire, the Money or
the Blade is melted; it proceeds from hence, that, in the Lightning, there is
the nature of those Salts, which serve to melt Metalls and yet have no power
upon slighter subjects: when the Wine congeals, the Vessel being broken; it is
a sign of cold Spirits in the Lightning, by which liquid things are rendered
consistent and hard things are broken; as we see by the congealing of water in
a glass or earthen vessel close stopped: when water will not quench it, it has
a mixture of Wildfire in it, such as we see in burning Fountains.

9. Iron is used against Lightning, because it is a kind of matter something
akin to Lightning, and draws the volatile spirits to it self, so that it does
other things no hurt: Mushromes, too, come on the better for Tempests, because
the Rain which accompanies them is warm and fat; as the fields of Aetna and
Campania are rendered more fruitful by the eruptions of the Mountains, because
much heat and fat matter descends withal.

10. Hence, that they call the Fiery Dragon is a certain weaker kind of
Lightning: Its livid color, and its falling without noise and slowly
demonstrate a great mixture of watery exhalation in it: nor is there any thing
else of singular in it worth taking notice of; for, it is sufficient for its
shape, that it has some resemblance of a Dragon, not the express figure.

LESSON X.
Of the generation and nature of Winds.
1. NOw, it happens that the exhalation shut up in the Clouds is, sometimes,
very lean and dry; and then, instead of Lightning, a wind is pufft out:
sometimes alone, and then it is called Ecnephias; sometimes mixed with flame, as
when a fat and lean vapor are mingled together, and then it is called Prester.

2. But, if it breaks out through a narrow passage, and is whirled about like
water, it is called Typhon or a whirlewind: for it brings down with it, even to
the Earth, that whirling impetus, and, being reverberated, as it were, back
into the Air, hurries away, wrapped up in it, whatever it meets unable to resist
it upon the Earth: All these winds are properly called Storms and stormy.

3. Some signs, by the providence of God, they send before, of their coming; as
all vehement things do: which proceed hence, that, in corporeal things, a part
must of necessity be made before the whole; and, in motion, the weaker must go
before, the violenter must follow.

4. Hence it comes, that Animals have a kind of sense of Storms before they
come. Again, because, for great things, there must precede great preparations;
a change in the causes may, by diligent persons, be observed: so Mariners
foresee future Storms, by the Sun, the Moon, the Clouds; and Shepherds,
Heardsmen and such others, by their Cattle.

5. Out of what has been said, it is easy to conceive the Generation of Winds:
For, if a vapor or exhalation be either so dry or so scatt'red that it cannot
coagulate into great drops, it descends in the form of dust; and, where it
first finds resistance, there it begins to take a determination and make, as it
were, a channel of its Motion.

6. And, that way the first parts have gone before, the later follow, (by the
force of consequence, now, and the impetus of the Air) and make way for
others: Thus, therefore, they run through the Horizon, till either the Sun has
sucked them up again, or their Atoms have adhered to other bodies, especially
moist ones, with which they are easily incorporated.

7. Hence, may be resolved the questions about winds: For, first, if the
exhalation be high, it makes the Rack ride, but it comes not near the Earth:
when there happen to be many exhalations of several lightnesses, the Clouds
appear to ride several ways: when the causes of the exhalations hold out
pertinaciously, the wind lasts longer from the same corner: when the vapors,
flowing in from one corner, are more dense and abundant then from another, then
the wind is more vehement on that side.

8. And this happens, either from the quality of the Earth whence they are
extracted: for, out of a moist and cold ground, the vapors are densest; out of
a moist and hot, most abundant; out of a dry and cold, they are still lighter;
out of a dry and hot ground, they are lightest of all.

9. As also, their way is to be considered: For, they mix themselves with the
vapors through which they pass, and are imbued with their qualities. Again,
much is to be ascribed to the Heat which dissolves them: for, a moderate heat
dissolv's those that are more subtle, a violenter those that are heavy and
thick.

10. It happens, too, that the nature of the Corners from whence the wind
comes, is accidentally alt'red sometims: for example, If, from the North, for
the most part, come dry and fair-weather Vapors; it may well fall out that the
Vapors carried by the South Wind, when they are past us toward the North,
meeting with a stronger Northwind, will be brought back to us pouring down
rain; and so, from a serene corner we shall have rain, and, contrary-wise, fair
weather from the South.

11. Out of the same Principles, may be understood the reason of Etesiae, that
is, Winds that always return at such a set season of the year: For, the
original causes of the Winds being certain and determined, (among which, the
melting of the Snows is the principal), which return at set times of the year;
the Winds, too, unless something interpose, must needs return at the same
Seasons. Such are the Northern Etesiae: These constantly blow, in Italy and all
over Greece, at Midsummer; rising, as I believe, out of the Alps, not from the
farthest North, since they are not felt in the intermediate Regions: And they
rise out of the Earth after it is moistened with the Snow; for the Snows are said
to melt about the end of May; whence, it is plain, they that blow at the middle
of June cannot be raised, but out of the Earth already well watered; unless
perhaps some Snows hid in the Valleys are then first sensible of the Sun's
violence, or that the Sun should draw a cool breath of Air out of the Snows
without melting them.

12. Such are the East-winds, which we have in England, out of Russia and
Muscovia, about the end of March and beginning of April, for forty days
together sometimes, upon the first dissolving of the Snow in those parts. Such
are the Westwinds the West of England is subject to, at the latter end of
Summer and beginning of Autumn; brought to us from that part of America under
the same Meridian, over a vast Sea and out of moist Regions, whence, for the
most part, they are rainy.

13. It appears, out of the same Principles, why some Winds are heavy and low,
others light and high: For, it is plain, these conditions must needs follow the
quality of the Subject whence the Vapors are raised, and of the heat that
raises them: For, as Chemists, with a soft fire, extract the purest and
lightest Spirits, but, with a violent heat, heavy and troubled ones; so Nature,
too, with a moderate and gentle heat, raises the purer and sublimer winds; but
the heavier, more vehement, and lower winds it forces out with extreme heats.

14. Hence, again, it is plain, some are wholesome, others hurtful: since, their
effects must needs follow the condition of the nature of those vapors whereof
they consist. But, we must note, that some winds have very guiltlessely got an
ill name: for, those that in one place are unwholesome, in another are wholesome.

15. The Sea-winds are commonly unwholesome, as bringing along with them heat
and moisture, the principles of corruption: Yet, in very hot Regions they are
wholesome; and sometimes in the height of Summer, because, then, they refresh;
and because they are drawn up higher by the Sun, they are penetrative, without
any harm.

16. It Is to be noted, that the winds always take the compass of the greatest
Circles: because, being thrust out with violence, they take the shortest line;
which, upon the superficies of a Sphere, is the Arch of the greatest Circle.

LESSON XI.
Of Earthquakes and their Effects.
1. BUt, because we have said, there are Caves under ground; and both our
experience of Pits sunk, and many extraordinary effects demonstrate Fire and
water, there, too: there must necessarily be notable effects of the vapors
extracted out of the bowels of the Earth.

2. If, therefore, out of some subterraneous humidbody, vapors chance to be
raised, by a subterraneous fire, too; and they prove too bigg for their place:
it is manifest that, always increasing and becoming condensed, by the
continual access of new vapors, they will seek themselves a way out, according
to the force they have, where there is the easiest passage. If that chance to
lead into any vast underground Cave, the Earth will quake with a great impetus
and groan; but nothing will appear above ground.

3. But, if the easiest issue be toward the superficies of the Earth, the
vapor will burst out through it: and, if it be noxious to Beasts or Birds,
'twill bring either Death or a Disease along with it; making with the eruption
either a gaping Hollow or a Mountain, according as the Earth either sinks or is
sustained and, as it were, vaulted. Sometimes 'twill bury and swallow up
Cities; sometimes transport vast pieces of Earth; and produce other effects,
whereof we find express memorialls in History.

4. The Prognostics of an Earthquake, they say, are an infection of the
Fountains with a sulphurious savor; an unusual calmnesse of the Air and
Birds; a swelling of the Sea without any apparent cause; blackish streaks under
the Sun of an unusual length: all (if they are truly Prognostics, and not
only Accidents, which, sometimes and not for the most part, happen) are the
effects of a spirituous Vapor bursting out from the bowels of the Earth.

5. They are said to happen chiefly in the Spring and Autumn, therefore, (if
the opinion be true) because the Superficies of the Earth, being warm, becomes
slacker with the rain: But, I should rather believe it a chance that many
should be recorded in Histories about these seasons; for, both Winter and
Summer have felt their Earthquakes, and in the Torrid Zone, where they are most
frequent, the differences of Spring and Autumn from the other seasons are very
inconsiderable.

6. The Sea-shores are most subject to these motions; because the subterranious
flames and fumes receive no little nourishment from the Sea; and the moisture
which soaks into the Earth, renders it very fit for breeding vapors.

LESSON XII.
Of the Meteors of the other parts of the World; and especially of Comets.
1. THese accidents of our Orb, and its parts, which are usually called
Meteors, must necessarily be found, too, in the other bodies, which, we have
said, are enlightened by our Sun: And that, out of the nature of quantity and
the mixture of Rare and Dense; if they have their several degrees and
differences.

2. Nor in these only, but in whatever bodies besides, wherein alterations are
wrought, by the operation of fire upon denser matter; for the same reasons.

3. It Is evident, too, that our Sun cannot warm and enlighten all those bodies
that reflect light to us: for, if it were as far distant from us, as
Astronomers suppose the Sphere of the Fixed stars, 'twould appear to us to be
but of the sixth Magnitude; and consequently, it could not communicate to us
any considerable either light or heat: how much less, in the situation where
it is, could it reflect so far as to us a light of the first Magnitude, from any
Star so far distant.

4. Add to this, that one that should collect, from the proportion of the
basis of a Cone to its Axis, how much light the Sun could reflect to us from
the eighth Sphere, would find it absolutely invisible. Besides, the very Air,
through which the light passes, by little and little drinks up and extinguishes
it: whence, in a thicker Air, it spreads it self a less way, then in a rarer;
so that, in so vast a journey, 'twould be utterly deaded and not seen.

5. A Meteor of the Planets, perceptible by us, is a Comet; which its
very-little Parallaxis convinces to be, sometimes, sited above the Moon.

6. That it is not fire, its constant figure; its Tail, not opposed to its
motion but to the Sun; its lasting consistency; its matter, light and to be
seen through; and lastly, its Motion, more regular then we observe in fire,
largely convince: farther, that it has nothing of fire but the color: add to
this, that Fromundus, with his very eyes, discerned the Tail of that Comet in
the Year 1618, to consist of the reflection of the Sun's light.

7. Be it, therefore, A vapor which partly reflects the light of the Sun,
partly, drinking it in, either repells it back again to us by refraction from
it self, or, letting it through, by reflection from another body: And, its
forepart will be the Head, its hinder (whether part, or something only
accessnry to it) will be the Tail.

8. And since, by this generation of a Comet, any figure of its Beard, any
Motion, any winding of its tail, but, for the most part, the opposition of its
Tail to the Sun and the lesser light of its Tail then of its Head, may be
fairly solved; this entire subject is clearly displayed.

9. Out of the same principles may be deduced, that fading Stars are Comets;
but, so far off, that the secundary or refracted light of their Tail, by reason
of the height, either cannot be distinguished from the body, or cannot be
extended to us, because of its extreme faintness: as also that, its motion
cannot be discerned.

10. Even these, therefore, witness that there are Meteors among the very
fixed Stars; and those, so much the more constant and lasting as the bodies out
of which they are extracted are larger.

LESSON XIII.
Of the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea, and its Accidents.
1. SInce, out of what has been said, Lesson 10.
it appears that the gravity of the vapors and the straightness of their
issue are the cause of the violent motion of the winds; and that the heaviest
vapors are extracted out of the Earth, when it is well moistened: It becomes
evident that, where vapors are raised out of the Sea only, they are lighter;
and that, if they be turned into winds, without being straightned, they will be
calm ones. And, since, in the great Pacifick Sea, in the Indian and Atlantic
Ocean, quite through the whole Torrid Zone, there are vast waters, and,
consequently, in some measure, secure from the incursion of Shorewinds: there
must needs be light vapors raised up by the Sun through all that Tract, which,
the Sun retiring, must turn into winds, taking that course which the Suns
rarefaction of the air makes most easy; and this, all the year long; and
consequently, there must be a continual East Wind.

2. And, because the Air naturally moves in a Circle, still yielding and
flying before it self; it must needs turn again by the Shore-side, drawing
along with it the Vapors it finds; yet, not so constantly as under the
Equator, because of the Shore-winds.

3. Moreover, eyewitnesses affirm, that East-winds range for 27 degrees of
Latitude from the Equator on each side; and West-winds the next ten: and, of
Longitude, in the Pacifick and Indian Sea, about eleven thousand Italian miles;
and, in the Ocean which leads to the new world, from the Canaries to the Bay of
Mexico, about 70 degrees, that is, some four thousand more such miles: so that,
if we allow the Equator twenty one thousand miles, these winds possess, thus,
almost three quarters on it.

4. Since, therefore, notwithstanding its calmnesse, this wind carries great
ships eight miles an hour; it must of necessity drive the waters themselves, in
the middle, with great violence, toward the West: whence they must needs
overflow upon the shores, and return again from the shores to the middle; and,
where they meet any shores, withstanding their course to the West, be reflected
toward the East: as also, they must rush into all the Bays, and, after a
determinate time, return again, according to the winding of the shores; the
account of which time must be taken from the common Channel.

5. We have found, therefore, an apparent cause why the Sea should fill the
shores with its motion toward the East and West, and empty them again, with a
constant course, which we call the Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea. That this
proceeds from an extrinsecall cause, and not because the water moves less,
that is, slowlyer then the Earth, appears from hence, that the Ebbing and
flowing is discovered, in some places not very deep, to extend not above six
fathoms; all the rest of the water is calm and like a Lake: whereas, if the
Ebbing and Flowing followed from the motion of the Earth, it must always be
moved ununiformly from the botto^ upwards; without any sensible beginning of
the contest of the Waters.

6. Hence the reason may be given why the Flux proceeds from East to West and
back again, in the open Sea; why no swelling should be perceivable in the
Mid-sea, but only at the Shores: The reason is, because there are no marks by
which we might take the height of the Sea; for it is found to swell there, too,
if any Island occur, how far soever from any other Shore.

7. Moreover, why there should be a continual Flux of the Sea observed,
toward the West; viz. because this wind in the middle of the Sea perpetually
drives the waves toward the West.

8. Why, too, the Flux should be more vehement in one part then in another:
viz. from the abundance of waters flowing in, and directed by other causes the
same way; as, by Rivers, or the repercussion of the Shores beating the greatest
part of the flood together against some one shore.

9. Also, why there should be six hours Flood, and as many Ebb: for, since the
wind proceeds from the Sun, and the Sun enforces its activity upon one part,
for six hours, and remit's it as many; there must needs be the same general
Periods of its effects, that is, of the Sea's Motion.

10. But, since the Moon, too, may suffice to increase the wind; and, the
nearer it is the Sun, the more its power is conjoined with the Sun's, the
farther it is from the Sun, the larger and stronger its force is upon the Ocean;
who can doubt but the Flux must be increased twice a Month?

11. In like manner, since the Sun is twice a year in the Equator, in which
place, as just in the middle, it most vigorously rayses the wind: every six
months, too, the Flux must be more eminent; but especially about Autumn,
because, between the Tropic of Capricorn and the Equator, it rains mightily
night and day, for three months together after the Summer Solstice.

12. But, that the Flux returns every day about an hour later still, it is from
hence, because the Flux and reflux proceed from opposite causes; whole forces,
before the victory, must needs be but equal, and, by reason of their equality,
require a convenient time. Whence, allowing six hours for the flux and as many
for the reflux, each must be allowed its intervall; which, in the Thames, (if I
well remember) is little more then a quarter of an hour: This space, therefore,
thus, four times repeated, in one day, makes somewhat more then an hour.

13. Sometimes too, the winds stop the Flood; insomuch that, without a Miracle,
the Flood has three times advanced and been beaten back in the Thames, by the
force of an opposite wind. Lastly, it appears why, in some Seas, there is no
mention of Flux; as, in the Red, the Euxine, the Meotis, the Caspian and
Baltic Seas: there is the same reason for them all; that they are but little
Seas, and have but narrow entrances; that, vast Rivers running into them, their
superficies is higher then the Ocean's; that their current into the Ocean is so
strong, that the Sea, especially the Mediterranean, whose Flux is not very high
upon the Grecian Shore, is not able to repel it.

LESSON XIV.
Of the Motion of the Earth, and the Causes of it.
1. SInce, therefore, the upper part of the water is continually moved toward
the West: (and, as, because the water in the middle runs one way, that by the
Shore-side must needs run backwards; so also, because the superior water is
hurried toward the West,) that which is next under it must needs be driven
back to the East, and whatever so adheres to it that there is no cause of
separation; that is, which will easilyer be driven toward the East then be
separated from the lower water.

2. But, one part of the lower water is not separable from another, unless it
either ascends into the place of that above it, which another part,
supervening, prevents and hinders; or else, unless it repells that which is
Easternly to it, and that again another, and, in the end, the last, the Shore
that is opposed against it, which is incredible and impossible: The whole body,
therefore, with the Earth adhering to it, must needs be driven toward the
East, unless there be some resistance stronger then the impulse.

3. Whereof there is none in its gravity, because that motion is not contrary to
the motion of gravity; and its bigness even much facilitates the motion: The
Earth, therefore, will be moved in a Circle, and turn round about its own
Center, because this impulse is made in a Circle.

4. Again, because it is almost impossible this impulse should be equal on all
sides, and cause a pure rotation about the Center; there will, of necessity, a
Progressive motion be mixed with it.

5. And since, as a body cannot be, but in one place, so neither can it move
but in one line: all the motions which Astronomers assign the Earth must, of
necessity, compose one line; and, if the lashing or impulse of the under-water
advance the Earth in that line, 'twill be an adequate cause of the motion of
the Earth.

6. Now, Astronomers teach, that the Earth, continually turning about its own
Center, runs under the Zodiac; its Axis retaining a certain inclination to the
Axis of the Zodiac: wherefore, when we have found out a line, in which the
Earth, being thrust on, will observe this motion; the Flux must be imagined to
move the Earth according to that.

7. Astronomers prove these motions of the Earth: because, otherwise, greater
motions of greater bodies must be supposed; and those, neither themselves
constant, nor proportioned to the bodies, and, besides, more entangled, both in
the Stars and in the Sun it self, as is apparent by its Spots: Which if you say
make not up a perfect Astronomicall Demonstration, that Maxim must be
renounced upon which all Astronomy depends, viz. that the Phenomena (or
appearances) are to be solved the best way we can.

8. Again; because there follows a variety in the fixed stars, from the
diversity of the Earth's position in its Orbis Magnus; when there is once found
out a Telescope, of such perfection as to be able to distinguish that variety,
we may expect a Geometrical Demonstration: and because, for the same reason,
there must needs be a variety of reflection from Mars and Jupiter; when the
laws and rules of light shall be better known, there will not want a Physical
Demonstration.

LESSON XV.
Of the Oppositions against the Motion of the Earth and, of its effects.
1. AStronomers object, that this annual transferring of the Earth would cause
a diversity of elevation in those Stars which are near the Poles, and a variety
in the appearing bigness of those in the Zodiac: which, since we see not
follow, neither is there any such thing as this Annual motion of the Earth.

2. It Is answered; The vast remoteness of the Fixed Stars renders such
variations imperceptible: and, that their distance from us is sufficient to
produce this effect, may be collected from the effect it has upon a Telescope;
which, though it amplifies so much the Planets and even Saturn himself, yet
adds nothing or an insensible matter to the Fixed Stars.

3. Out of this motion of the Earth rises, First, the reason of Night and Day:
for, since, in a determinate time, it is roul'd about its Center, (suppose in
about 24 hours), the things that are in the Heavens must needs appear
sometimes, and otherwhile disappear, to a determined place of the Earth: and,
such a variety, in respect of the Sun, makes Day and Night; in respect of the
other Stars, a variety not owned by any common name.

4. Again, by its motion under the Zodiac, it attains various conjunctions
with the other Planets.

5. Lastly, in that it carries its Axis turning still toward the same parts of
the Heavens, it comes to pass, that the part of the Earth, enlightened by the
Sun, possesses sometimes greater sometimes lesser parts of the Parallells,
according to which the Diurnall motion proceeds; and, consequently, that the
days are longer and shorter.

6. Thence, too, is it, that the Sun becomes more perpendicular at one time
then another; whence the natures of Winter and Summer are deduced, and the
varieties of Declinations, Descensions and Twilights.

7. But, that the Winter is shorter then the Summer, proceeds from this, that
the Motion, through the inequality of the bodies raised up in the Winter time,
is swifter then in the Summer.

8. An effect, too, of the Motion of the Earth is the carrying of the water
about with it; but not the Tide: First, because, if the Earth should stand
still, the water would stand still withal; B. 2. Les. 10. N. 1.
since, as we have said above, there is no impetus but from the gravity, and such
there would be none in the present case.

9. Again, there is no cause of the unequal motion of the water; since, there is
the same quality continually in the movable, and not by skips.

10. Again, if the whole water of the Sea were so moved, 'twould drown the
Mountains: Lastly, the periods of the Earth's motion do not agree with those of
the Tyde's.

11. But, that the Flux depends on an extrinsecall Agent, which impells only
the Superficies of the Sea, is most evident; by the experiment of a late Diver,
that discovers there is no Flux in the bottom of the Sea.

LESSON XVI.
Of the Motion of the Air with the Earth; and its effects.
1. OUt of what has been said, it is manifestly inferred, that the Air, which
clings to the Earth, is roul'd, in the same manner, about or rather with the
Earth: For, since, both by the nature of Quantity and the weight of its
gravity, it presses toward the Earth, and sticks to and incorporates with it;
it cannot, without some greater force interposing, be separated from it: Since,
therefore, in it, there is no resistance against Motion, and only a resistance
against being torn away from the Air next it, which takes another course; and
this resistance is not greater then that against being torn off from the Air
below, and perhaps not so great, (since Air is so much the lighter the higher
it is); It Is evident, it will follow the Earth: Wherefore, to the very confines
of the emanations of some Star, that has a different Motion, the whole Air
will be roul'd about with the Earth.

2. And, experience also proves it: for, else, the twilight vapors, Comets,
and Birds above the highest Mountains would seem hurryed extreme swiftly
toward the West. Again, it is plain, those Clouds of dust, which we call the
Sun's spots, fly along with the Sun; and that, the same way, (as appears,
because the bright parts are burned still the same way,) notwithstanding they
are judged to be a hundred miles distant from the Sun. The vapors, too, of the
Moon are found to be carried about with the Moon.

3. From this Motion of the Air it follows, that bodies in the Air it self
are so moved, in respect to the parts of the Air and the Earth, as if there
were no Motion at all in neither; they being carried still along together with
the Air it self: as, one in a Ship, under sail with a constant wind,
exercises the same Motions and with the same facility in the Ship, as he could
do if she stood still.

4. Wherefore, Arrows, shot just upright, will fall in the very same place; or,
shot toward the East, they will fly no farther then if shot toward the West: The
Motion of the Earth will raise no wind, etc. This, too, will be certain, that
the Air cannot be carried less then the Earth; as, one that sits in a Coach
cannot rid less ground then the Coach it self.

5. Nor can all these be made good by an impetus, conceived upon the Earth, and
remaining in the Movable after its separation from the Earth: for, neither
could Birds retain that impetus for many hours together, at least, without any
notable diminution; and less could little bodies, for many days: nor could
that impetus carry an Arrow as swiftly acrosse, as directly. Besides, as those
that swim against the stream feel the strength of the stream under water; so,
one that should move toward the West would feel the Air to be carried toward
the East.

6. Much less, by the force of its circular motion, will the Earth throw any
thing laid upon it into Heaven: For, circular motion has no such property in
its own nature; since it is still about the Center, and, by consequence, keeps
every thing, according to its own line, in the same distance from the Center:
But, those things we see thrown off from wheels, are so, by reason of their
adhesion, and the mixture of a straight motion with the circular; as also,
because the center of gravity of such thrown bodies is removed, from that
position wherein it was sustained by the body under it.

LESSON XVII.
Of the causes of the Motion of the Moon and other Stars.
1. SInce, supposing this motion of the Earth, the Moon is carried with it
about the Sun, and keeps always the same side toward it; it is fairly
convinced to have a kind of adhesion to the Earth.

2. Yet, not a Magneticall one, being it changes not its aspect, nor has any
declination, for its approaching the Poles; nor, though it hangs loose, does it
come to the Earth: It Is, therefore, an adhesion of gravity.

3. And, since gravity proceeds from the Motion of things descending toward
the Earth; the Moon must be situated within the Emanations of the Earth, be
carried about the Center of the Earth, and about the Sun. But, because it has a
propension of its own toward the Earth, it is not carried so swiftly as the
Emanations themselves; its progress being, according to Astronomicall
observations, but about a 28. part every day.

4. And because, under the Zodiac, there is a perpetual tumult of vapors which
ascend, and being come up to a certain height, turn off from the Torrid Zone
toward the Poles; the motion of the Moon is compounded of a Motion under the
Ecliptic and toward the Poles.

5. It is not, therefore, carried purely under the Ecliptic: but, because it is
moved in a Sphericall Superficies, and by the shortest line, that is, by a
greatest circle; it will cut the Ecliptic twice every entire course of its
defects, that is, every month.

6. In its Opposition and Conjunction to the Sun, the body of the Moon, that
is, the whole complex of its solid and vapors, becomes less heavy: In
Conjunction, because its nearness to the Sun and the Sun's stronger reflection
from the Earth raises more Vapors in the Moon: in Opposition, more vapors are
raised out of its, naturally, colder part; and in the upper part there is allways
abundance.

7. Wherefore, the Moon, in these positions, must rise higher from the Earth,
and, in the Quadratures, that is, about the passages from the first to the
second and from the third to the fourth Quarters, appear bigger. But, because
that part which looks toward the Earth is allways the heavier, it never turns
the other side toward us.

8. Nor is there any fear least the Moon, falling by reason of its weight,
should o'rewhelm the Earth; both because it is furnished with a great deal of
fire and vapors lighter then the Emanations of the Earth; as also, because
very gravity it self, near the confines of the Earths emanations, is not so
powerful as it is here lower.

9. But farther, because it is hurried about two thousand miles every hour:
whence, were it made of solid Iron, it could not fall down; since, we see iron
Bullets sustained in the Air, by the power of Guns, though their motion be not
two hundred miles an hour.

10. Out of what has been said, we may easily argue concerning the other Great
Bodies. For, all those that belong to our Great Orb either are moved about the
Sun, as being certain other Earths: or else about other Stars, as the Moon
about the Earth; such as are the Medicean Stars, and the Companions of Saturn.

11. And, because we discover Suns among those other parts of the world; it is
very credible there are proportionable Planets disposed among them, too; and
that all those Bodies are moved in the manner of ours.

12. The Sun it self must, of necessity, turn about its own center: else,
certainly, since it is Fire, 'twould appear divided into Pyramids; and, if it
were born along with a progressive motion, 'twould show a vast train of flames
like a Comet.

13. Lastly, since it is all full of Caverns belching out flames, and fire
flames out according to the nature of its fuel; these flames must of
necessity flash out with a fierce impulse against the sides of the Caverns:
and, because they have an eminent proportion to the body, they must shake the
entire Sun and turn it that way the Motion lies strongest; which, the Phenomena
of its Spots and bright parts testify to be according to the Zodiac.

LESSON XVIII.
Of the Primum Mobile, the Duration, and Quiddity of the World.
1. BUt, because this fire, which bursts out from the Sun's bowels, is it self
moved, too: either this Motion, which is the Mother of all other, must spring
from it self; or else we must come to an incorporeall Agent.

2. But, that Bodies which rest, how many soever they are, cannot start of
themselves into Motion, is most evident: For, being supposed to rest, all their
intrinsecalls are supposed, without that effect which is called Motion: Since,
therefore, all things remaining the very same in the causes, there cannot be
any change in the effect; and yet, supposing Motion, there would be a change;
it is plain, there cannot any Motion spring out of them, without altering first
somewhat in the causes, that is, in the Bodies.

3. Moreover, every part of Motion being a new effect, the same evidence
convinces that motion cannot be continued, without some Cause be supposed
continually altering the First Body, on which depend the motions of all the
rest.

4. Since, therefore, we have pursued the Original of motion into the very
bowels of the Sun: we must conclude, that there is a Mover of another nature,
viz. an incorporeall, from whom Fire receiv's the power of moving; who, being
of an immovable Nature, establishes the Center of the Sun, that it may be the
Fixer and, as it were, Basis of all things rouling about it.

5. Les. 1. n. 1.
That Motion cannot be infinite, the same argument convinces which made it
plain before, that all Permanent Quantity is finite: For, suppose backwards
from this instant or now wherein we are, an infinite Time already past, there
must be infinite hours past; some one, therefore, will be infinite others
distant from us; and, in that one, a determinate now, which, with this present
instant, must enclose an infinite on both sides.

6. Nor, if the computation be made forwards, will the reason differ: for,
there must still be infinite hours to come; and one of them will be infinite
others distant from us; and, in that one, a certain now terminating an
infinite, which is impossible, whereas yet, what is future is, in that very
respect, possible.

7. The World, therefore, is neither from nor to eternity: because, the world
includes the motion of bodies passing on in a determinate order, and, as it
were, consists in this. 'Twas, therefore, created; but, not for it self: for,
if it could have deserved to be made for its own beauties sake; upon the same
title, it would endure for ever. It rests, therefore, that 'twas made for
something else; which cannot be successive, since the same evidence, with which
we have disputed about motion, N. 5. 6.
convinces that no successive thing can be eternal. The World, therefore, is
made for some permanent thing: but, there is nothing permanent found in Nature,
except the Rational soul, for whose sake the world could exist: Spirits,
therefore, born in bodies and perfected in them, (not such as are purely
abstracted from body, who have no use of corporeal instruments) are the End
for which the world was made.

8. And, the world is nothing but a kind of vast womb, in which these Spirits
may be begotten and brought up; which has so many Cells as there are several
Races of these Spirits. Our Cell is the Earth we inhabit: the Cells of the rest
are those masses of the Celestial bodies; except the Solar ones, which are the
basest of all the rest, and, as far as we can guess, only ministerial.

9. The Quantity of the world, both for its Extension and Duration, is such as
may fitly serve for the breeding up so many differences of Spirits: providing
the Cells, according to the several kinds; and giving every Cell the bigness
and duration which was sufficient for the number the Architect designed.

10. The Figure of the world is not rendered uneven, either with hollownesses or
jettings out; since, the notion of Vacuum excludes both these: Wherefore, it is
either Sphericall, or of some other Curvilineall figure, which, most concisely,
covers and encompasses so many and such great Cells.

11. The exterior rimme of it is not composed of any solid body, but of
thinnest Vapors exhaled out of the outmost bodies: unless, perhaps, there be
reserved in nature some farther use of the Outmost body, which we know not of.

Peripateticall INSTITUTIONS. Fourth Book.
Containing that part of METAPHYSICK, which explicates the Essential Notions
of BODIES.
LESSON I.
Of the divisibility of Substance, into Formal parts.
1.SInce water is, B. 2. Les. 2. N. 2.
manifestly, less divisible then Air; and yet they are but one,
Quantitatively: if they are more then one according to their Substance, there
must, of necessity, be a real composition of Quantity to Substance; since
Unity and Plurality are not distinct from the thing whose they are.

2. But, if they are not two Substances; since there cannot be a different
proportion of the same thing to it fels, and yet the proportion of Quantity to
the Substance in Air is greater then in Water; it must needs be, again, that
there is a real composition of Quantity to Substance and, therefore, a
Divisibility.

3. Whence, it is inferred, that Substance, as it is condistinct from Quantity, is
indivisible; since Quantity is divisibility.

4. As also, that the Notions of Rarity and Density consist in the proportion
of the Quantity to the Substance whose it is: since rare bodies are more and
dense less divisible.

5. You Will object, Such as are one in Quantity are one in Substance, B. 2. less.
1. N. 4.
too: But, the whole world is one in Quantity; and that rigorously, since,
there are no Parts actually in a Magnitude: Therefore, either Quantity is a
distinct thing from Substance, or else all Bodily Substance will be but one
thing, really and materially, whatever may be imagined of an Intellectual
distinction between them.

6. It Is answered, It Is a false assumption, to say, those things which are one
in Quantity are one in their Substances, too. To that which is objected, That
all things would be really and materially one; It Is answered, Either it is but
the same which we call to be One quantitatively, and then 'twould be showed
what inconvenience would follow, that consequence being admitted: or else, that
term, really and materially, would be explicated; for the Arguers seem to
insinuate that it signifies, abstracting from our Notions, that is, they would
be one in no kind of unity whereof we have any Notion.

7. All things, therefore, according to that unity which follows the notion of
Quantity, (and that is accidental,) are one: but, according to their
Substances, and that unity which follows the notion of Substance, they are many.

8. It follows, from what has been said, As often as any division is made, the
Substance it self is changed, which is subjected to the Quantity, according to
the intrinsecalls of Substance, as it is condistinguish't against Quantity: For,
Division being that whereby more are made of one; and, they not being made more
according to the proper unity of Quantity; this plurality must, of necessity,
be in the Substance as it is condistinguish't against Quantity; wherefore, the
Unity, too, which is destroyed, was in the Substance, as condistinguish't from
the Quantity: since, therefore, Unity superadds nothing to Entity, but a
negative notion of indivision; it comes to pass, that a change cannot be made
in the unity without a change in the Entity, and consequently, that the Entity
is changed.

9. But, the Entity is not so changed, that two Entities should be made out of
nothing; but out of one that existed before: otherwise, there would not have
been made a division. There was, therefore, a power or possibility in the
Substance, to be many; as, in many, there is a possibility to be made one again.

10. The Substance, therefore, is changed, in some respect; and remains in the
many, according to some part of its power: wherefore, it is divided according to
its own proprieties; and, there is, in Substances, divisible according to
Quantity, another proper divisibility, into the Power by which it can be what
it is, and the Act by which it is what it is; or, into the Matter remaining and
the Form changed.

11. Yet, the parts of the Substance, and the Quantity it self with the
Substance against which it is condivided, are not actually in their compounds,
before division: for, it is plain that, if they are in act, one of them, before
division, is not another; they are, therefore, many, nor can be divided, that
is, made many.

12. Out of what has been said, it is evident, that this Formal divisibility
has not the true nature of divisibility, that is, it is less then the
divisibility of a Magnitude into its parts: For, a Magnitude is divided into
parts, whereof every one exists after the division, by their proper existences;
but, one, at least of these parts exists no longer, and that which remains
exists, not alone, but commonly with some other, instead of the part it has
lost.

LESSON II.
Of the Formal parts of Substance, in particular.
1. HEnce it follows that, because a change, according to the parts of the
Substance, changes the Substance it self; the parts are parts of the Substance,
as it is such: wherefore, neither part is a Substance; since a part cannot be
the whole: But, to be a Substance is, To have a nature capable of existence:
therefore, neither part, separately, is, by its nature, capable of a Being:
and, any Agent to give a Being to either part, separately, must first change
its nature, that it may be capable of Being; for, to exist, cannot agree to
that, in which there is not a power of receiving existence.

2. And, after the same manner, must it be said of Quantity and all other
Accidents, whose notion is wholly without, and not comprehended in the notion of
Substance; and consequently, their notion is less fit and apt for existence.

3. You Will say, if these things are true, it implies a contradiction that any
Accident should exist out of its own Subject; the contrary whereof is a matter
of Faith.

4. It Is answered, there is neither Authority nor Demonstration, in Theology,
which convinces that an Accident may be preserved out of a Subject; as, it is
plain, to those that look more attentively into it.

5. But, on the contrary, it is evident a Whole cannot be, without its Parts in
potentia or power, therefore a Substance cannot be without Quantity, which is
its parts in potentia; nor can a Magnitude be, without its Quantity's having a
determinate proportion to its Substance, that is, without Rarity and Density;
again, Rare and Dense diversely mingled, import all the rest of Corporeal
Qualityes: It Is evident, therefore, that Accidents cannot be without a
Substance.

6. Farther, it is plain, the division of Substance is into a pure Power and a
substantial Form, or, that which makes it be a Substance: For, since, by the
division of a Substance into its parts, the Substance is changed; it must needs
be, that the Part which is lost gives the being a Substance to the Whole,
since, that being withdrawn, the notion of Substance is taken away; and that
the remaining Part is a pure Power; for, since it is a power to the notion
that is changed, and that is the first of all others, it is clear, in the
remaining part there is no notion, and therefore, that it is a pure Power or
possibility.

7. Whence, again, it is clear, there is a greater unity of the parts of a
Substance, then of Substance to Quantity: since, Quantity and Substance are,
intellectually, distinct; but, of the Matter and Form of compounds, there is but
one only notion together.

8. You Will say, It Is impossible to conceive that Matter, of it self, has no
notion; for, it would not be cognoscible. It Is answered; Since, to be capable
of being something neither is, in that kind whereof it is capable of being, nor
yet is wholly estranged from that kind: so, that which is a capacity to the
first kind, that is, to Substance and Being, neither has it that first notion,
and yet it is not altogether estranged from it; but, it is a certain degree to
participate Being it self, by the mediation of another.

9. Now the ratio or notion in a thing is That, by which its nature is fitted
to the Understanding, or the Understandablenesse of a thing, or the quiddity,
the whatnesse and, consequently, that, whereby a thing is made to Be: The Form,
therefore, primarily, is the Cause, or the whereby the Being is had.

10. Whence, it is evidenced, there cannot be more Substantial Forms, in the
same Thing: nor subordinate ones; because, since the first Form gives the
Being, the second must needs be adventitious to what has a Being, and not give
it, but be an Accident: nor coordinate ones; since they have each their own
notions and, consequently, constitute more Beings.

11. It Is plain, too, that the Matter has a Being through the Form, and cannot
be sustained otherwise then by the Form; since, of it self, it has not a
capacity to Be.

LESSON III.
Of the Unity and distinction of Bodies in common.
1. IT follows, from what has been said, that there is some plurality of Forms
in nature, before all Division: For, since Division is made, by the
interposition of one body, between the sides or parts of another, there must
necessarily be, before division, a body to be the Divider and another that may
be Divided; which, being they are not more then one, through any former
division, (since, this is supposed to be the first,) this plurality must of
necessity proceed out of the very nature and notion of the Things.

2. And, since Essence is nothing but that whereby a Thing is; such Things must
be, essentially, distinct: Since, therefore, to divide belongs to dense, to be
divided to rare; those things that are naturally rare and dense must be
essentially distinct.

3. Since, therefore, such things are transmutable among themselves, and
adequately divide the Universe; the Matter of rare and dense things must be the
same, and consequently, that of the whole Universe.

4. The same is deduced out of the very notion of Matter; which, being a power
to the notion of a Thing, is also a power or possibility to the notion of One:
since, therefore, a Multitude consists but of Unities; before unity, neither
distinction nor multitude can be understood: There can, therefore, be no
multiplicity of matter; wherefore, that of all nature is but One.

5. Hence, then, those Questions are superfluous, Whether one Form can be the
same in diverse Matters? and again, Whether many Forms in one Matter? Since, if
it be asked, of the proper unity of Matter, that of all Forms is the same; if,
of the individual unity, that the matter attains by its conjunction with a
Form, as it does its very Being.

6. From what has been said, it is clear, that every body, that is, every
Compound of act and power is a Magnitude: For, since there is but one possible
First matter, and that subject to Quantity; the Compounds of it, too, must of
necessity be subject to Quantity.

7. Hence, again, it follows, that no body moves, unless, in some manner, it
be changed first: For since a Bulk excludes another out of its place, by this,
that it intrudes it self into the other's place, because two cannot be together
in the same place; unless it become greater then its own place or leave it, it
cannot exclude another: It Is manifest, therefore, that it must be altered
first, according to one of these mutations, if it become a Mover of another.

8. Hence, again, it is collected that a Body is, essentially, an Instrument:
For, since a Body has two properties, to be moved and to move; and, to be moved
appertains to it, out of its power and the notion of Matter; it is clear, the
essential notion of it is to be taken from its virtue of moving, by which it
expresses act, and which follows the nature of a body in respect as it actually
is: Since, therefore* a body does not move, but in as much as it is moved;
clearly, according to its essential notion, it is an Instrument of its mover or
applyer.

9. A BODY, therefore, is a Thing in Nature, or, A certain part of the
Universe; provided by the Author of Nature, to produce a certain determinate
Motion, when it is applied.

10. Whence, three notions, or manners of defining a natural Ens or Thing, are
discovered: A Metaphysicall one, which is deduced adequately under the notion
of Being, and it is, A thing which has an existence spread into many potentiall
parts, that is, a Thing in or of such parts: A Natural or Physical one,
which, by Sensible Qualities, expounds the notion of those parts and,
consequently, of the Thing: And lastly, a Moral one, as it were, which
collects the same from the End, that is, from the quality of its Motion; for,
the Metaphysicall notion, properly, regards only its capacity of Existence.

11. And, he that has any one of these three notions, even by that, has all:
for, the Sensible Qualities impart both a capacity of Existence and a power for
Action.

12. Whence, too, it appears, that one Body can have but one primary Operation:
for, since the sensible qualities give both the power of working and the
capacity of existence, and they, in the same part of Matter, are the same;
either they conspire to one operation, or not: if not, neither will it be one
body, but many: if they conspire, there is, then, one primary operation of such
a body; which could not be produced, either by another disposition, nor
together with any other disposition then that. A natural Body, therefore, is
that One Thing whose Operation is One.

LESSON IV.
Of the essential unity and distinction of the Elements and mixed bodies.
1. Les. 3. n. 4.
SInce it is said above, that there is but one possible Substantial Matter, and
Quantity is known to be infinite in power; the power of Matter, too, to
Quantity must needs be infinite: Since, therefore, actually, Quantity is but
finite; the Composit or compound must needs be, in some measure, dense.

2. And, if whole Nature were uniform, it must be established in a certain
degree of Density and Rarity, springing from the proportion of Matter to this
Quantity: but, the special and particular bodies which are in the Universe, as
it is now framed, participate, out of this universal proportion, some more
some less of Density and Rarity.

3. Since, therefore, the notions of Density and Rarity are the first
differences of Magnitudes: those bodies, which first and least of all exceed
the nature of Body in common, will be distinguished by these differences, that
some exist in denser parts, others in rarer; which, in our Physics, we have
said, are the Elements.

4. Since, therefore, the operations of rare and dense bodies, as such, are to
divide and be divided; and this last is passion, out of which the essential
notion is not deduced; it comes to pass, that all the Elements receive their
differences, according to their power of dividing: and since, to divide is a
kind of simple action; they are distinguished by no other differences then of
more and less, that is, of velocity and slownesse.

5. Among the Elements, therefore, those which are framed by nature to divide
more swiftly must be more perfect; and those are they which are more subtle:
wherefore, since the greatest force of dividing agrees to Fire, that must be
the noblest; next to which must be Air, then Water, then Earth.

6. Which last, though, by its Bulk and density, it may seem more apt to
divide, and has, as it were, in the first place, the nature of divisive: yet,
by reason of the grossness of its parts, in natural action, it can do the
very least of them all; and consequently, it is the vilest and most beggarly
Instrument.

7. It appears farther that, since a body is, essentially, an Instrument for a
determinate motion; and there must needs be some least degree of rarity and
density; and the littleness in bulk hinders both the divisive power and
divisibility: there may be supposed, in every Element, parts so little, that,
according to the order of the Universe, they may neither have a capacity of
dividing others, nor of being divided by others; and so, there may not be in
them the essential notion of an Element, nor of any other natural body.

8. Again, since all bodies are Conjoined; B. 2. les. 2. n. 7.
it appears, that such minutest particles never exist, but in composition with
others: nay, when ever two or more Elements are joined, it must needs be that
their extremes may be supposed in so little a quantity, that one cannot operate
without the other.

9. There must needs, therefore, in nature, out of the pure conjunction of the
Elements, be a notion of a certain body, whose parts cannot act at all
separately, but, in conjunction they may: that is, some body essentially
distinct from the Elements, and yet, made out of their conjunction; that is, a
body whose essence is to be a Mixtum or mixed body.

10. But, since, in bodies, universally, Unity and Magnitude are considered:
it is plain, the differences of those bodies are collected out of three
respects; the specificall difference of the Elements, that is, the degrees of
Density and Rarity; the Multitude of parts of the same notion; and their Bulk.

11. A Mixtum, therefore, is a body of certain parts, of diverse degrees of
rarity and density, in a certain number and bulk compacted among themselves,
ordained by nature for a determinate Motion. Moreover, it is evident, that the
qualities of the Elements exist refracted and mutually abated in mixed bodies;
since, the very least must needs simply differ in degrees of rare and dense,
and these degrees, by reason of the composition, must needs hinder one another.

12. And yet, that no substantial Form of any Element is found in a Mixtum:
since, a Form constitutes a Thing, and a Thing is ordained for Motion; but,
Motion is of the whole, not of the several parts.

13. Out of what has been said, it is evident, that the operation of a Mixtum is
a certain Division qualified by the nature of the parts of the Mixtum: which
nature, the better it is, that is, the more serviceable for the best works of
nature, so much the nobler is the Mixtum, essentially.

14. Again, if the whole mixture of the Elements be shut up into so little a
part, that one part cannot, separated from another, have its proper effect;
then the Mixtum is simply one and primely mixed: but, if the mixture be extended
so amply, that many parts may act, asunder, according to the diverse parts of
the temperament; then, it is not a Mixtum, but a Demixtum or Decompositum, that
is, one made up of many Mixtum's; as we see in Metalls and other Mines, as
Coal, etc. where many Mixtum's are joined together, which are apt to be
separated by fire or other artifice.

LESSON V.
Of the Essence of Animals, and of the Soul.
1. BUt because, among Mixtum's, some are solid and consistent, others fluid;
and of these, by the course of nature, the conditions and temperaments are
different and, in some sort, opposite: there must, of necessity, out of the
conjunction of these, rise a middle temper, which cannot but be fit for some
certain motions.

2. And, because all things, with us here, are beset with heat; the solid parts
cannot be kept moist, that is, mixed thoroughly with actual moisture, unless
there be some continual cause or Fountain, out of which the moisture, so
consumable and subject to be wasted by the power of heat, may be perpetually
supplied.

3. Now, that Fountain may be supposed within and intrinsecall to the Mixtum,
or else conjoined, that is, in a body joined to it: But, if it be this later
way, it is plain, that watered Mixtum is not, of its mere self, constantly what
it is, but through its situation or conjunction to another, from which, if it
be separated, it perishes.

4. But, that which is watered the former way has, within it self, what is
necessary to keep it still a constant Instrument in nature, of that operation
which it is framed to undertake: and, consequently, it has one Form, from that
one Operation it is ordained to, and that one Order of parts conformed to such
an operation.

5. And, because we find these in all and only Animals: an Animal is evidently
counted to be One natural Thing having one Form.

6. You Will say, if the several similary parts of an Animal, subsisting in their
proper forms, were connected; they would have the same effect as they have now in
the Animal: there is no need, therefore, of the particular form of an Animal.

7. It Is answered, There Is no particular nature in any similary part of an
Animal, which is common to that part alive and dead, as if there could be some
form, as it were, indifferent; but, the nature of a living part is contrary to
the nature of a dead part: Now, natural Things are natural parts of the
world, unerringly flowing from the ESSENTIFICALL IDEA'S; and, therefore, they
receive essential notions, according to the Order they have in the Universe.

8. But, because the parts of an Animal are so framed, that one should water,
that is, alter or move another; it is plain that, of necessity, they must be of
several conditions and figures: wherefore, the complex of them is an
Organicall body, having within it self Life, that is, a power of moving it
self; and, its Form is the Act of such a body, that is, a Soul.

9. But, since the notion of a Soul requires that the parts of its subject,
whose orm it is, be some Movers others Moved; it is clear, that it does not
inform each of the parts, or, is not in every part, as it is usually said, and
as it happens in Elementary forms; but, that it is only in the whole and,
immediately, the Form of the Whole.

10. Notwithstanding, the parts have not, therefore, partial or particular
Forms: because they are not actually in the whole, nor have, actually, any
nature by which they could subsist out of the whole; as appears, in that, being
but divided, they presently die.

11. Hence, it is collected, wherein consists the Metaphysicall notion of an
Animal: viz. that, It Is a Thing of many parts, ordered among themselves, as to
Action; that is, whereof some are active upon others, and the rest are passive
from them.

12. To which the Moral definition adjoyn's, that It Is an Instrument for
Action, that is, for that operation or motion to which they apply themselves;
such as is local motion, which all participate.

13. And, the Physical definition considers that many Mixtum's are contained
in an Animal, as also Organicall parts, that is, parts woven and composed of
many Mixtum's; and so conjoined, that the liberty of each is not taken away,
but that they are active upon one another, as if they were distinct Things.

14. And, since, from the presence of an Object, an impression is made upon an
Animal; whence it begins to act about that which is without, so as is
convenient for the nature it self of the Animal; yet, this impression is, such
as makes no sensible change in the Animal: we apprehend the Object to be in
the Animal, as neither perfecting nor hurting it, but indifferently, and
purely As another thing; and this we call Knowing: and, that the Animal
operates out of it self, as it were, what is convenient for it, supposing this
knowledge; and this we call working out of knowledge.

15. Again, because it appears, by our Physics, that the proper motions of an
Animal derive their Origin from the Heart, which directs the Spirits into the
nerves that are necessary for all kinds of motion; and that this Impulse is
called Passion; moreover, that all Passions depend and emerge from LOVE and, in
an Animal rightly disposed, are subject and conformable to love: It follows,
that Its prime Love, or, the prosecution of its chiefly beloved is that Passion
or Motion or Action, to which the fabric and compagination of an Animal is
immediately ordered; and consequently, that Animals, by these, excel one
another.

16. Now, the prime pursuit of an Animal is after Food; and Food is what is
conformable to the quality of a body, and preserves and causes a right
disposition: Since, therefore, an Animal agrees with other bodies in being an
Instrument, to be applied by another, and an Instrument is, in so much, more
perfect, as it can perform, more easily and more efficaciously, more or more
Noble works; that Animal will be better then the rest, which is more easily
applyable, and to more things: for commonly, the more noble operation consists
of the more parts, and what is applied more easily operates more efficaciously.

17. The Food, therefore, of that Animal is best, which renders it of a calm
Fancy and of an Appetite the most indifferent; which, commonly, follow one
another: and, that Animal is the best, which is primarily affected to such
Food.

LESSON VI.
Of the Chief Animal and the essential distinction of Bodies.
1. OUt of what has been said, it may be convinced, if some Animal can be
applied to one or more determinate operations, and another to whatever, without
any term or limitation; this later kind has so great an eminency above the
former, that they are not of the same Order: wherefore, It will be the noblest,
and something above the Order of the rest.

2. It Is plain, too, that nothing greater can be imagined, in the notion of an
Animal; no, nor of a Body: For, if a Body be an Instrument applyable to a
determinate action, an Instrument to all extends to both the noblest and the
most: Wherefore, nothing can be conceived higher in the notion either of a Body
or an Animal.

3. Since, therefore, in our Physics, B. 2. les. 24. n. 6.
it appears, that a Man, even in his Body, is provided to do any thing
whatever; it is plain, that a Man is the prime both of Bodies and Animals; and
something beyond them.

4. It appears out of what has been said, that there cannot be any other
differences of Bodies, which are not comprehended in the forementioned. For,
the Elements, differing in Rarity and Density, divide Body, precisely, as it
speaks Quantity united to Substance: The nature of Mixtum's, which consist in
the Number and Proportion of rare and dense bodies, follows that divisibility
of quantity, whereby bodies have number and proportion: And, the Site and Order
of Parts we chiefly see in Animals, whose members can act one upon another:
Lastly, the Infinitude of Quantity shows it self in Man, in that he is
ordinable, after a sort, to infinite things.

5. Again, since Quantity is divisibility into parts, those are distinct either
in Number, as it were, and Site only; and bodies divisible into such parts are
the Elements: or, they differ in Nature; and such are the parts of Mixtum's:
or, lastly, they are parts which, in the Thing it self, are, as it were,
certain Things exercising their own proper operations; such are the Members of
Animals; the complex of which, if it makes a body orderable to all possible
Action, it constitutes a Man.

6. Again, the division which a body makes is, either simply dividing more and
less; and, by this, the Elements are distinguished: or, it is a modified
division, by which certain bodies, with a certain qualification, are
distinguished; and this is the proper division of Mixed bodies, by which their
so many effects are produced: or it is an abstractive division, that is, which,
of it self, has no effect, but is a way and instrument to another division; and
such is the motion of Animals; which, if it be in a certain determinate manner
and number, constitutes the other Animals, if indeterminately and with infinite
variety, belongs to Man.

7. And, that these differences are essential, appears from hence, that they,
of themselves, divide and include the notion and end of a Thing consisting of
parts, that is, of Body or bodily Substance; as cloven-footednesse includes
pedality, and the being divided into three or four Toes includes
cloven-footednesse: for, no difference, of any of these abovementioned kinds,
can be understood without the notion of a Thing consisting of parts; nor, be
apapply'd to any other common notion, unless accidentally.

8. Nor, is it less apparent, that these essential differences are the very
Accidents, that is, the very complexion or clinging together of rare and dense
parts: which is called Substantial or essential, in as much as it furnishes
the body for its prime and chief operation; and as, saving the order to the
chief operation, it is mutable, so far it is some of the Accidents: For, since
the parts are not actually in a formal Compound; it is clear, that whatever is
in the Compound cannot be this and that, several and distinct Things.

9. A transmutation, therefore, is accidental only or more then accidental,
in as much as it is greater or less, or, as it extends to several notions.

10. Hence, again, it is evident, that Genericall unity, though it be founded in
nature (as appears out of what has been said): yet it is not truly any other
then Mental (that is, by being in the understanding) as to the effect of
unity; though the similitude in which it is founded be real.

11. And that the ultimate essential unity, which they term Specificall, and
imagine common, is no other then the very Individual unity: For, since all
difference consists of the collection of rare and dense, and all operation
follows the same differences in the very instant of the birth or first being of
every thing, when the Individuation is determined; it must needs be, that
whatever Accidents there are, in the thing once made, either fit or avert it
from the primary operation, to which it is ordained: Since, therefore, every
change in the Form makes an essential difference, and all variety in respect
of the primary operation is a change in the Form, it is plain that every
Accident concurs to an essential change; and (which was intended) that
Numericall difference, which is the ultimate and complete proportion of a Thing
to its operation, is essential.

12. Wherefore, since, from the highest ratio or notion of a Thing consisting
of parts, one may descend, by numberless degrees, to whatever Individual;
Genericall degrees will be without any known number, but the specificall will
be no other then that of an Individuum.

LESSON VII.
Of the mutation of the Individuality in the several kinds of Bodies.
1. ANd, hence, it is evident that, a Thing being changed but accidentally, the
Individuality is not changed; because that is taken directly under the notion of
Thing or Body; which is the last that is destroyed in the thing, as it is the
last that is made.

2. For, since change is made by local motion, and that is divisible without
end; if, upon every accidental variation, the Substance should be changed,
substantial transmutation would be continually successive, and would not
subsist but in motion, that is, so, that one part would not be whilst another
is; and consequently, the notion of a Substance would never be nor its Being be
Indivisible; nor would there be any Thing by whose mediation Accidents might
subsist; to conclude, there would be nothing in Nature, the constancy and
firmness of Substance being once taken away.

3. Among the Elements it is plain, the Notion of the Individuum is changed by
mere division; so that, any whatever least particle being taken away or added,
the notion of the Individuum is changed: But, the quality of Rarity or Density
being changed, the notion of the Individuum is not, therefore, altered.

4. For, since the mutation according to Rarity and Density is a continual
one, that is, divisible without end; there would be an infinite succession of
Individuums: But, it appears to the Considerer, that it happens not so in
division; whose Motion though it be continual, yet the being divided follows
indivisibly. Besides, if, both by division and change of rarity, the
quidditative notion of an Element should be varied, there would be no
accidental change in the Elements.

5. Of Mixtums, the manner is partly the same, partly different: for, if a
dissolution intervene between the heterogeneall parts which essentially
constitute a Mixtum, there will be a change, not of the Individuum, but of the
Genericall notion; but, if any parts of the same temperament be either added or
taken away, the Individual notion is accounted changed.

6. But, the Unity of an Animal is not prejudiced by the withdrawing of neither
similary nor dissimilary parts; but only of those, wherein the prime force of
its Instrumentality precisely consists: and, that being maimed, it suffers a
Genericall change.

7. For, since the divisibility of the Elements is, precisely, into the parts
of a Magnitude; out of that division, by the course of nature, a variation in
the Substances must necessarily follow.

8. As also, since the composition of Animals clearly aym's, by a certain Way,
at a certain End; a substantial variatio in them must only depend upon the
change of the adequate complexion necessary to the End of the composition.

9. Lastly, Mixtums; since their notion is constituted betwixt both these; as
it is aggregated of similary parts and has a conformity with the Elements, so
far, it follows, they must be subject to their way of change; but, as it is
compounded of dissimilar parts, yet cohering in Proportion not Order, so far
it is changed by the change of the Proportion without any respect to the Order.

10. You Will object; Since every Accident concurs to the designation of the
Substance; upon any Accident's being changed, the ultimate substantial
difference must be altered: especially, since a Substance is defined to be
nothing but A certain Resultance from Accidents.

11. It Is answered, that, as, it is evident, Plurality is, so, nothing else but
division ended, as, notwithstanding, not every part of the division changes
Unity, but only the Figure: so, it happens in Rarefaction, that it is indeed the
production of a new Element, when it is perfected; yet, every part of
rarefaction does not partially change the Substance of an Element.

12. Now, rarefaction and condensation is perfected, when it is become such,
that the former degree cannot be restored to the Thing that is rarifi'd or
condensed, out of the precise nature of Common causes; but there is need of a
special cause for this effect: for, it is plain, that, otherwise, it is not, in
respect of the world, a new Thing or part; since, by the very common
constitution of the world, 'twill return to its former nature.

13. Much more, in the destruction of an Animal, every alteration is, so, a way
to its destruction, as, notwithstanding, every part does not partially change
the very Substance of the Animal.

14. Hence, it is collected, how there is made an Augmentation of the same
numericall Animal, through the whole course of its life; and how, many of its
members being cut off, the same still numericall Animal remains: For, it being
said, that the Substantial notion of an Animal is to be rated from its prime
Passion, and that That is the Love of Food, that is, of preserving it self;
moreover, that an Animal being once made, the identity is not changed, unless
the quality of its first operation be changed, according to the order of
nature; it follows, that an Animal is not changed substantially, as long as the
love of preserving it self remains in it.

15. But, the cutting off of members, clearly, does not take away this
disposition; and, the change which is made by the digesting Food into it self
is meant to continue the Animal: it is clear, therefore, neither of these
destroy the bounds of nature, which, we have said, are the Ends and determiners
of Substance; and consequently, the nature of Individuation remains firm.

16. Now, why an Animal, remaining the same in Substance, should not be
rarefi'd although more quantity come to it: the reason is plain; because, the
Substance of an Animal is, of it self, indifferent to many Magnitudes, that is,
to be less and bigger, and that which it receives is derived to it by the
destruction of other bodies; so that materia prima (which is a capacity of
quantity) has that comparison to the augmented Animal, that is, is a Capacity
of as much quantity in the Animal, as it was before in many Things: whence, it
comes to pass, that in the Animal, the quantity and substance retain the same
proportion to the Standard or universal substance, which before they had to it
in the Animal and its food.

17. It appears, again, out of what has been said, how the Suppositum may be
said to have more in it then the Nature; though these are, indeed, one and the
very same thing: For, the Nature speaks the complexion of Accidents, precisely
as it is a complexion; and so makes an Instrument of the operation intended by
nature: and the notion of this is one and determind; and there is nothing in it
but essentially and formally.

18. But, the Suppositum is the thing which the Nature constitutes: whence,
because it so explicates the nature, as that, besides, it includes confusedly
other notions; as also, because the nature is a complexion of many, the natures
of every one must needs be conjoined with this Nature or Substance: it comes to
pass, that all the Accidents, according to their particular natures, are in
the Suppositum; and consequently, that there is more in the Suppositum, then in
the Nature.

LESSON VIII.
Of the proper Action of the Chief Animal.
1. IT appears, farther, that, since an Animal is governd by Passion; and
Passion rises from goods or ills to Nature, that is, those things which are
conformable or dissonant to nature: Man, if he be applyable to all things, that
is, prompt to embrace any ill of nature, or fly any good; must of necessity
have such a faculty in him, that, in his Brain, ills of nature greater then any
such good may be joined to the good which he is to eschew, and likewise greater
goods to the ill he is to embrace; that, so, he may, by the applyer, be
impelled to his destined actions.

2. These goods, therefore, with ills, and contrariwise, since they are not
conjoined in the things themselves, and yet must appear to him conjoined, and
this not by mistake but by the design of nature; it is plain, there is in the
Man a faculty whereby it may appear to him that those goods are conjoined with
the ills, and that he from that appearance is moved; and not because the
appearances are naturally conjoined (as, peradventure, it is in Beasts), which,
not having any conjunction from a conjunction of the objects in nature, (as,
future or past things), cannot from such conjunction, that is, by force of
nature, have a power of moving through conjunction.

3. And, since this conjunction moves a man, not as being a manner of the
knowledge of things, but because it is the thing known; the other conditions,
too, of Things and chiefly their very Existence must be, so, in a man and, so,
move him: The objects, therefore, as existing, that is, Existence as Existence
must be known by a man.

4. And, because existence, by its own Form and its very being existence,
excludes nonexistence; he that knows a thing exists knows that it does not
not-exist, or (which is as much) that what exists, whilst it does so, cannot
not-exist. Man, therefore, has a foundation whereby he may be certify'd of all
Truth, viz. that The same cannot be and not-be, at once.

5. Since, therefore, then we are judged to understand, when we know a thing is
and cannot be otherwise; a Man, certainly, is to be called an Understanding
Creature.

6. Again, since our knowledge rises from our Senses, and our Senses,
sometimes, are so imperfectly moved by the Objects, that, though we perceive
there is something, yet we know not its quality, (for example, we see a body,
which we know not whether it be alive or dead; or, we discern it moves it self,
but doubt what kind of Animal it is): it is evident, we know some one thing, of
more like to one another which we are acquainted with, to be, without
distinguishing the individuality, that is, we have an universal notion which
is indifferent to many.

7. And, compounding these former with this farther Consideration, that It Is
the same thing to know One thing is another, and to know that Those things,
which are the same with a third, are the same between themselves: it is plain
that a Man is Discoursive; and that his knowledge is derived from those things,
whereof he is certain, to something, whereof he was not certain, but is rendered
certain by the very derivation.

8. And because, of those things which are unknown, either part is indifferent
to the Understanding, and the Understanding is undetermined concerning them: it
follows, that a Man, by this Discourse, of undetermined, is rendered determined;
and, because the Principles of determination are in himself, it comes to pass
that a Man determines himself and moves himself.

9. Again, since, it is clear, that one part of a Man is affected from another
part, as from a sensible object; for example, One hand Feels the other or
whatever other exterior part of the Body; in like manner, we are sensible of
our selves by Smell, Hearing, and Sight: it follows, that a Man can think and
discourse of himself and, consequently, of his actions; and, by consequence,
that he can determine himself to act or not-act, the understanding descending
by discourse to the good or illness of the action he is about to do.

10. A Man, therefore, moves himself to act and is Master of his action, and,
out of the notion of good and ill, differently disposes his action; which we
use to call being Free: a Man, therefore, is Free.

11. You Will object, that liberty, according to the common notion of men,
consists in this, that, Supposing all things requisite for action, yet a Man
can, out of an intrinsecall faculty, immediately will to act or not-act. It Is
answered, This is not the notion of the vulgar; which holds to act and not-act
for the notion of liberty, without that addition of supposing all things
requisite besides the action it self: nor is it the notion of the Learned, that
have sought in Nature it self, how the notion of the vulgar should be
explicated.

12. But it is an error in Metaphysick, in as much as it supposes an
indifferent, as indifferent, to act; and that to be in Effect which never was
in Cause, that is, an effect to be without a cause.

13. Again, it is erroneous in Moral Science: for the Notion of Virtue would be
taken away; whose nature it is to incline to will actually, so that, a more
virtuous person is more determined to will just things then a less virtuous.

14. Persuasion, too, and Negotiation would be taken away: for, if the
determination of the will should proceed not out of the preceding causes, in
vain would be the endeavors of drawing men to follow one thing more then
another.

15. Out of what has been said, it may be determined, that Man, by force of his
Intellective virtue, considered in it self, is capable of infinite Science:
For, since, whatever is added is still a degree and disposition in the Man to
farther Science it is apparent, the understanding is not burdened but rendered
more capable by former Science: Wherefore, since Science, for its part, may, by
addition, increase without end, and is only restrained by uninfinitenesse of
the number of the Objects, it must needs be that Man is capable of
comprehending all, that is, infinite Science, together and at once; that is, he
is of a capacity absolutely infinite, in respect of bodies; comprehending
infinite of them, as a Superficies comprehends infinite Lines, and a Line
infinite Points.

16. Again, since, among knowable things, those are contained, too, which are
to be done by a Man; to this, also, humane Science extends, even to know what is
to be done. And, since Science is an active Principle, a Man, by Science, will
be enabled to direct his actions; that is, to govern his life; and this most
perfectly, because he is enabled to know what is best to be done.

LESSON IX.
Of the Soul of the Chief Animal, or, of the MIND.
1. OUt of what has been hitherto explicated, it is easily deduced that Man,
according to this principle, is raised above the notions of Matter and
Quantity. For, since Matter is a certain capacity of Quantity, Quantity of
Figure, Figure is determined by Place, and all these in Time: but, it is clear,
that the intention and thought of Man, in an universal conception, is
entertained about something indifferent to infinite Figures, Places, Times, and
Magnitudes; and this, not out of the nature of the thing, but because it is in
the Mind of Man: It Is most evident that the Mind is something of another kind
then Matter and Quantity; and consequently, nobler, since it is an addition to
the perfectest bodies.

2. Again, since Thing and Existence is that which first and primely fixes the
Mind, and to which it seems to be a certain capacity: but Thing (out of what
has been said) abstracts from and is before great and little, Les. 7. n. 11. 16.
both in rarefy'd and augmented things: it follows, that the notion of the Mind
is before and nobler then Quantity and, its com-part, Matter.

3. Again, since all the negotiation of our Mind reduces divisibles to
indivisibility; as appears in Numbers, Figures, Points, Lines, Superficies,
Instants, Comparisons, Denominations, Relations, Negations etc. but, nothing is
so different as an indivisible from a divisible: it is clear, on all sides, that
the nature of the Mind is wholly opposite to the nature of Quantity; and
Quantity implying a kind of undeterminatenesse and confusion, that the Mind is
still the nobler part.

4. Nor, with less evidence, is it proved that the Mind is a Substantial
principle of Man: For, since his operations are manifestly indivisible; but,
what is received in a divisible, ipso facto becomes divisible upon the division
of the subject; it is clear, his operations are not received in a Magnitude,
and, consequently, that his Mind is an indivisible Substance.

5. Again, if the Substance of Man be wholly material and divisible, his Mind
it self and all its affections can be nothing but certain Manners and
determinations of divisibility (as, it is plain, of the other qualities which
are accessory to bodies): but, it is plain, out of what has been said, that it is
no such thing: wherefore, neither that the whole Substance of Man is material,
but, in part, Spiritual and indivisible.

6. It Is clear, too, that the Mind is not another, but the same Substance with
the Man: For, since an Instrument to all things includes the being an
Instrument to some; wherein consists the notion of an Animal: it is clear, that
a Man is a certain Species of Animal; and consequently, that his Mind, by which
he is a Man, is formally one and the same Thing with the rest of the Substance
of Man.

7. And indeed, were it supposed a distinct Thing from the Substance of the
Man, it would not suffer from the body, nor could it acquire any thing through
its conjunction to the body, nor be at all conjoined to it: for, it must be
either entitatively, and this cannot be otherwise then by unity of Substance,
for a Thing speaks Substance; or, some other accidental way, whereof there is
nothing common to a body and a Spirit.

8. You Will say, Since a Spirit is a Thing of another order then a body, how can
it concur into the same Thing? then, how will it be cemented? and, what
neighborhood of one to the other? It Is answered, that, as, in a Magnitude, one
part is fastened to another, and has the power of a Subsister without division,
that is, the propriety of a severed Thing without separation: so, the Soul
also, may be the same with the body, without confusion of properties.

9. And, because, in a corporeal Substance, there is admitted a certain
negatively indivisible virtue antecedent to divisibility, viz. a not-yet
divisibility of the Substance before the Quantity: such as is the connection and
gradation from the divisibility to the negative indivisibility; another like
that will be apt to unite, without a Paradox, the Mind positively indivisible,
to the Substance negatively indivisible.

10. And, how will it unite? but, according to those parts, in which the
Substance primarily and principally resides: which, as it is principally in the
Heart, that being a certain Fountain of the whole Thing; so, specially, as to
the notion of Animality, it is in the Brain, whence Sense and Motion is derived
to the whole Animal, which are those operations from which it is denominated an
Animal.

11. Since, therefore, the other actions, which do not affect the Heart nor the
Brain, strike not home to the inmost Substance; so, neither do they reach
Mental Knowledge or the integrity of the Soul: but, the changes that strike
upon these Principles affect the Soul, too; and, it comes to pass that
not-the-same ordination of bodily parts, especially of the Spirits and Heart,
follows in Man from the Brain's being affected, which would follow in another
Animal; but one, from the propriety of the affected Substance, conformable to
the whole, not to the body alone.

12. But, any other unity, then that the Soul should intimely be comprehended
in the definition of Man, and consequently, should consist of the same notion
and indistinct predicates, is not to be looked for in Substance.

LESSON X.
Of the Proficiency and Deficiency of Man, and of his Essence.
1. THis, therefore, is out of Controversy, that Man, as to his Soul, suffers
from Corporeal Agents: For, since the Soul it self is a certain Affection or
Qualification of a divisible Substance, which is introduced and expelled by
corporeal actions; it is clear, that those actions, which reach to the very
Substance, must, of necessity, affect and be received in it, after its manner.

2. Consequently, it acquires Science: For, since, it is nothing but a certain
Possibility to Science, as to its perfection; it is manifest, that all its
change is toward Science, viz. to be some kind of Knowledge, either perfect or
imperfect.

3. Whence, even they, that deny the Soul acquires Science, say that it is
excited and admonish't by the presence of the body: but, to be excited and
admonish't is to receive knowledge: the Soul, therefore, acquires knowledge
from the Body.

4. Nor makes against this Socrates's experiment of a Boy, orderly asked and
answering right to Geometrical propositions: for, this questioning was a
production of Science, not a renovation; for 'twas an application of the notion
of the same Being, which is between the Terms, to the understanding of the Boy;
whereby it came to pass that the Truth to be known was by the notion of Thing,
knit to the Soul of the Boy, and made, as it were, a part of it, in which the
virtue of knowledge and Science consists.

5. Yet, the Soul has not, by this Science, a power to move the body: For, we
see, Science is often overcome by Passion; but, if it had any proper activity,
it could not be resisted by any power of its own body: Moreover, it would no
longer be a part of a Man, but something grafted in him of a superior nature,
according to that virtue.

6. It follows, therefore, that, by virtue of the Soul, more motives of goods
or ills are conjoynd to the singular objects; by whose conjunction the Heart
and the body is affected otherwise to those goods or ills, then it would be had
they not that conjunction: So that, the force of Pain and Pleasure is that
which moves a Man, even then when he seems to follow the firmest Reason;
namely, because to be Reasonable to follow this and to fly that, is nothing
else but that more of delightful is conjoynd with this and more of painful
with that.

7. In virtue of these, therefore, a Man is changed, and acts otherwise then if
he had not understanding. Nor, is he carried, from the very beginning, by
reason or any proper power, to this connection of goods with ills; but is
prevented by some chance or obvious disposition of objects and corporeal
causes, either intrinsecall or extrinsecall.

8. Now, this disposition in the Soul, upon which Operation follows, we call
the WILL, and the first beginning Volition; which, it is apparent, is left by
precedent judgments, chiefly those that are about good or ill, since, by such
judgments, it is plain, a Man is determined to action.

9. Hence, it appears, how the Soul fails in Opining: For, seeing Objects
occur to the Soul, not deduced and drawn-in, by its own force and nerves, as
it were, but, by the agitation of bodies; if the affection to any thing so
presses a Man to action, that it leaves not room for the objects to run in that
order which is necessary for demonstration; the Man must needs fall to acting,
before he has any absolute evidence what is to be done.

10. If this be done by reflection, a Man see's that he is moved uncertainly;
but, he see's, too, that nature requires he should move upon apparences;
whence, he does no unbeseeming incongruous thing: But, if it be done without
reflection, a Man takes an uncertainfor a certain; which is, to Opine; for he
says, this is, which he has no determinate cause to say.

11. From this precipitation of action, it happens, that one Man operates
better, another worse; according as one, more frequently or more grievously,
precipitates his action, then another. And, those that come nearest to
evidence, as far as nature will bear, do the uttermost of their power; which
is to operate virtuously: but, those that very much recede from it, are called
vicious: between which, a certain middle state of Men inclines notoriously to
neither part.

12. It Is clear, therefore, whence the defectibility of Vice rises in Mankind:
to wit, because, by too much precipitation of bodily motion, false or the worse
opinions are generated. Whence, it follows, that man is not only changeable
from imperfect to perfect, but also from good to evil, and contrariwise: For,
if he has opin'd a falsity, upon farther light, he may be led to the Truth, and
if, invited by apparences, he has followed the Truth, by others he may be
averted again.

13. Whence, it is evident, there is some opposition in the Soul, that is, some
acts incompossible at once in it: for, since those things which are in the Soul
inhere in it, in virtue of Being; it is plain, it must be gathered, out of the
very notion of Being, what things consist together in the Soul and what not.
Now, it is clear, that it is against the notion of Being, that the same should Be
and not-Be: but, of those things that are, all agree in the notion of Being,
nor does any thing hinder that white and black, light and darkness, hot and
cold should coexist; wherefore, neither does any thing forbid their being
together in the Soul: but, for the same to Be and not-Be, which is, to be
affirmed and denied, it is wholly repugnant.

14. Since, therefore, Man suffers no repugnancy in himself to have whatever
other things together in his Mind; it comes to pass, that he is capable and
cognoscitive of all Things: He can, therefore, know what is best for himself,
or, in what State he may most perfectly enjoy himself: Nor, will he doubt that
he is to strain toward this by all his actions; wherefore, he will be governed
against nature, if he be employed otherwise then is convenient to attain This
last End.

15. Whether, therefore, one Man rules another, or whether some superior Power
governs him; he governed against nature, if he withdraw him from This chiefest
Good: And because Nature is the Principle of acting; a Man, as far as he is
able, will reduce himself to a rectitude and straight course toward his
ULTIMATE GOOD, and will resist all contrary operation.

16. Though Man, therefore, be an Instrument, framed to be moved by another, as
all other Animals: yet, 'twill be with this difference, that other Animals are
ordained to be moved to the End of the Mover, without any respect to their
proper good; but, Man is governed to the Mover's End, no farther then as the
same is a Motion toward the proper Good of Man.

17. MAN, therefore, is an Instrument, framed by nature apt for universality of
Action, that is, to do any thing whatever, so it be in order to his proper
good: or, a Thing, of connected parts, in a passive and active order, that is,
which can order themselves: or, lastly, Consisting of a RATIONAL SOUL and an
ANIMAL BODY.

Peripateticall INSTITUTIONS. Fifth Book.
Containing that part of METAPHYSICK, which treats of SUBSTANCES ABSTRACTED
from Matter, and of the Operation of Things.
LESSON I.
Of the Souls separation from the Body.
1.OUt of what has been said, it is evident, that a Humane Soul perishes not at
the dissolution of its Body: For, since, whilst it exists in the Body, it has
immanent acts which cannot belong to a Body; it must of necessity have, of its
proper self, the virtue of a Thing, or, of receiving Existence: Since,
therefore, there is nothing farther required to exist, in a thing already
existing, but the having in it self a power of sustaining existence; and, it is
plain, that, the body being taken away, this power is not withdrawn, (since
it is in the Soul, apart from and besides the Body); it is evident that, by the
dissolution of the Body, the Soul is not dissolved.

2. Add to this, that, since there is no other substantial divisibility, but
of Form and Matter; and Matter is not necessary to the Souls existence; there is
no divisibility in the Subject of existence, as existence is in the Soul, by
means whereof the Soul can be alienated from Being.

3. We see, too, that all mortality of Bodies either proceeds from contrariety,
or from the divisibility of a quantitative Subject; whereof, since neither is
to be found in the Soul separated, it is plain, that It Is not subject to
corruption.

4. You Will object, if the Soul in the body is capable of existence, it is capable
of action or of a Motive power; as quantitative parts, though they have a
common existence, yet act upon one another. It Is answered, quantitative parts
are accessory to and find the Substance already perfect: but formal parts (at
least essential ones) do not presuppose the Substance established; whence, the
active power follows not any one, but all.

5. You Will say, that Existence, too, supposes all the parts of a Thing, as it is
a Thing: wherefore, neither will the Soul be capable of existence in the Body.
It Is answered, that action belongs to the Soul in the Body as existence does:
For, existence makes not the Soul, while it is in the Body, to be a Thing; for
that is primely of the whole, and the whole Man is the Thing; but it makes the
Soul to be That which may be a Thing: So, also, it is not absolutely a principle
of acting, but it is a principle by which action becomes other then 'twould be
without it; and consequently, it has a Being, whence action may be, but not
whence it is.

6. It appears, again, that the Soul separated is not, truly, the same Thing
with the Soul in the Body; but is substantially changed. For, first 'twas
joined substantially to the Body and was one with it: but, it is clear, that
when, by division, more things are made of one, the Thing divided is changed;
especially when the Unity it self was substantial, as in the present case;
since the Soul adheres to the corporeal Substance, not by quantity, but by
identification.

7. Again, the Soul, now separated, is the immediate and adequate Subject of
its own existence: whereas, in the body, the Man himself was the Thing, and the
Soul only a part of the Thing, or, whereby the Thing was. Yet, it is the same
Thing, as to its notion and definition; since it consists of those predicates
it had in the Body.

8. You Will object, In the Body, it had not a power of receiving existence in it
self; therefore, neither will it have out of the Body: for a part and a Thing
are of an entirely different kind, and vastly distinct from one another. It Is
answered, that, as, in the parts of a Magnitude, it is manifest, that they are
neither Things, nor only parts of a Thing; but something between, which is so a
part, that it may be some kind of whole: So, it repugns not, that there should
be something in formal parts which is, de facto, a part, and yet may be a
whole; and that should be a kind of Middle thing, which has enough in it self
to become a whole, yet should not actually be a whole: Whence, when the Soul is
separated, there is not any thing added to it, to make it more capable of
existence, but that is withdrawn from it, which hindered it from existing.

9. Now, he that desires to frame to himself, in some sort, a notion of a
separated Soul; let him ponder with himself that object which corresponds to
the words Man or Animal, as such: which when he shall see, abstracts from Place
and Time, and is a Substance by the only necessity of the Terms; let him
conceive the like of a separated Soul.

10. Then, let him attentively consider some self-evident and most natural
proposition: in which, when he shall have contemplated that the object is in
the Soul with its proper existence and, as it were, by it; let him think a
separated Soul is a Substance that is all other things, by the very connection
of Existences.

11. Lastly, when, in Bodies, he shall observe that Motion proceeds from the
quality of the Mover and a certain impulse; and that this impulse is derived
again from another impulse, and so up even to that which is first moved, and
beyond: let him imagine the Soul is a kind of principle of such impulse;
whatsoever thing that must be.

12. What is said of the Substance of the Soul, undoubtedly must be understood,
too, of its proper Accidents; for, since they depend only upon it, (being
something of it, nay even the very Soul), and it would be more imperfect
without them; they must run the same fortune with it, unless some special
reason interpose.

13. Whatever things, therefore, were in the Man, according to his Soul, at the
instant of his Death, remain in the Soul after separation: wherefore, all his
Resolutions or Judgments, whether speculative or practical, shall remain in
it; where, since they cannot be without Apprehensions, even they, too, shall
remain: And, since all things, which are made to follow out of or have
connection with these, are in a separated Soul, in virtue of these, its Science
must needs be extended to all those; all such, therefore, which have once been
in it and are not blotted out, after death all remain.

14. Since, therefore, in a Soul there is an infinite capacity; and there is no
opposition of apprehensions among themselves, nor any other opposition, but of
contradiction, whereby the same is affirmed to be and not-be: all the
apprehensions, scraped up together in the whole life, and judgments
unretracted must, of necessity, remain; unless some special Cause withstand.

15. The whole Notion, therefore, of the past life, all the particular
acquaintances of Familiars and other Individuums, all Sciences and Arts,
attained in the life time, survive after Death.

LESSON II.
Of the Science of a separated Soul, and its unity with the Soul.
1. BUt, all these things being so, now, in the Soul, that time was, they were
not; it is plain, they are so conjoined to it, that there is no repugnancy it may
be without them: wherefore, so there be a cause, they may be divid^d from it:
some kind of divisibility, then, there is between the Soul and the things in it.

2. Not that which is between the parts of a Magnitude; since, here is an
indivisibility on both sides, whereas a Magnitude is not made up of
indivisibles. Nor, that which is between Matter and Form; since the Soul, which
is before, is able to preexist of it self; and whatever things come into it
supervene to a Thing already existing. Nor that which is between Substance and
Quantity; since Quantity is in a Thing, as somewhat of it; but things known are
in the Knower as other things which preexist out of him.

3. It Is, therefore, a special manner of divisibility which is not exactly
found in bodies: For, since a body essentially includes a power or possibility,
the unity of a body is by the privation of act on one side; whence follows the
unity of act in the Compound: But, a separated Soul is composed only of Act or
Quiddity, as white or hot, and Existence or Being, as when we say, it is:
whence, its unity to another actually existing must be, so, as an act can be
joined to an act, that is, by identification or a community of Being: and,
after this manner, are in a separated Soul whatever are in it.

4. Whence, first, this is evident, that a separated Soul knows it self: For,
since, to be in another, by way of knowing, is distinguished, in this, from the
other manners of inexisting; that, in others, what inexists is now no Thing in
it self, but that is in which it is; things known, by inexisting, lose not the
being what they were, though they acquire the being of that which they were
not: for, Heat, in that which is hot, is something of the Subject, nor has any
proper Being of its own; but, the hot Subject which is felt is, so, in him
that is sensible of it, that he knows it is hot; therefore, this Subject to be
actually hot is in the person that is sensible of it.

5. In like manner, the Soul exists substantially, because Being is made
something of the Soul. Again, this, that the Soul is, is in the Soul: for,
since the Soul is a certain Power of being all things that exist; and it self
also exists; it cannot but, by reason of its intimate conjunction, be present
to it self according to this its power, which is that it cannot but be
understood.

6. Again, since all those things are in the Soul which we have, above,
recounted; they must needs be, too, all known in the Soul: And, because, it is
clear, that, in a Syllogism, the Conclusion is nothing but the very Premises;
all is known by a separated Soul, which is deducible out of those things that
are in the Soul.

7. And, because, such is the connection of Truths, that, out of any one, all
others, may, by links, be drawn in; it comes to pass that a Soul, which knows
any whatever sensible Truth, knows entirely all cognoscible things; that is,
every Soul penetrates absolutely all things.

8. For, if any Infant never knew its own Being, it is not to be esteemed to
have arrived at all to the nature of Man: For, since, even in us, to be
sensible of or to know is by suffering from another; we know another thing is,
because we know we have suffered from it: but, if we know we have suffered from
it, we already know we are: the first knowledge, therefore, even in the body,
includes the knowledge of our selves.

9. And, since Passion is a participation of the Thing from which we suffer; it
must needs be that the Thing is in us, when we are sensible of it: and, because
it does not denominate according to its own proper appellation, but according
to the quality of that wherein it is, (for, we do not call an Eye white or
wooden, but a Seeer of white or wood); it must needs be that it is in it, as
another thing, and as of the nature of the sensitive Subject. Now, the reason
why in the body, too, the Soul does not know it self, but the Man, a part of
whom it is, is because it is he that is and not it, as has been said.

10. You Will object, this multiplicity of knowledge is framed or aggregated,
either of several knots and articles, as it were, so that whatever was
knowable in this world by new discourse, the same is, in some sort, a new
addition in the Soul; or of one simple knowledge which, eminently and in one
formality, in a manner, comprehends all these knowledges: but, neither of these
seems possible; not the first, because 'twould be a certain infinity, either in
act, which is impossible, or in power, and then 'twould be some continuity and
a principle of continual motion; nor the later, for such an universality seems
not to have any thing above it.

11. It Is answered, the manner of a separated Soul, in some sort, contains
both; though it is neither way formally: For, since, the parts in formal
composition are not actually; it is plain, that neither can there be, in this
composition of the knowledge of a separated Soul, formal knots and articles of
discourse, and consequently, no actual infinity: Again, since one part is not
beyond another, that is, extended, as in quantity, but all, by a certain
identificaon, grow together; there can be no continuity between, though the
parts be in power, that is, only in the possibility of the Subject.

12. Besides, that this power is not such that there should be any
correspondent natural cause to reduce it into act: but, it is only a certain
defectibility of act, upon which there is no active power but only a Logical or
a Creative one, which will never act.

13. It Is, therefore, a certain actual Metaphysicall composition, in which
there is a Logical possibility that any of these later known things may be
away, without hurting those that were known before; yet so, that it can never
come to pass it should be reduced into act: Wherefore, it is neither the
precise contemplation of one formality precontaining infinite; nor yet any
actual infinity, or natural divisibility.

14. But, it may be compared to the Metaphysicall composition of degrees; in
which we see Peter or Bucephalus so agree with infinite Things or Animals, that
it contracts thence no multiplicity, and yet we may always frame some new
apprehension of them in our Mind.

LESSON III.
Of the eminency of a separated Souls acts, above those it exercises in the
Body.
1. OUt of what has been said, it may be evidenced, that simple Intuition or
the inexistence of a thing in the Soul serv's, in stead of that composition
which is found, here, in our judgments.

2. It appears, also, that an actual universal intuition of Things supplses,
abundantly, any need of Discourse.

3. It Is plain, too, that, with that, there is no want of Memory or Remembrance;
there is no need of ordering or framing Idea's; and lastly, whatever the Soul
operates, here, by distinct acts and in time, there, together and with one only
labor, (not so much, is wrought out, as) exists.

4. Again, whereas, by reslexion, those things we have, in the body, thought
on, we farther know that we have thought on them; so that we can never know the
last reflection, though we had infinite: a separated Soul, by the simple
inexistence of it self in it self, necessarily see's all its knowledge without
any reflection.

5. Again, it is plain, that a separated Soul, in another manner, excells Place
and Time, then in the Body: since, in that, it only abstracts from them, but,
out of that, it comprehends them. For, this universal and actual knowledge
places all Place and all Time within the Soul; so that it can act in every
place at once and together (as far as concerns this respect), and provide for
all time; wherefore, it is, in a manner, a Maker and Governor of time and place.

6. It appears, moreover, that it is active, out of its very self: for, since it
comprehends all things, it needs not Sense, as in the body, to perceive that
infinity of Individuality; but it know's, even, to the utmost divisibility of
Magnitude, whatever circumstances are required to action: It knows, too, what
is good for it self; whence, it, naturally and of it self, has both power and
an actual will, which alone are required to act; for power depends on pure
Science, and whoever is impotent is ignorant what is to be done, by him, to
produce such an effect.

7. Hence, lastly, it follows, that the proportion of Pleasure and Grief, out
of the body, is infinite, to that in the body: For, since Pleasure is nothing
else, but a judgment concerning a good possessed, out of which follows an
activity to enjoy and retain it; and Grief is the same, concerning an ill,
which the Soul desires to repel: Whether we contemplate the Manner of the
Souls Being, to which its acts are proportioned; it is of a superior notion,
that is, of an infinite eminency.

8. Or, the Firmness and Evidence of its Knowledge; since all knowledge
receives strength from antecedents and consequents, it must of necessity attain
an infinite excellency: for every knowledge of a separated Soul has infinite
things connected with it, out of which it is confirmed.

9. Or, its Eminency above Time and Place; it is raised in a like degree: Or,
lastly, its force of Activity; it is beyond all comparison. Wherefore, to the
least, either Pleasure or Grief, of the Future life, even abstracting from the
Perpetuity, nothing can be comparable in this mortal state, or considerable in
respect of it.

10. Again, it is collected, out of what has been said, that all separated
Souls, or, at least, the most part are improved in this, that whatever false
judgments they have taken up in the whole course of their lives, they throw
them off by Separation: For, since, the excellency of a separated Soul is
immense above the powers of an imbody'd one, and the connection of all Truths
is, immediately upon the Separation, imprinted in it; it must needs be that a
true judgment of all things is impressed: since, therefore, Contradictories
cannot consist together in the Soul, the false judgments must be expelled; and
Souls, as to this, be universally improved.

11. Nor, is it less evident that, among Souls, there will be some difference,
by reason of the employments they have followed in their life time: For, since,
whilst we live in the body, one exercises his Understanding more about one
thing, another about another; and, as, the first act works a knowledge of the
thing, so, the following acts cannot but increase this knowledge and more
perfectly impresse it upon the Soul: It follows, since all these must needs
participate of the elevation caused by the Separation; the Soul must know more
perfectly, too, in Separation, its accustomed Objects and whatever depend on
them, in a due proportion, then other things; whence, it comes to pass, that
the Sciences here acquired, not only, remain in the future life, but, are in
the same proportion, there, as they were, here.

LESSON IV.
Of the Felicity and Infelicity of separated Souls, and their Immutability.
1. ANd, because the Affections in the Soul are nothing else but judgments,
upon which operation does or is apt to follow; and the stronger the judgment
is, so much the apter operation is to follow out of it, if it be a judgment
concerning good or ill: it comes to pass, that our Affections to our
Acquaintance and Friends, and the rest which we have cultivated in this life,
shall remain in the future: wherefore, we shall both better know and more
rejoice in our Parents and Friends, then in others, (other circumstances alike).

2. And, because the Affections shall remain, and that, in the proportion they
were in, during life: it follows, that those who have, in this life, delighted
in those things and Sciences, which the Soul is apt and fit to enjoy in
Separation, (for example, in natural Contemplation, or that of abstracted
Spirits, especially, if with great affection), will have a vast Pleasure in the
State of Separation, through the perfection of the knowledge they will enjoy.

3. But, those that have given themselves up wholly to corporeal pleasures
will be affected with vast Grief, through the impossibility of those pleasures,
there.

4. You Will object, that separated Souls will see the unworthiness of such
pleasures, and consequently, will correct in themselves such erroneous and
false judgments, nor will have such appetites as would torment them. It Is
answered, these griefs follow not out of false, but inordinate judgments; for,
it is true, that such like pleasures are a good of the body and of the Man
(whose appetite is the appetite of the Soul); again, supposing the deordination
of the Soul, it is true, that these pleasures are conformable and good, even to
it: but grief follows, hence, that the judgments or affections about these are
greater, then in proportion to those other desires, which ought to be preferred
before them.

5. Whence, it comes to pass, that the Soul's seeing these objects to be
unworthy and not regardable, in comparison of the better, increases its pains;
whilst it can neither cease to desire those it desires, through the excess of
these affections above the rest, and yet sees they are vile and unworthy.

6. Moreover, out of what has been said, it is deduced, that, in the state of
separation, no variety can happen to Souls, from a body, or the change of
bodies: For, since a change passes not from any body into the Soul, but through
the identification of the Soul with its own body; and this identification
ceases, by the state of Separation; it follows, that no action nor mutation can
be derived from any Body, to the Soul.

7. Nor, has the Soul, of it self, a principle of changing it self: not from
hence only, because an Indivisible cannot act upon it self: but also, because,
since a mutation of the Soul cannot be any other, then, either according to the
Understanding or Will; but the Understanding is supposed to know all things
together and for-ever, whence, by the course of nature, there is no room left
either for ignorance or new Science; and the Will is either not distinct from
the Understanding or, at least, is adequately governed, in the state of
separation: it follows, that naturally no mutation can happen to a separated
Soul from within, or caused by it self.

8. Nor, yet, from any other Spirit, without the interposition of the body:
For, since all Spirits are indivisible, their operations, too, will be such;
but an indivisible effect, supposing all the causes, of necessity exists in the
same instant: wherefore, if any thing be to be done between Spirits, it is all,
in one instant, so done and perfected, that, afterward, another action cannot
be begun: for if it begin, either the causes were, before, adequately put, or
not; if they were, the effect was put; if they were not, some of the causes is
changed that it may now begin to act, and not this, but the former, is the
first mutation, whereof, it is to be urged, whether the causes were put before?

9. If you say, the Spirit waits a certain time: First, time is motion and not
without a body: Then, since, among Spirits, nothing is changed by time, one
that acts according to reason could not expect a time by which nothing could be
changed. Certain, therefore, it is, that There can be no change, by the power
of nature in a separated Soul.

10. From the collection of all has been said concerning the Soul, it is
deducible, that Our life is a Mould or a March to our Eternity; and, according
as a Man behaves himself in this life, such an Eternity he shall, hereafter,
possess: since Good-deeds and Rewards, Crimes and Punishments are equally
eternal.

11. To conclude, He that has lived perfectly shall be perfect in the future
life, he that has lived better shall be better, he that has lived well shall be
well; he that has lived ill shall be ill, he that has lived worse shall be
worse, they that live worst they, too, shall be worst of all for ever: so true
it is that THINGS WILL NOT BE ILL GOVERNED, that is, their very Nature exacts
and forces them into a good Government.

LESSON V.
Of the nature of Existence, and its Unity with the Thing.
1. OUt of what has been said, it is clear, that all bodies and a separated Soul
it self, sometimes, are and, time was, they were not: whence, it is evident,
that the notion of Being or Existence is different from the notion of that
Thing whereof it is affirmed; since, it is denied, too, of it, and since, of all
Substances that are so different, it is said, according to the same notion, that
they are.

2. Besides, if, for Peter or a Man not to be, were the same, with Peter not to
be Peter or a Man not to be a Man; 'twere a proposition destructive of it self,
and, consequently, impossible; but now it is prudent and pertinent to Sciences.

3. Neither would there any one and the same thing be a Subject of
contradictory enunciations, or of affirmation and negation; and consequently,
the art of Logic and the foundation of all humane discourse would be taken
away: Nothing, therefore, is more evident then that Existence is distinguished,
mentally or by definition, from the Thing whereof it is spoken.

4. But yet, that it should differ, really, actually and, as it were,
numerically or in the Subject, from the Thing whose it is, it is equally
impossible: since, so, they would either of them be Things; B. 4. Les. 2.
the whole, n. 1.
therefore, would not be one and a Thing, as above, in the like case, is
deduced.

5. Notwithstanding, since a Thing really acquires and loses existence, (for,
to be made is to receive, to be dissolved is to lose existence); it is evident,
there is a real divisibility between a Thing and Existence.

6. But, this divisibility is less then any of those, hitherto, explicated:
both because, in separation, neither part of the Compound remains; as also,
because existence out of a Compound is not intelligible, since it is its
ultimate actuality or actuation. And, as it is commonly said, that Union cannot
be understood out of Composition, nor Action without a Term; so, neither can
Being without it actually be, and consequently, make those things be which are
by it.

7. Lastly, it is evident, that existence is the perfection of every and all
Things; since, the notion of all Substances (as it is explicated above) is
nothing else but to be such a capacity of existing: B. 4. Les. 2. n. 1.
whence, they have the notion of a power to that; or rather, the notion of an
as-it-were (a quasi-) possibility, since they have a virtue terminative of the
understanding (that we call to be a quiddity) which a possibility has not.

8. Notwithstanding, because this notion is nothing else, but a disposition and
preparation to existing; Existence is not only the perfection, but, if it were
perfect, it would be the whole perfection of any Thing whose it were.

9. It follows out of what has been said, that no Thing, of those that sometime
are sometime are not, is of it self; but, all require some other thing to make
them exist: For, since they are sometime and sometimes are not, it is evident,
the notion in them, which is presupposed to Being, and whereof it is said it is,
is, of it self, indifferent to Being and not-Being; and, which follows, this
notion being put, Being is not put or the Thing is not, in force of this
notion; and something else, therefore, is required, which being put, Being must
necessarily be applied to that notion: It Is from without, therefore, that these
Things exist, and not from their own intrinsecall nature and force.

10. And, because this notion has not its indifferency from otherwhere, but
from it self; as long as it has Being, so long an extrinsecall cause must make
it exist: for, since its necessity of existing is from something without, that
extrinsecall being taken away, it is no longer: And, because from an
indifferent nothing follows, its exexisting is not derived from any
intrinsecall; and, which follows, if, the extrinsecall being taken away, it
should exist, this, its existing, would be an effect without a cause.

LESSON VI.
Of the Existence, Simplicity, and Eternity of GOD.
1. AGain, it follows, there is some Thing, for whom it is impossible not to
exist: For, since an effect is because another is, it is clear, the same cannot
be the cause of it self: nay, if two should be put, as, adequately, cause and
effect to one another, the same would be put as cause of it self; for, if A be
because B is, and B again because A is, it is clear, that A is because A is,
that is, it is cause and effect to it self.

2. Wherefore, since those things that may not-Be need an extrinsecall cause to
Be; nor can all things have an extrinsecall cause, unless some two be,
reciprocally, causes to one another: it follows, there must be something which
needs not an extrinsecall cause; and consequently, must have, from its
intrinsecalls, that it cannot not-Be, and for which it must be impossible not
to Be.

3. Again, since an impossibility of notexisting imports and carries Existence
along with it; and this impossibility is intrinsecall and essential to the
Thing in which it is; it follows, too, that Existence is essential to such a
Thing.

4. And, since existence is equally universal with the notion of Being or
Thing, that is, every Thing has an existence correspondent to it, which it may
actually have; and Being is the most universal predicate of that wherein it is;
it follows, that Existence is the most universal predicate of the Thing to
which it is essential.

5. But, on the other side, because Existence being put, the Thing is complete,
as to its essence; nor can any essential predicate supervene to that which
exists, but all are presupposed to existence: it is clear, that, to the most
Genericall notion of a Thing to which Existence is essential, there can no
essential Difference supervene; and consequently, that, between Things to
which existence is essential, there can be no essential difference, that is,
but One only such Thing can exist.

6. There is, therefore, some Thing essentially existing of it self; from
which, being but One only, all other Things must, of necessity, receive their
birth and existence: Now, such a Thing we conceive to be that we call GOD:
There is therefore, a GOD.

7. The notion, therefore, of God's existing is, that his existence or essence
is diametrically and contradictorily opposed to not-Being: not, in the
Understanding, as a Chimaera is opposed to a non-Chimaera; nor, in possibility,
as a man to not-a-man; nor, in an irradiate act, as it were, and impressed like
a Seal in water, as our being and not-being, running and not-running: but, in
the thing it self, by the highest and ultimate actuality, substantially, by the
very essence of Being and exercising, by the very notion of existing, it self
substantially and concentrally within it self and about it self and upon it
self reflected, exercised, and exercising.

8. This is the solidity and stability of the First thing and GOD; whilst, the
stability of all the rest is no other, but to depend and Be from Him.

9. Out of what has been said, is deduced the most eminent Simplicity and
Indivisibility of God. For, since existence is essential to him; and there can
be nothing in a Thing, neither before nor after existence; it is clear, that God
is so Existence, that he is nothing besides, formally.

10. Therefore, He is not corporeal or composed of parts excluding one
another: for, a Body, since it has a Being in parts, of necessity includes
something besides Existence, divisible from that.

11. The same is for composition of Matter and Form, Subject and Accidents; for
these, since they include something divisible from Being, cannot be pure
existers.

12. Nor is there any room for composition of Genus and Differentia; since,
Difference supervenes to a Genus, at least, with a foundation in the Object for
so apprehending it. There Is, therefore, absolutely, no composition at all in God.

13. But, whatever composition there is in our Understanding concerning God,
proceeds out of the pure defect of our understanding, which cannot adequate the
Simplicity of the Divine Essence. GOD, therefore, is pure Being, pure
Actuality, the pure Brightness of eternal Light.

14. Again, hence it is deduced that God is Eternal, or, that there is not in
God past and future, but only present. For, since God cannot not-Be, by reason
of the essential exercise of his Being; and, has this essentially, that he
cannot not-have-been nor not-be-to-be, but possesses his essence indivisibly:
it comes to pass, that it is the same thing to God not to-not-have-been and not
not-to-be, as to Be what He is; but, there cannot be, either by imagination or
in time, an instant supposed, in which God possesses not his Essence; in every
moment, therefore, of time whether real or imaginary, He is his not
not-to-have-been and his not not-to-be hereafter, that is, his to-have-been and
his to-be.

15. In every instant of time, therefore, He is in every instant of time past
and future: not, that the time past and future are; but, that the indivisible
existence of God possesses all that length, which passing times make,
contracted* by the eminency of his Simplicity, in an indivisible act; and never
either loses or gains, because His repugnancy to not-Being is actual Being,
and Actually-to-Be is his Essence.

LESSON VII.
Of the Perfection, Immutability, and Science of God.
1. FArther, the Perfection and Plenitude of God is deduced, that is, whatever
goodness and perfection is possible, all this is eminently found in God. For,
since existence cannot receive existence from another, but is by its own force;
it is plain, that whatever existence is and whatever perfection is in existence
has its Being from that power* by which existence exists: the whole perfection,
therefore, of existence is in that existence which is of it self and by its own
notion; but this existence is, as has been said, the very essence of God;
wherefore, in God, there is all the perfection which is it in existence or can be
in it.

2. Since, therefore, whatever is in any Thing, besides Existence, is nothing
else but a disposition to existence, or a capacity of it, or a compart in which
and by which imperfect existence is to subsist: it is clear, too, that perfect
existence subsisting includes, more eminently and perfectly, all this
perfection, and consequently, that All the Plenitude of Being is in God.

3. Besides, since God or Being-of-it-self is but One alone; whatever is
besides must, of necessity, receive Beginning, Goodness or perfection from
Him: but, that the adequate cause contains all the perfection of its effect is,
of it self, evident: all that ample and inexhaustible plenitude, therefore, of
entire Being is in God and flows from Him.

4. Out of these foresaid Attributes of God, his Immutability is demonstrated:
For, from this Plenitude of Perfection, He is Immutable; because he can neither
acquire nor lose any thing.

5. From his Simplicity, again, he is Immutable; because all mutation includes*
a divisibility of that which is changed, from that according to which it is
changed.

6. And lastly, from His Eternity, he is Immutable; because what is changed has
sometime and sometime has-not the same thing; but, what God has he has
indivisibly for ever, and, in that very respect, he cannot not-have it.

7. Out of the premises, too, it is collected, that God knows and understands
both Himself and all other things, by his one only essential act of Being.
For, since God is Existence it self and the Plenitude of Being, nothing can
belong to existence which is not primarily in Him: since, therefore, to know,
is to have the thing known, after a certain proper manner of existing, in one's
self; God cannot not-be in Himself, after this manner of existing, yt is,
not-be-known by Himself.

8. Again, since all other things are in God; but, to inexist as another thing,
is a perfecter manner of inexisting then simply to inexist; it appears, that
all other things in God inexist after this manner, too, that is, are known.

9. Nor, does this any thing prejudice the divine Simplicity: For, since those
things that are known inexist as another thing, the bounds and divisions of the
Creatures in God are as other things, and produce not their effect, viz. of
distinguishing, in Him; but, their being in Him has nothing whereby one should
be opposed to another; as appears even in us, in whom two Contraries inexist
together, that the one may be known by the other.

10. It appears, too, that God knows other things, in his own Essence: which,
since it may doubly be understood; one way, that His essence should be the
Principle of the knowledge of other things; and another way, that the knowledge
of the Creatures should be, as it were, a part of the knowledge of His essence:
it is to be taken this second way.

11. For, since the Essence of God is not from another, but by its own formal
power of existing; it is plain, its manner of existing is opposite to the being
from another: there ought not, therefore, to be put any Vertuall causality,
whereby one should be from another in God; because, whatever is in Him is
because it is, or by virtue of self-being.

12. You Will say, the Creatures are something distinct and another thing from
God; wherefore, the knowledge of them, too, is distinct from the knowledge of
God. It Is answered, by denying the consequence: for, some distinct things are
of that condition, that the knowledge of one is part of the knowledge of
another; and so it happens in the present case.

13. For, since God cannot know his Essence, unless he know his Science and
the, as it were-vertuall parts of his Essence; and, since the Creatures flow
immediately from God, without any other help; it comes to pass, that God is a
Cause actually causing by His essence: it is plain, therefore, that part of the
knowledge of the essence of God is, to know that He actually causes such
Creatures, which includes, that such Creatures exist: part, therefore, of the
knowledge of the divine Essence is to know the Creatures exist, in all their
differences and circumstances.

14. Again, the universal answer is evident to all those questions, Whether
God knows Future contingents? the secrets of Hearts? Infinite things? Materia
prima? Negations? Mental or imaginary things? etc.

15. For, it is evident, as far as these are apt to exist and to be known, so
far they proceed from God; and the knowledge of them is part of the knowledge
of God: but if, on any side, they have no entity nor cognoscibility, so far
they are not known by God: But, to enquire, of each of them, what
cognoscibility they may have, belongs to their proper places, not to this of
the Science of God.

LESSON VIII.
Of the Divine Volition and Liberty.
1. NOr is it less evident, out of what has been said, that, since God,
operating by Existence, of necessity applies himself to the particularities of
the Creatures, (since Particulars only can exist); and more things cannot be in
one but by Science; that, I say, He makes the Creatures by his Science:
wherefore, since Science, when it is so perfect as to be able to proceed into
action, is called Will; it is clear, that there is a Will in God.

2. And, since the Science of God is every way perfect, it appears, by the same
evidence, that there is all the perfection of Will in God, or, all Moral
Virtues, as far as they follow out of pure perfection. He is, therefore,
Gracious, Just, Merciful, Patient, and whatever other use to be pronounced of
Him; out of the eminent perfection of his Essence, as it is called Science.

3. And, since Liberty is among the Perfections of Will, by which the Will or
the Person that knows chooses one out of many, according to the Principles of
his proper nature; and, the Science of God is larger and more ample then His
Operation; nor is there any thing, out of himself, by which he can be impelled
to operate this more then that; it is clear, that God, freely and according to
his innate inclination, chooses and operates this rather then that.

4. You Will object, since God is a pure Act, there cannot be put in God a
natural inclination, according to which election may be made; because it would
have the notion of a Principle in respect of the act of election: there cannot,
therefore, be put Liberty in God. It Is answered, there cannot be put, in God,
election in fieri, or, to-be-made, but only in facto esse, or, already made,
that is, such a Will as is election already in act; and to this there is not
required the notion of cause and effect.

5. Moreover, natural inclination, as it is put in God, is not any active
principle, but a certain common and abstracted notion by which we know God;
and, to which, that more particular notion is conformable, according to which
we attribute the name of election to God: as, for example, to this Volition, by
which God will's that which is best, the volition of the World's Creation is
conformable, by which is chosen the best in particular.

6. You Will object, again, since God essentially has all Virtues, He always
does, of necessity, that which is best; and would do against his own Essence,
should he do any thing otherwise then he does: It Is, therefore, determined to
him essentially, to do every thing as he does: but, that which proceeds out of
Nature and Essence is not free: God, therefore, does nothing freely.

7. It Is answered, Even in us, after we see any thing to be better, it is
against Nature to do the contrary: neither are we free, because we can decede
from nature; for, so, Liberty would not be a perfection but an imperfection,
since all perfection is according to nature: but, Liberty consists in this,
That, among many, which, at the beginning, seem indifferent, we can find which
is more according to nature; and embrace that, because it is conformable to
Naure.

8. Therefore, in God, too, Liberty is, so, to be put, that it be understood He
has arrived, by his Science and understanding, to act what is conformable to
his nature: and though, after He Is supposed to have arrived to that, it is
against His essence to do another thing or not to do this; yet, His Liberty
is not, thence, diminisht: as, there is not less liberty in a constant Man,
that changes not his judgment once established, then in a Fool, that, at every
little appearance of reason, alters his opinion, but a greater; for, a constant
Man, therefore, changes not, because he always exercises his wisely-made
choice, that is, the better, whereas a light person exercises now the worse,
now the better.

9. Again, for the most part, those things that are-not-chosen are not against
the nature of the chooser, in themselves, but from some Accident or complex of
circumstances; whence, the terms precisely considered, the chooser may do them
according to nature, but, because of some circumstance, he cannot: And, even
thus, Liberty may be attributed to God; for, to do some particular thing,
which he does not, is not against the nature of God precisely compared to this
Thing; but, when the other circumstances are collected, it appears another
thing is better, and then it is against the nature of God to do this: yet, this
prejudices not His Liberty; which consists in this, that He rejects that which,
in it self, is according to His nature, because, by accident, it is against it;
which we experience in our selves to be the track and path of Liberty.

10. You Will say, that God is determined by the very Being of his Essence; and,
so in Him can be understood no indifferency to the utmost circumstance. It Is
answered, this hinders not but that we are necessitated to conceive That
perfectly-determin'd Essence, by diverse abstractive notions; in one of which
this determination is not, so precisely and by design, expressed as in another;
and so, to us, the more particular of them becomes the determination of the
more common; and of both is compounded the notion of liberty exercised in God.

11. You Will object, thirdly, If God were free, he could not-doe what he does;
therefore, 'twere possible for him not to have the Volition and Science which
He has; it is possible, therefore, there should notbe the same God. It Is
answered, by granting God can make that which He does not; but, by denying the
consequence, that He could have another volition then he has: for, when we say,
God can make another thing then He does, we compound the Power of God or His
fecundity with the Object whereof we speak; but, when we speak of his Volition,
we speak of his Understanding completed to action, and This proceeds to action
upon the consideration of all accidents, out of which, as it is said, it happens
that this object is not made, because it is not-best and against Nature.

12. It Is, therefore, to be denied that there can be in God another act of
volition, or, that his Will is indifferent to this and another act; though his
effective power, taken abstractedly, is indifferent to more, because it
respects the only notion of Being, or, Thing, in them: And thus, it is evident,
how there is not, thence, inferred any possible mutability in God.

13. You Will say, His Will, abstractedly taken, is indifferent, too, to more
acts. It Is answered, we speak not of the Will as it means the faculty, to be
abstracted in God; but of the Will as it signifies the act or Volition; and
that always imports that the last determination is made, though it expresses
not what it is: whence, the notion of it is different from his Omnipotency,
which, because it is referred to things without, does not of necessity imply the
second act.

LESSON IX.
Of the Divine Names, how they are improperly spoken of God.
1. OUt of what has been said, hitherto, of God, we find farther, that the
Names which we attribute to God are all imperfect, and, not one of them all has
any notion whose formal object is in God. For, since God is a most Simple
Entity, precontaining in one most simple formality, the whole plenitude of
Being, that is, the objects of all our notions and the significations of all
our Names:

2. And is, too, Existence subsisting; but we have but one only name and notion
of existence, which signifies nothing besides: It Is clear, that our names do
infinitely come short of the most simple essence of God; both in their
genericall notion, because God is in none of our Predicaments; in their
integrity, because no name of ours represents all that is in God; and in their
form, because none of our apprehensions have a formal likeness in God.
Whatever, therefore, we pronounce of God, must needs be applied to Him
improperly and by an accommodation of the name.

3. Whence, again, it is clear, that all the names, which are spoken
promiscuously of Created things and God, are spoken analogically; and their
primary signification is that in which they are spoken of the Creatures: For,
it is evident, that men first imposed it on created things, and of them they
have, in some manner, perfect notions; and consequently, names attributed
according to those notions are, in some sort, proper: but, they are infinitely
far from explicating the Divinity: whence, it cannot be doubted, but they are
more properly pronounced of the Creatures then of God.

4. You Will object, Perfections simply-simple are formally in God, and more
originally in Him then in the Creatures: names, therefore, signifying these,
are more originally spoken of God then of the Creatures. It Is answered, that,
it is evident, all names whatever are translated from the Creatures to God;
whence, there can be no doubt which signification is the former: but besides,
it is false that there are Perfections simply-simple (as Divines term them) in
created things, which can be signified by humane names; but those things which
are simply, that is, for-themselves-purely, desirable by us, we call
simply-simple perfections, and, through ignorance, think they are simply
desirable by every Thing.

5. But, there is none of these formally in God, as it is proved; and, if any
were, formally, then the same name would signify God and a Creature, in the
same signification, and would be univocall. Nor imports it, that these
perfections descend from God: for so do all others, which yet they know are
metaphorically transferred.

6. This notwithstanding, the names which are spoken of God are truly spoken,
and it may be argued from one to another in Him: For, since he that speaks
knows he understands not what that is which he signifies by this name; but
knows it is such as has effects, like those proceed from that perfection, which
is called by this name in Creatures: it is clear, that this name truly, both
signifies what is in God, because the speaker means to signify this; and, in
some sort, makes known God to us, since it manifests God to be something,
whence such like effects proceed, as from a just, a merciful etc. Man.

7. And, since such effects contain others in them, or produce them out of
themselves, or they accompany them: it is clear again, from the affirmation of
the said names, we may proceed to the affirming others; which may signify,
that the consequent effects, too, have their root in God, or, something
conformable to their root in Men.

8. You Will object, at least, There are three kinds of names, which are
pronounced properly of God: Proper names, which agree not to any other, as, to
be GOD, Omnipotent, Omniscient, and the like, which suit not with any Creature,
and consequently, are, of necessity, attributed properly to God: next,
Relatives, as, to be a Creator, Lord, Judge, etc. which, being they speak
only an extrinsecall denomination from their effect, it cannot be doubted but
they are properly pronounced, since, doubtless, their effects are from Him:
lastly, Negative names, which, since they only deny something of God, cannot be
counted improper; such are, to be incorporeall, immateriall, infinite, immense,
etc.

9. It Is answered, Even these names, too, are improperly spoken of God. For,
first, those which seem to be Properly spoken of God include something common
to be the basis of what is superadded, which makes a Proper name; since,
therefore, that common is improperly spoken, that proper, too, which includes
that common, is improperly spoken: as, when God is called Omniscient, the
Searcher of Hearts, etc. if Science be improperly spoken, then Omniscient, if a
Searcher, Powerful, etc. then Omnipotent and Searcher of hearts are spoken
improperly; and the same is of the notion, GOD, whether we take it for a
comprehension of all, or whatever else.

10. Again, it is false that Relative names speak nothing intrinsecall, but only
an extrinsecall denomination: for, they signify a proportion and a community of
the nature of things, which have either an unity or coordination in acting and
suffering, or a natural subjection; which, if they are not in the things, (as,
in God, in respect of his Creatures, they cannot be), at least, they are in the
Soul, since they are expressed in words; and consequently, even such Names,
too, are improperly pronounced.

11. Lastly, Negative names, when they are simple, signify some positive
disposition; as, to be blind or lame express a vicious and defective
disposition of the Legs or Eyes: and so likewise, to be incorporeall,
immateriall, infinite etc. in God, explicate a difference of Substance distinct
from corporeity and limitednesse, that is, a difference under the same genus;
whence, they are improperly spoken of God.

12. But, if a purely-negative proposition were pronounced of God, it would not
be improper: Whence, that Science which inquires into the Impropriety of the
names which are spoken of God, and denies all things of Him, is the most
sublime and proper of all.

LESSON X.
Of the degrees of impropriety in the Divine Names.
1. OUt of what has been said, it is easily determined which names are, more or
less improperly, pronounced of God. For, there being three degrees of them,
The first, of those which signify things the most excellent in and simply
desirable by men; such as are those we call the Virtues, both Moral and
Intellectual: The second degree, of those Goods of the same persons, but
participated in others which include imperfection; such as are the goods of
Animals or the other Things below Man: lastly, The third, of those which
signify directly and formally imperfection:

2. N. 5, 6, etc.
It Is clear, these last are most shamefully attributed to God, and only by
ignorance: but, the middle ones, by translation, that a name should be, as it
were, first by a common Metaphor, used tosignify some Virtue and, then again
that borrowed signification, should be transferred to God; for example, when we
call a Man a Lamb for being Meek, a Lion for courageous, we pretend, too, to
call God a Lamb and a Lion, by the same right as we, before, called Him meek or
courageous.

3. You Will ask, since both the names of courageous and a Lion are improperly
spoken of God, why this should be esteemed spoken symbolically and
metaphorically, and that properly? It Is answered, that, in the Creatures we see
both the terms, and, therefore, we easily discern when a name is spoken
metaphorically and not properly; for we see a Lion to be another thing then
Courage: but, when names are transferred to God, one of the extremes is obscure
to us, and consequently, the translation, too.

4. Moreover, in a Lamb, a Lion, etc. besides meekness and courage, there are
many other things, which it is not the intention of the speaker to transfer:
but, in meekness and fortitude, there is nothing but their own particular
notions; wherefore, it seems that, of necessity, either they must be in God to
whom they are applied, or else the name cannot be at all pronounced of him:
and, therefore, many think these are formally in the Divinity; though they
mistake.

5. Out of what has been said, it is deduced, that some things cannot be
attributed to God, which yet are commonly spoken of Him. First, a Distinction,
whether formal or vertuall, between his Predicates: for, they that affirm
these things observe not that Distinction is a name of negation and
imperfection; whence, for these to be in Him, either vertually or eminently, is
as much as that He can be nothing or defect.

6. Worse, yet, is the notion of Cause and Effect, in respect of Himself,
attributed to God; for example, that his Attributes flow vertually from his
Essence, that He understands other things because He understands himself, that
He wills the means because He wills the end, and the like: for, it is clear,
that the notion of an effect, likewise, speaks imperfection; whence, it is no
eminency to precontain it.

7. Like this it is, to put Instants either of nature or Intellectual, in one
of which some thing should be and another thing not-be in God, till the next
instant: for, by this, there is put a posteriority in God, which is
imperfection.

8. But, foulest of all, God is put to suppose Creatures, or to depend on them,
whether possible or actual; as, when it is said, the Intuitive Vision of God
supposes the futurition of Creatures; that God knows not a free act but in its
existence; that a conditionate futurition is presupposed, before the
disposition of the divine Providence; and such like: which, since they make the
Divine essence, really, both posteriour to and depending upon Creatures, are
intolerable and absurd.

9. The Imperfections, too, either of the Things God has made or of our
Understanding, they unwarily cast upon God: as, when God wills the Means should
be for the End, they weakly suspect that He wills the Means because He wills
the End; when any one act of God is conceived by us, we not conceiving another,
they believe that there is something in God, too, whence one notion may be,
though another be supposed not-to-be.

10. It appears, out of what has hitherto been said, that, of all the names
attributed to God, the name of BEING sounds least imperfection: for, both it
stands in the highest degree of Actuality, whereas the rest speak Act only; and
it is most Universal, whence it has this, both to contain all things and not to
be bound to differences, and therefore, to include the plenitude of perfection:
and lastly, Being or Existence is perfecter then Essence, which is nothing but
a capacity to that; but, all other things are in the order of Essences and more
imperfect.

LESSON XI.
Of the Existence, Nature, and Science of INTELLIGENCES.
1. OUt of the premises, it is easily collected, that there is some Substance,
by its nature and originally, incorporeall: For, since God alone is Being of
himself, and whatever is produced participates existence from Him, and
Existence, among those things which integrate a Thing, is the least unlike God,
and is the most perfect and supreme; it appears, that all other things which
are in a Thing are caused by God, by the means of Existence, and that alone
immediately flows from God; and, by consequence, nothing is immediately made by
God, which is not in the Creature in virtue of Existence.

2. Again, it is clear, that, supposing whatever Bodies to exist, they, because
they are many, must be in a determinate place: and because, the same things
being put and none changed, there always remains the same; all Bodies, in
virtue of Existence alone, if nothing be changed in them, will always remain
in the same place; and consequently, in virtue of God alone and Bodies, there
will not any Motion follow.

3. Since, therefore, it appears in bodies, that there is motion; it is evident,
there is some incorporeall Creature: which, because it is required to give the
first motion to Bodies, cannot be a separated Soul, whose birth presupposes the
motion of Bodies.

4. It Is plain, again, that, since this Creature receiv's its Being from God,
of it self it may not-be; and consequently, includes in it self a divisibility
of Existence from its Essence.

5. B. 4. Les. 3. N. 6.
Again, out of what has been said concerning a Body, it is evident, that it is
not compounded of Matter and Form; and a composition of Existence with any
thing above it is impossible, since Existence is the most formal Form of a
Thing, and consequently, there can be nothing more formal or superior to it
in the Thing whose it is.

6. Counting, therefore, those things which integrate a Thing or Being, there
are three kinds of Things: GOD, filling the highest degree of Existence;
Bodies, by their latitude immensly expanding the infinity of Matter; and This
middle kind of Act, neither essentially actualiz'd, nor flowing into matter,
possessing and filling a kind of middle order of subsisting.

7. It Is, therefore, a pure Act, because it is not mingled with a substantial
power or possibility: it is not the purest, because it is compounded with
Existence, which is a Substantial composition and, as is manifest, common to
all but that One Thing of-it-self.

8. Again, it is evident, that an incorporeall Creature is Intellective; and,
so, actually, Understanding: for, since the necessity of its existence is
collected from the motion of Bodies, it is evident, it has some power to alter
Bodies, that their motion may follow; wherefore, since action proceeds from an
Agent as it actually is, that motion of Bodies must, of necessity, be actually
in this Creature, and consequently, the Bodies changed.

9. Since, therefore, there is no Matter in this Creature, nor, consequently, any
determination of matter, as its motion or quality; it comes to pass, that
Bodies are in It as existing in themselves, that is, as another thing: since,
therefore, to be known is, to be, as another thing, in another, this our
Creature is Cognoscitive; and since, to be known by the notion of Being, or as
existing, is to be understood; and movable things are known to exist; the
Creature we are in search of is an INTELLIGENCE.

10. It follows, too, that an Intelligence, in its own essence known, knows God
and all other things that exist: For, since an Intelligence has whereto an
existing thing may be conjoined, retaining the property of its being another;
and, its own Essence existing is intimately conjoined to this power; it is
clear, that It primarily and formally so inexists.

11. And, since, knowing that its own Essence exists, it must needs see that It
exists accidentally; it sees evidently, that It has a Cause of existing, and
that such an One as we have been in search of above: It sees, Les. 6, 7, etc.
therefore, in its own Essence, that God is, and is such as we have been
enquiring after, and far perfecter then we can decypher.

12. It sees, therefore, that nature actually emanes and flows out from Him;
and, because it sees what is the End of nature, viz. that so many kinds and
subdivisions of Animals should shoot-out and ripen into Spirits of eternal
Being; It sees what is necessary for this; and consequently, the whole Plot of
the World, and wherein It self will be useful for it.

LESSON XII.
Of the comparison of Intelligences to Souls and Bodies.
1. It Is clear, too, that an Intelligence has a real divisibility of Essence
from knowledge: for, since, it is of the notion of the knowledge of its Essence,
that it exists, and its existing is divisible from Its essence; much more the
knowing its existence, which is posteriour to and supposes its existence;

2. Since, too, its Essen^ce is limited to a certain degree of existence
whereof it is capable; it is clear, the plenitude of Being is not essential to
It: Since, therefore, by Its knowledge, It has the plenitude of Being,
knowledge is not essential to It: There is, therefore, a non-repugnancy in Its
essence to the not-having such knowledge; and consequently, a real
divisibility of its Essence against its knowledge.

3. You Will say, that power is in vain which is never reduced to act; but, this
divisibility is not reduced to act; therefore, it is in vain, and there is none.
It Is answered, it is not a power, but a non-repugnancy, which was in act whilst
the Intelligence existed not.

4. Out of what has been said, we are arrived to the comparison of an
Intelligence to a separated Soul: for, as they agree, in that they are both
immateriall Things, existing by their own existence; so, they disagree, in that
an Intelligence is adequate to its existence, but a separated Soul exists by an
existence which is, by nature, common to the Body, and consequently, it is not
adequate to its existence.

5. Again, though both understand their own Essence and, by that, other things;
yet it is with this difference, that an Intelligence has this knowledge of it
self from its manner of existing, but, a separated Soul, Les. 2. N. 8.
from its Body: for, when, as it is above said, something strikes a man, it
makes him know that is, because it strikes him; but, his being struck includes
that he is; therefore, in all knowledge, a man must needs know that himself is:
The Soul, therefore, has, in its first knowledge, the notice of its own
existence and, from the body, receiv's the knowledge of its Being; which
unless it carried along with it, it could not reflect upon it self whilst it is
separated, because it is a power or possibility; for a power is indifferent to
an act and non-act, and has neither but by force of an Agent distinct from it.

6. This, therefore, is the universal difference of separated Souls from
Intelligences, and proper to them as they are incomplete Spirits: that a Soul,
out of the pure notion of its identity with its Intellect, does not inform its
Understanding; for, otherwise, it would not be a power: but an Intelligence has
this, out of the very genericall manner of its nature, by the force of identity
To be present to its intellective virtue.

7. Hence, again, it follows, that a Soul, in virtue of those things which are
in it by the communion of the body, is carried to all other things: but, an
Intelligence, in virtue of its own Essence existing.

8. A Soul, therefore, even in separation, uses these common notions it finds,
impressed in it; and consequently, too, by other such like, attains to the
plenitude of Being: but an Intelligence, by the pure degrees of Things, at
sight of one Thing, transcends to another, nor needs incomplete notions.

9. Lastly, a Soul, because it is naturally the compart of a certain Body, is
determined to that, nor can act upon another but by means of the motion and
affection of its own Body: and, it affects its proper body by identification;
because the impression or alteration of one is, of necessity, the alteration of
the other, according to its manner, by reason of their identity.

10. But, an Intelligence is not determined to any Body, but indifferent, and
is determined only by choice to this rather then that; and changes that,
because, being of it self in act and exercise, the exercise, according as the
corporeal nature is subject to It, passes into the Body, by reason the
Intelligence is in such a determination.

11. Again, since an Intelligence and a Body are called, univocally, Things,
and the notion of existence is found the same in both; and all existence which
is a compart with essence is, of necessity, proportioned to a part of Being,
and limited: but, between two limited Things under the same univocall notion,
there must needs be a proportion: it is evident, that Bodies are not infinitely
inferior to Intelligences, in the notion of Substance; and consequently, that
the action, too, of an Intelligence upon a Body is not but in proportion.

12. And indeed, if the operation of an Intelligence, viz. motion, were
supposed unlimited in respect of a Body: it would not be connaturall for an
Intelligence to move a Body, but to change it instantly, nor for a Body to be
moved by It: That nature, therefore, might grow up by continued degrees, there
would need a kind of Thing of a middle nature, between Bodies and separated
Souls, on one side, as the Sum and fruit of Bodies; and an Intelligence on
the other; to which middle Creature it should be connaturall to move Bodies.

13. Be it, therefore, certain that an Intelligence's power of moving is
limited; but yet, raised, too, above the motive power of a Soul: and
immediately it is deduced, that, because there are many primarily-mov'd Bodies
and, as it were, Suns; nor is it likely that one Intelligence can move them
all; many Intelligences, too, viz. a several, to the several Suns, must be
assigned.

LESSON XIII.
Of the Distinction, Subordination, and Number of Intelligences.
ANd, because To be another thing, as another, is the notion of Knowledge, and,
out of that, follows the comparative power, or, that many may inexist together;
it appears, that the perfection of Understanding is argued from hence, that
more may be together in one Understander then in another: but, since, in
Intelligences, as also in a separated Soul, all things inexist together; this
togethernesse must not be referred to the time but to the way of Knowledge,
that they should be accounted together which are contained under one Step or
divisibility.

2. Intelligences, therefore, will be essentially distinguished, in that One
comprehends the Universe, by fewer links and knots, as it were, then another:
so that, the Supreme, by one divisibility, knows whatever is and what,
according to the order of nature, can follow out of these; and this capacity
follows out of the amplitude and eminency of its Substance: the lowest is that
which has, for the several Substances, several divisibilities.

3. It Is manifest, out of what has been said, that there is a perfect
Subordination amongst the Intelligences: for, the Superiors comprehend the
adequate perfection of the Inferiors, and not in part only, as it is in Bodies.

4. Moreover, a Superior is active upon a greater body, or more active upon an
equal body, then an Inferior: whence, if each be supposed willing to act
diversely upon the same body, the Superior will prevail, and the Inferior will
not be able to act.

5. It appears, notwithstanding, that this Subordination extends not, to this,
that a Superior Intelligence can act upon an Inferior, or contrariwise: for,
since there is not in an Intelligence any notion of power or possibility,
consequently, neither is there any mutability; but, as Its existence once
infused, by reason of the connection with its Form which has not an
indifference to more, remains unchangeable as long as its Form; so also, the
knowledges of an Intelligence cannot, like Accidents, be present and absent,
but, once infused by the power of the Giver, they are subject to no mutation
but from Him. Since, therefore, there is no other divisibility of an
Intelligence, but either in Its being or its knowing; it is evident, It can
receive no change from another Intelligence.

6. It Is apparent, too, that, because an Intelligence embraces whole nature, by
necessary deduction; It has, of necessity, in its very birth, all the good
which it is ordained to have: since, the good of every thing is that which is
according to its nature, and, the whole possible good which can belong to a
Creature, whose entire nature is to be intellectual, is to understand: whence,
since an Intelligence understands all things by force of its nativity; by the
same gift that gives It being, it arrives to the possession of all connaturall
good.

7. Every Intelligence, therefore, is blessed, in respect of the good it
possesses; nor can it lose this Beatitude, more then Its essence with which
it is conjoined.

8. Lastly, it is evident, there are three things chiefly to be considered in
Intelligences, Understanding, Will, and Action: among which, Action is the
meanest, as being about inferior things; and though, by it, they rule over
Bodies as Instruments, yet those things must needs be nobler by which
themselves are perfected, which things belong to the Understanding.

9. And, the Will differs no otherwise from the Understanding, then the
imperfect Understanding from the perfect: for, when the things that are
understood are appropriated to the nature of the understander, and are made
something of it, then the Understanding begins to be Will. It Is evident,
therefore, that the Will is of those intelligible things, the understanding
whereof most of all perfects the understander.

10. Wherefore, the greatest nobility of Intelligences is, to excel according
to Will; the middle, according to Understanding; the lowest, according to
Action: though, it is clear, that these notions are so correspondent to one
another in Intelligences, that, as much as the Will of one excells that of
another, so much, too, must both its Understanding and power of Acting.

11. Now, that the multitude of Intelligences is but finite, it is evident from
hence, because all Multitude (since it rises and is increased from One by
Unities, and Unity cannot be a step from a finite to an infinity) of necessity,
is finite.

12. But, since they are not made for the good of another thing, as their End;
nor have any thing common, whereby they should naturally respect one another;
nor any order of cause and effect; and there is no term, no limits of
Understanding: limitation, among them, cannot depend on any other, then the
occult proportion of their Natures, by which they integrate the complete order
of being without matter.

LESSON XIV.
Of the Action of GOD, Intelligences, and Bodies, severally.
1. FRom the knowledge of the Agents, by the same steps we are led to the
knowledge of their Actions. First, therefore, it is evident, out of what has
been said, that, since God alone exists of himself and essentially, something
flows immediately from Him; and consequently* is created, and that God creates:
for, it is evident, what is made is made out of no presupposed matter; since God
himself is mutable, and no Thing, besides, preexists.

2. It Is plain, too, this Action is in an instant: for, were it in Time, since,
in the intermediate Time, there is no Substance wherein it should be subjected,
it would neither subsist nor be in another: wherefore, of necessity, some
Substance flows instantaneously from God.

3. It Is manifest, therefore, that both the Intelligences and the first Bodies
proceed from God, by such Action.

4. Nor must it be asked, by what extrinsecall power they receive birth from
God: for, since God is essentially Being it self, it is plain, that whatever is
required, intrinsecally, for God to be a cause actually causing, is essentially
found in God; and, since nothing besides himself exists, that which is in Him
is of such virtue that the effect follows; wherefore, it is a necessary
consequence, because the subsistent Being is Being it self, Creatures are, or,
if Being be, the Creature is; as if you should say, if the Sun be not capable
of its own light, the things about it are illuminated, or, if the Fountain
overflows, the neighborhood is watered.

5. Less. 13. n. 5.
Again, since an Intelligence can neither act upon God, because He is
immutable, nor upon another Intelligence, nor upon a separated Soul, which, as
to that, is of the same nature with an Intelligence; its action is wholly about
Bodies: And, Action about a Body, if it be compounded of more, is known by the
simples whereof it is compounded; now, that there are only three simple Actions
has been evidenced, (by showing how all Actions are performed) in our Physics,
viz. local Motion, Condensation, and Rarefaction.

6. And, for Local Motion, it is manifest that it is, really, nothing but the
division of a Magnitude: and the division of a Magnitude consists both of the
conjunction of the dividing body to the divided, and its separation from the
body with which 'twas formerly one: to conjunction there is nothing else
required, but that no Quantity keep off the Place from what is placed in it, B.
2. Les. 2. N. 7.
since Magnitudes between which no other interposes, even by that, are one
together; now, that there should not be another between them is a certain
negative notion and, by consequence, is not made by an Agent on set purpose,
but follows out of the Action of a Body intending another thing, viz. from a
body impelling.

7. But, the body impelling either it self changes place, without any other
mutation, and then, it self, too, is impelled; or else, from some other
mutation only it receiv's the being impelled, or, without impulse, to impell:
Since, therefore, besides division, there are but two simple mutations,
Rarefaction and Condensation, and condensation is both a negative action, as
being the lessening of Quantity, nor makes it the body aspire to another
place; it is plain, there is no simple, properly called, action in bodies, but
Rarefaction.

8. Since, therefore, it is clear, that the Action of an Intelligence is a
simple and properly an Action, as, that which begins and causes the action of
all other bodies; it comes to pass, that the proper Action of an Intelligence
upon Bodies is Rarefaction: And, since there is no other action, properly, upon a
body, nor has an Intelligence any action upon any other thing but a body; it
follows, that Rarefaction alone is the action of an Intelligence.

9. You Will ask, wherein consists this action of an Intelligence upon a body? or,
what consequence is this, An Angel wills, therefore a Body is rarefy'd? It Is
answered, out of what has been said, it is clear, that an Intelligence, by love
or desire, ingrafts the thing to be done into Its own Essence and existence, in
a particular manner, as if it were something of It self: whence, it is plain,
that the Intelligence, by the act of its own being stands bent to the Body upon
which it is to act, according to all the circumstances necessary, out of its own
knowledge to the Effect.

10. On the other side, it is plain, both that the Body is susceptible of the
desired effect, and that the effect follows out of, or rather, is but the
eminency and excess of its own act, or Form, that is, Quantity, upon matter,
nay, of its commonest act or corporeity; as also, that the Body is, in some
sort, continued to the Intelligence, by its Form or Substantial act.

11. And, though the act of the Intelligence is of another kind, yet, because
the notion of existence, to which both dispose, is the same; the act of the
Body must needs, from the assistance of the Intelligence, grow, as it were, and
be cheered; and consequently, more overmaster its possibility; and, which
follows, the Substance be made rarer, either to the transmutation of the
Substantial Form, or within the same nature.

12. We answer, again, It Is evident, that, precisely out of the notion of
Understanding, there is a connection between the understander and that which is
understood: In such an one as receiv's his Science from the Objects, the Object
is the cause of Understanding; in one whose Understanding is His being, the
being of the thing understood is from the understanding; lastly, in one whose
Understanding is neither his being, nor from the object, but concreated and
natural to him, the changes in that which is understood (if it admit of any
without the change of existence) may be from him.

13. Next, from hence is understood the operation of a Body, wherein that
consists, viz. in nothing else but in the formal power of existing what it is.
For, let there be three bodies, A, B, C. following one another between the
parallel sides of three places, or of one place equal to all the three; and
let an Intelligence rarify A: since that cannot increase, unless either B be
diminish't or driven on, so long as it is easier for B to be condensed then to
drive on C, so long B will be condensed; when it is arrived to the term of
condensation, by little and little it encroaches into the place of C, and
forces C to enter into the place of another; till it is come into so ample or
condensable a field, that the rarefaction of A operates nothing else but
condensing the farthest body, and then the motion ceases.

14. The operation, therefore, of A is, to be greater, whence follows A 's
being united, according to some part of it, to the place of B: Again, the
operation of B is, either to be made less and so only to quit its place, or
else, keeping it self in its Quantity, to unite it self with the place of C:
Since, therefore, to be united to the place of C is nothing else, but to be a
Magnitude between which and the place of C there is nothing interposed; the whole
operation of B and A is no other, then to be what they are, by a kind of
formal consistence.

15. Because, therefore, a body has no operation but division, it is plain, that
the whole action of a body is reduced to Being what it is, or a formal
consistency in its proportion of Quantity to Matter and its continuity to
place; and, that its true power of acting is infused by Intelligences.

16. It Is plain, too, that an Intelligence, by that one rarefactive Virtue, can
operate whatever is to be done by Bodies: For, since all corporeal action is
perfected by division, and division is arrived to by this virtue, all action of
a Body is attained to by this virtue.

LESSON XV.
Of the cooperation of the Agents, to the making of Substances, a rational
Soul, and to all other effects.
1. HEnce, we are arrived to the production of Substances: For, since some are
produced out of nothing, some out of others preexisting; the former must, of
necessity, have flowed immediately from God: The Agent, therefore, which
produces out of nothing, makes all the other qualities and conditions of the
Thing, by the notion of existence: Existence, therefore, is first in execution;
and, since the greater is not made for the less, it must be first, too, in
intention.

2. Wherefore, since every Agent, by acting, endeavors to express its own
essence upon the effect; the Essence of him that produces out of nothing must
be Existence it self.

3. Nor is it to be expected, that another Creature should be made use of, as
to preparing the matter; both because Existence is nobler then all the rest in
a Thing, whence it admits not of any preparation for the rest, since
preparations are only in the baser in order to a better: as also, because,
existence being put, the Thing is already put: whence, the operation upon
nothing is complete by the very putting of existence, and consequently, of that
cause alone which puts existence.

4. Supposing, then, that God has created certain Substances; and that,
because, of themselves, they are defectible, they always have that being from
God; it is inferred, that God perpetually poures out the power of being, as the
Sun Light. Imagine, now, an accidental transmutation on Body's part, (such as
is explicated in our Physical discourse), and, (as it is declared above)
through certain changes, an arrival to a constancy of being in another degree.

5. It must needs be, that, As, when the Earth is turned to the Sun or Wood
laid on the Fire, from the perpetual and minutable action of the Sun or Fire,
joined with the mutability of the Earth and Wood, sometimes one sometimes
another part of the Earth will be enlightened, and sometimes one sometimes
another part of the Wood will burn: So, supposing that natural motions make
Matter, in several Sites, sometimes capable of a perfecter existence,
sometimes of a more imperfect; from the same constant effusion of existence on
Gods side, the Substance must needs be sometimes nobler, sometimes more
ignoble, respectively.

6. Suppose, farther, an existent body so changed, that the matter may be
capable of a Form which, in its essence, includes some notion, that exceeds the
power of matter: is it not plain, that, out of the very same constant effusion
of existence from God, a Substance will exist which will be, so, corporeal,
that 'twill be, in some respect, Spiritual?

7. For, since the putting of existence puts a Thing; purely at the second
causes determinating God to the position of such an existence, not that alone
is put, but whatever follows out of it, though it exceed the power of second
causes: And so, it appears, how, putting the generation of a Man, a rational
Soul is put; and how the power of nature so concurres to it, that yet the
notion of Creation, or rather of con-creation, supervenes, and is necessary.

8. Lastly, how it both is and is-not ex traduce, and, at once, by Generation
and Creation; and how, in this case, an Instrument, in some sort, is made use
of for Creation.

9. And, because the internal Dispositions of a Soul, as, to know and to will,
even they are indivisible, and follow out of the material impressions made
upon the Body: it must needs be that, as the Soul it self follows out of the
generation of Man, by the help of the universal Action of God; so these
Dispositions, too, from the impression made upon the man, and from the nature
of the Soul, must indivisibly alter the Soul.

10. And, whoever would see an evident example of these things, let him
conceive how, by cutting, a piece of wood is made more; for, all the time of
the cutting, the figure is changed, yet the wood remains, by the same unity,
one; but, indivisibly, the cutting being finished, they are, now, two pieces of
wood; without the dualities beginning at all, before, or any thing of its
nature, but only some variation about the Figure.

11. Out of what has been said, we are deduced to see, how God performs all the
works of the Creatures in them. For, first, if we speak of Intelligences, Since
their internal operations are nothing else, but to be all other things after a
certain manner; it is manifest, they are, actually, even to the uttermost
positive circumstances, by force of their Creation.

12. For, by force of that, their essence is conjoined to it self, as it is a
cognoscitive virtue; and, out of this conjunction, the next divisibility, which
is, of God to the same cognoscitive virtue, since all the causes are put, is,
of necessity, in them.

13. And, what is said of this divisibility is, with the same facilnesse,
discovered of all the rest whatever; since they are all connected: their
external action, too, Matter, which is its subject, being put, follows, by
force of their internal, without any other change in them.

LESSON XVI.
Of the government of God, and the locality of Incorporeall Things.
1. AS for the rest, the same way leads to the discovery that God is not the
cause of any imperfection and not-being, or ill, which is in created things and
their action: For, since the action of God is only to infuse Being, and this as
much as the Creature is capable; it is plain, what there is of Being is to be
attributed to God, but what there is wanting of Being is to be refunded into the
incapacity of the Subject.

2. And, since the defect of action proceeds out of the defect of the
Principle, that is, out of some not-being in the principle; in the same manner,
all defect in acting is to be reduced, likewise, into some defect in being of
the Creature, and not into God, as its cause. Wherefore, God is the Author of
all Good, because all good is from being; but, of no ill, since ill is from
not-being.

3. Consequently, it is evident, that God cannot annihilate any thing, or
withdraw his concourse from the action of any Creature: For, to be able to
annihilate is to be able to make a no-Thing; and, to withdraw his concourse is
not to give Being to things created; either of which cannot happen, but from a
defect of Goodness and of the overflowing, as it were, of Being in God.

4. You Will say, Therefore, God does not act freely ad extra, that is, upon the
Creatures: But, Les. 8.
this Consequence is to be denied; as it is said above, when we treated of the
Liberty of God.

5. You Will say again, In the same manner, therefore, it must be said, that God
cannot make any thing which He will not make. But, this Consequence, also, is
denied; for, his Power is referred to possible things, or, which have entity and
intelligibility; and therefore it is not to be denied that he can do any thing
that is possible; though, in another respect, it be impossible it should happen
that He should, actually, make this.

6. But, the Power of God, which is the very notion of Being and Thing, has
not, for its act, the not-being of any thing and not-acting; and therefore,
it is not to be said, that He can give not-being, or can not-act.

7. Let us remember, now, that God understands all and every thing done by the
Creatures, and wills all things which follow out of his operation; and, we have
it, that God is Governor of the World, and that there can be no resistance
against his Will.

8. For, since whatever is has its birth from his will, nor can there be any
thing which is not effected by Him and His works; it is clear, whatever He wills
not is not, nor can be so long as he wills not that it be.

9. Nor is it less evident, that neither the Contingency of natural causes,
nor the Liberty of rational Creatures is infringed, by this government of God.
For, since Contingency is nothing else, but that the nature of the cause is
such that it may and uses to be hindered, by other causes; and Liberty, that a
Creature, upon the consideration of more proceeds to action: and, it is so
manifest, that both these are in nature, and no ways touched by the operation
of God (as that operation is explicated) that it needs only the remembering:
it is clear, that the government of God is sweet, and offers no violence to the
natures of natural causes.

10. You Will object, that Propositions, concerning a future, whether contingent
or free, Subject, are determinately true; especially, since they are known by
God and are predefin'd: wherefore, the effect cannot not-be: there is,
therefore, no either contingency or liberty; whether this happens out of the
force of Contradiction, or of the irrefragable will of God.

11. It Is answered, it is false that Propositions concerning a future contingent
have a determinate truth: for, since a man speaks out of consideration of
causes, the Sense of his proposition is What the causes may bear: Nor imports
it, whether it be pronounced actively or passively; as if you should say, what
the causes will act, or what effect will be made by them; for, it signifies
still the same.

12. If it be, therefore, asked, what men mean by such propositions, 'twill
rain, 'twill be hot, Socrates will be angry or go to Sea, etc? it is clear, they
mean to explicate effects, as in defectible causes, and consequently, they have
no determinate truth. But, if it be asked, what the proposition will signify,
if it be referred immediately to the effect, as it sounds? it is answered, no
sensible man uses to speak so or make such propositions; and so it belongs not
to the present question. But, if there be supposed such a power of
Contradiction in the Objects, as to determine the truth of propositions; all
things must fall out by the necessity of Fate and be from themselves, Les. 5.
n. 9, 10.
which is, above, sufficiently demonstrated impossible.

13. It Is plain, lastly, that this action of God, by which He moves a Creature,
is miscalled a Concourse; since such a word leads the hearer into an
apprehension of a certain equality in acting, between God and a Creature: It Is,
therefore, more properly called premotion or predetermination; since God makes
us do even to every the least positive circumstance of action.

14. It Is collected, too, out of what has been said, how God is said to act in
all things, both by the immediation of his Suppositum or Substance and of his
Virtue; but, an Intelligence upon one body only by the immediation of Its
Substance, upon the rest by the immediation only of Its virtue.

15. For, since the action of God is the influx of Being it self, and nothing
can act without Being, nor Being flow from any but God; God must needs
immediately act upon all Substances by Creating and Conserving them: and
consequently, in such his acting, no third Substance intervenes between Him and
the Creature. Again, the action of all bodies proceeding from Intelligences,
and They being made act by God; the virtue of God makes every thing act, and so
is more immediate to the effect then the virtue of the nearest cause: whence
also, God is, by the immediation of his virtue, more immediate, then the next
cause which produces the action.

16. But, an Intelligence, which immediately rarifies A, moves not B, but by
the mediation of A; the Suppositum A, therefore, is between the Intelligence
and B; wherefore, the Intelligence acts not, by the immediation of Its
Suppositum, upon B: But, because A's being rarified is the cause that A moves
B; and A is rarified by the virtue of the Intelligence; the virtue of the
Intelligence makes B be moved by A; the virtue, therefore, of the Intelligence,
not the Suppositum, is immediate to B.

17. And, hence it follows, that God is said to be Immense; but, an
Intelligence to be definitively in Place: For, since nothing either is or can
be without Existence, it is clear, neither can there be any Place, upon which
God does not, immediately, act: but, an Intelligence, having a determinate
proportion to a body, so acts upon a certain quantity, that it cannot, together
and at once, immediately act upon another. Since, therefore, incorporeall
Things are not in Place circumscriptively; an Intelligence must be
definitively, but God, without end, in all Place, by immediate operation.

LESSON XVII.
Of the Conservation of Creatures, and the Durations of Things.
1. It Is clear, too, out of what has been said, that this action of God is the
conservation of things, both as to their Substance, and as to their
intrinsecall Accidents: For, since the essence of created things has not, of it
self, a necessary conjunction with Being, but such an one as may, of its own
nature, be lost; it is plain, they are not conjoined, by force of their own
notions, for that time during which they may be not-conjoyn'd; and, by
consequence, as long as they are conjoined, they have this, to be conjoined,
from an extrinsecall; they, therefore, remain conjoined by an Extrinsecall
power.

2. But, it is of the same nature, to be conjoined and to remain conjoined, or,
to be for any duration conjoined; they have, therefore, this from the same
cause and virtue: and, since it is not any change, but, on the contrary, the
effect is that nothing should be changed; by the very same action, too, they
keep their being, which is, to be conserved. The same action of God, therefore,
is Conservation, in respect of Substances: B. 1. Les. 5. N. 8, 9.
And, since it is declared above, that intrinsecall Accidents are nothing else
but manners of Substance; the Substance being conserved, it is clear, that they
also are conserved in their Being.

3. Out of what has been said, too, we may know, what Action signifies in the
effect it self: And, if the question be of the Divine action, as it immediately
flows from God, it is plain, that It Is the very Substance it self; not only,
because it cannot be subjected in a Substance, which subsists no otherwise then
by it; nor, because the existence of Things formed out of our conceits is
universally rejected; but also, because any intermediate action (such as the
Moderns feign the Making) which should be put, serves to no purpose.

4. For, either God, before this action, is determined in himself to act, that
is, that this action should follow from Him, or, He is not; if not, this action
will not follow, for, from an indifferent nothing follows; but, if He be
determined, this action has not the power of determining Him, for which the
Opponent requires it as necessary: but, the effect can, as immediately, follow
out of Himself, as this action. And, this same discourse holds against the like
fictitious action, too, of Creatures.

5. Again, in as much as the action of God is Conservation, it is nothing but
the very Being of the thing conserved. For, first, the Duration of an
Incorporeall thing cannot be divisible; for, if it were divisible, 'twould be
continuate and divisible without end: either, therefore, some part, together
and at once, in an incorporeall, that is, indivisible thing, or not: if
together, that part will not include succession; if not, no part can ever be.

6. And, this Argument has not less force in a Corporeal Creature; for,
though it be divisible in extension, yet, it is indivisible in succession, and
consequently, it cannot sustain together more parts of successive duration.

7. Again, if, to endure be, for the same thing to be the same it was; is it
not clear, there is nothing required but a non-mutation? and, on the other side,
that, of two things which exist, if one perish, that is said to be changed; that
which endures remaining still unchanged? There is, therefore, no novelty in
permanency.

8. Moreover, to change the existence, the Essence, too, must needs be changed,
since, it is the aptest capacity of existence: the notion, therefore, of
Substance will be in perpetual change and instable, and consequently, out of
God, nothing stable.

9. You Will object, Since it is often said, that a Creature may not-be, and yet,
whilst it is, it cannot not-be; it is manifest, that its cannot not-be, or, to
be whilst it is, successively supervenes to a Creature: Since, therefore,
there is a greater necessity of indivisibility, on God's part, then on a
Creature's; the succession is to be concluded on the Creatures side.

10. It Is answered, It Is just contrary: for, as, if the action of God were put
(by way of imagination) to be successive, no man would require any other
succession, to understand the duration of a Creature; so, if the action of God
be put equivalent to continually successive, no man can complain of the
unintelligibility of Duration.

11. Because, therefore, the action of God is conformable to His existence, and
His existence indivisibly comprehends the past and future; it must needs be
that the action, as it is the internal determination of God, in the same
manner comprehends succession. This action, therefore, actuates the Creature,
with a certain indivisibility that eminentially contains divisibility; and,
without any divisibility, makes the existence of a Creature, by contradiction,
impossible to be taken away successively; yet, without any more then a vertuall
succession intervening in the Creature.

12. For, what has formally the virtue which is in succession, can as well
perform this as succession it self: but, such, we have said, is the action of
God: whence, it is plain, that, even from this effect, the notion of Gods
Eternity is demonstrated a posteriori.

13. Hence, it is deduced, that the duration of corporeal and spiritual
Substances is, intrinsecally different: Since, corporeal Substances have, from
the notion of Matter, an intrinsecall possibility to not-be; and consequently,
a weaker connection to Being, intrinsecally, out of their own nature; but
duration consists in the connection of existence and essence, as to the effect
of permanence.

14. Add to this, that there are, in nature, causes which destroy Bodies, but,
there are none which are able to infest Spiritual Substances: whence, since
God destroys nothing, of Himself, Intelligences are absolutely immortal, as
also, separated Souls; and Bodies, when motion ceases, will be immortal
accidentally, in the mean time they are simply mortal, unless perhaps there
are some exempt from the general order.

15. Out of what has been said, too, both the notion and difference of three
Durations is evident: B. 2. Les. 3. N. 3.
of Time explicated at the beginning: of Eternity, when we treated of God: Les.
6. N. 14, 15.
lastly, of Eviternity in Intelligences.

LESSON XVIII.
Of the manner of Action, on the Subject's side.
1. THe solution, also, of that old Question is evident, Why God made not the
World before? For, if we consider, that there is no beginning of an Infinite, and
that, where there is no beginning, there can be no determinate distance from the
beginning; it will appear, that it is impossible there should be any eternal
flux of Time or instants, (even by imagination), wherein there can be taken a
now and then, and any constant difference of duration, or, something to be
before, something after, determined.

2. Wherefore, such a Question proceeds from the weakness and infirmity of our
understanding, and signifies nothing; and consequently, bears no answer: For,
for God to make this world before, in time, that he made it, would be to have
made a world before a world; since, the time of the beginning of the world is
nothing else but the very motion, with which the world began to be moved.

3. In like manner, evident is the solution of that question, Whether God could
make a permanent Thing (that is, whose essence includes not succession) from
all eternity? For, if there be no quiddity or possibility of an infinite in
succession; it is clear, that God could not so make a Creature, that it should
have Eternity, by relation to infinite succession: Therefore, not otherwise
then by some positive eminence conferred on it: Since, therefore, Duration
consists in the connection of existence to a Thing, He could no otherwise make
a Creature from Eternity, then by giving it such a connection by which, simply,
it could not not-be, wherein consists the very Eternity it self of God.
Clearly, therefore, it is impossible that even a permanent Thing could have been
from Eternity.

4. But, as for the not-immediate action of God, or (which is all one) as it is
the same with the action of the Creature, it is plain, the same account is to be
given as of the action of the Creature. And, of these, Philosophers have
pronounced, that Action is something between the Agent and effect: as, in the
change of Place, between the Rest in the term whence and the term whether,
there interven's motion; which they falsely imagine to be more beings-in-place
successively, since, as Aristotle has demonstrated, all that time the movable
happens not to be in a place equal to it, whereas, yet, equality is of the
very notion of Place.

5. So, too, in other mutations, especially that which is called Substantial
generation, the Subject, by the precedent motion, which properly is the very
action, is not, neither actually nor in part, in the term it self; but is
changed only in its Quality.

6. So, too, it falls out in Rarefaction, which is immediately from an
Intelligence: for, since the proportion of an Intelligence to a Body is finite;
It cannot, instantaneously, reduce a body to any how-little-soever-a degree of
rarity: wherefore, there must of necessity, between It prepared for action and
the term, intervene some motion; during which, the body rarified is neither in
any determinate degree of rarity, nor in any determinate Place.

7. Out of all which, this, at length, is concluded, what a kind of being
Passion or mutation has in the Subject: for, since it is repugnant, the Formal
parts in a Compound should be actual; they must be only in possibility or
power, and some other third thing, resolvable into parts, actually exist.

8. This third thing, therefore, has a certain resolvable and changeable
nature; wherefore, it is clear, there is some cause which has the power of
changing it: Let B, therefore, be the changeable nature, A the changing cause;
if A be applied to B, must not B, of necessity, become another thing then it
was, that is, be changed?

9. This is, therefore, for B to have suffered by means of A, viz. to become
another thing then it was: another thing, I say, or altered; for, if nothing
perceivable remain, it is become another thing; but, if there remain whereby it
may be marked to be this same as was before, it is only altered, because the
foundation, or, that which is the sustainer still remains, but it is innovated
in some respect.

10. For example, Let there be a Gallon of water in a Cubicall vessel, and (to
avoid dispute about a thing that concerns us not) let us suppose the Figure to
be nothing else, but that that very quantity, according to its three
dimensions, be no farther extended then, actually, it is; (which conceit, being
purely negative, can add nothing to the quantity): let the same water, then,
be supposed in a vessel of another figure; and consequently, it self, too, to
have put on other limits: Since the former terms were nothing but the very
Quantity of the water, neither can the later differ from it.

11. It Is evident, therefore, that this Quantity, remaining a Gallon, (which is
its difference, whereby, as quan-tity, it is limited), has a possibility to be,
now Pyramidall, now Cubicall; and consequently, is changeable, no Thing being
changed: To this possibility, therefore, if the power of two such vessels be
supposed successively applied; it is clear, purely upon the water's and their
conjunction, there follows a change in the Quantity of the water, by little and
little, and, at length, what in one vessel was of one figure, in another
becomes of another, changed according to the manner, unchanged according to the
notion of Quantity.

12. Thus, Substances become altered, according to Qualities, the Quantity
unchanged; according to Quantity, the Substance unchanged; according to
Substance, the Matter remaining: for no other cause, but that the Subject or
that which suffers is so mutable, and an Efficient, which has the power of
changing, is applied.

A THEOLOGICAL APPENDIX, Of The BEGINNING Of the WORLD. Wherein, it is essayed
how subservient Philosophy is to Divinity.

Same AUTHOR.

Cant. 1. Equitatui meo in curribus Pharaonis assimilavi te, Amica mea.

Printed in the Year, 1656.

To the READER.
SInce Philosophy has then attained its Dignity, when, applied to Action, it
renders Man better, that is, more Man; and Christians are initiated to this by
Divinity: this, evidently, is the highest pitch of Philosophy, to wait on and
be subservient to the Traditions derived from God. Wherefore, I saw it
absolutely necessary, to fortify the Institutions, I would recommend to Thee,
with a subsignation of Theology. Nor was I long to seek whether I should first
address my self: For, when, after the Notions of Nature digested in common, I
had exposed the same in a Collection of the World, as it were, in an Example;
by the same rule, having exhibited the Action of Things, like a sceleton, in
its Principles, in the last Book of Metaphysick, I saw my self obliged to vest
It, in the CREATION, with the Nature due to It. And, since in the ancient
Theology, we had this accurately decyphered, beyond the Attempts of
Philosophers; but untraceable, because the Paths of Nature were unknown: It
seemed to me, a more express Seal of Theological Approbation could not be
desired, then that the Institutions should carry a Torch before the Mysteries
of Genesis; and, from those so discovered, receive themselves, with advantage;
the Glory and Splendour of Authority. What more? I essayed: thou see the
Issue; which I wish may benefit Thee.

A Theological Appendix.
Of THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD.
CHAP. I.
A Philosophical discourse, concerning the Creation of Heaven and Earth.
1.SInce we find by universal experience, without any exception, that, not
only the Operations, but, even the very Subsistence of all bodily Substances is
by continued steps brought from possibility to be in act; nor can we doubt that
the parts and the whole are of the same nature; it is evident, the Beginning of
the Universe it self, if we suppose it managed according to the nature of
Bodies, must proceed by the same rule; that, from the nearest power and
possibility in which it could be, it has been rip'ned by degrees to this
excellent beauty, and did not by instantaneous Creation immediately start into
perfection.

2. Because, therefore, God subsists by the very necessity of Being it self,
and in Being it self there can be nothing of imperfection, it is clear, that His
ultimate intrinsecall formality and free act preexists before, not only the
existence, but even, the very essence of all and every Creature, as much as
whatever is most essential in Him.

3. As also that this Being, which they have received from God, is the nature
of the Creatures, nor can they otherwise flow from God then according to their
natural condition. Especially, since God acts not to attain an end prefixed to
himself; but this is His end, (if we may call any thing an end in respect of
God) that the Creatures should be, so, as, in his Essence, Science and Will, He
has predesin'd their determinate nature fixed and inviolably to be; that the
whole Universe might emane His most beautiful Image, and, in a manner, a most
adequate participation of Himself.

4. So that, all things that are to have their most connaturall quality, as far
as it can stand, impartially, with the perfection of their fellow bodies; this
is that which God willed, and what, in effect, he has brought to pass.

5. Be this, therefore, firmly established, that God not instantaneously, but by
a congruous disposition of diverse degrees brought up the world from its
deepest possibility, that is, its simplest and fewest principles, to its due
perfection.

6. Again, because neither materia prima nor any other part of a Thing, but
only Physical Compound, is apt to receive Exiastence: and, of Physical
Compounds the most simple and, as it were, most poten, tiall, that is, next
above mere possibility, are the Elements: and something must, of necessity,
have flowed instantaneously from God: It follows, that some one or more of the
Elements were, by Creation, called by God out of the common Abyss of
nothingnesse.

7. But not one only Element was created. For, since Motion does not follow out
of the sole virtue of Creation: nor could Motion be without Division; nor
Division without a Substantial difference of the divider from the divided; nor
this be made, even by Angelical virtue, without time: it follows that more
Elements were created immediately by God.

8. Yet not all the four: Since FIRE we call an Element that makes it self be
seen, which implies Action; but corporeal action is not without motion; nor
motion from pure Creation.

9. But, of the other three Elements no one could be conveniently omitted: For
EARTH and WATER are those we see mixed by Fire through the whole course of
Nature; and Fire is immediately generated and nourished by AIR: If any one
therefore, of these three had been wanting; the matter had been unfit for
Angelical operation.

10. Three Elements, therefore, were created; nor those confused in a Chaos:
for such a confusion had not exhibited the most simple matter, but a disordered
multitude of mixed things; since mixed things emerge from a mere confusion of the
Elements.

11. Earth, therefore, was the inmost, as the densest and of constant nature:
Air was the outmost, as the most opposite to Earth: the middle both Nature and
Place water possessed.

CHAP. II.
An Explication of GENESIS concerning the same.
1. Let Us see, now, whether the Christians most ancient Theology, derived from
the Hebrews, speaks consonantly to this. God (says it) in the Beginning
created the Heaven and the Earth. The Beginning, says, not so much a
precedence to things that followed, since it self was something of what was
began; as that nothing was before it. Admirably, therefore, by this term, it is
expressed, that the Creation of Heaven and Earth was, so, instantaneous and, in
a manner, before the rest; that neither any Time intervened, nor was it self in
Time. It shows, therefore, that they were created out of nothing; and that,
instantaneously; and, that the rest immediately followed out of these once put.

2. Nor can it be doubted what it calls Heaven and Earth, since the name of
Earth is immediately used afterward: whence, it is evident, that, by the
remaining name of Abyss, is expressed what before was called Heaven;
otherwise, the sacred Text is confused and imperfect.

3. It Is added, that the Earth was void and empty; according to the Hebrew
expression, solitude and emptiness, or rather, of solitude and emptiness;
for, so, the Hebrews often express their Adjectives. The sense is clear, that
neither were there men upon the Earth, whose properties are fellowship and
conversation, the privation whereof makes Solitude; nor Plants and Animals,
which, as bodies and utensils, might fill the place and house of humane
habitation.

4. It follows, that Darkness was upon the face of the Abyss. The word
Abyss, says a Gulf of waters whose bottom is unknown, or not reached; and
because the most simple manner of reaching is by Sight, it properly signifies
such a depth of water, that Sight cannot reach its bottom. Wherefore, the sense
is most easy, that, what it had formerly called Heaven was a vast diaphanous
body, upon which there was no Fire to enlighten it. It affirms, therefore,
directly, that Fire was not created.

5. But it subjoyns two parts of the Abyss, whilst it says, and the Spirit of
the Lord was born upon the waters. Clearly, therefore, it affirms three
Elements, EARTH, WATER and AIR, were Created by God; but not FIRE. And, that
they were not confused is evident, in that, otherwise, it had not been an
Abyss, that is, a capacity of Light, and a privation; since by the commixtion
of Earth the other Elements had been rendered opake: Moreover, the Spirits
being born upon the waters denotes a distinction of Places between the other
two Elements.

6. But it is observable that the word, was born, according to the force of the
Original term, speci^ies that motion whereby Birds sustain themselves with
open wings over their nests, least they should crush their young ones; and yet,
to defend them from the cold. Whence, a certain person amongst the Hebrews
explicates it, not weighing upon, touching, but not striking: wherefore, the
Air covered the water, but pressed it not. It Is plain, therefore, that
according to the propriety of the expression, it is specified, there was as yet
no Gravitie, and that the Air is the first of the Elements whose property it
is to have any heat in it. It Is evident, therefore, there is no gravitie in the
Air, of its own nature; and consequently, that it is not an intrinsecall
Quality in the other Elements, but is in them from the operation of Fire and
the order of Agents.

CHAP. III.
A Philosophical discourse of the works of the two first days.
1. THe Matter of the World being Created, it remains that we see what
followed, by the additional operation of Creatures. And because the operation
of Angels is no other then rarefaction: and nature wanted its natural
instrument, viz. Fire; for This we see principally made use of for almost all
natural effects, especially, the generation of Substances: and This is not
raised out of Water and Earth immediately without first becoming Air: it must
be, that the Angels or Angel whose task this was, by rarefying the Air raised
a vast Fire.

2. And since there are many sorts of Fire; and that, which, far from the fiery
body, smoaks no longer, but shoots out directly with pure rays, is, by a
special name, called Light: Light must needs have been made by the Angels,
through the rarefaction of pure Air, as, from which no Smoke rises.

3. Nor is it less certain, this must be done in the very confines of Air and
water. For, since the Angels could not in an instant convert Air into Light;
and a local motion of the neighboring bodies follows upon rarefaction; the
Air must needs have been moved whilst 'twas yet in the form of Air: and since
motion cannot be without a plurality of Substances, it is plain that the Air
divided the water; and consequently, the first Fire was raised in the confines
of both.

4. Since, therefore, the Fire being raised, of necessity, acted upon the
water; it follows, that the Waters being stirred, those particles to which the
Fire stuck, (being rarer then the rest, and coveting still a larger place), by
their own and the denser parts of the Water's motion, must needs be thrust out
into the Air, which is more yielding: and those excluded, be aggregated
together, specially toward the Light, where, by reason of the more vehement
action, there must needs be greatest abundance of them: and, more flowing from
one side then another, (since natural causes work not rigorously even), the
whole mass of Water, and Earth adhering to it, by little and little attain a
motion toward the same Light; so that, successively and by parts, it rol'd in
a Circle and was enlightened, having in some places Night in others Day.

5. Besides, another effect must evidently have followed from this production
of Light, viz. a vast abundance of Clouds be raised up into the Air, which, by
the circulation of the Light about the inferior Globe, must necessarily be
removed a vast distance from the Globe it self and the Light: Whence, being no
longer sensible of the Globe's attraction, they could not, by any order of
Causes, be remitted back toward the Globe. Thus, therefore, there is a vast
space established, between the waters in the Globe, whence the Clouds were
extracted, and between those very Clouds themselves; which may keep them from
one another separate for ever or, at least, till the end of the World.

CHAP. IV.
An explication of Genesis concerning the same.
1. WHat says Theology to this? It says, And God said, Let there be Light; and
LIGHT was made. Speech and command are addressed to another: clearly,
therefore, it reaches that, by the intermediate operation of Angels, Light was
made.

2. And it was made, clearly shows that the making immediately and instantly
began, viz. that there was no delay in the intermediate Instrument; wherefore,
that 'twas an Incorporeall Substance which needed not be moved that it might
move: Moreover, the word he said, which implies Knowledge, declares it to have
been an Intelligent Instrument.

3. It adds, And God saw the Light that it was good. Goodness is perfection:
namely, because the nature of the Elements, by the addition of Fire, was
complete and perfected; therefore, Light is said to be good: Again, because the
rest of the Elements were passive, and Light active; therefore Light is called
good or perfect: for, what has attained an aptitude to produce or make its
like, is esteemed perfect, in its kind.

4. It follows, And he divided the light from the darkness etc. It Is plain,
this division was made, not by Place but by Time, since Day and Night are parts
of Time: and consequently, that motion or the diurnall conversion was now
begun; which is declared by those words, and he called the light Day and the
darkness Night. For, since, as yet, Man was not, to whom words might be
significant; He called is as much as he established the Essence of Day and
Night: for, a name or appellation denotes the essence or quiddity of the Thing
named.

5. It Is added, and the Evening and the Morning was made one Day: in the
original Text, and the Evening was made and the Morning was made, or, the
Evening was and the Morning was. From which Phrase it is understood, that this
motion had, for its term whence, the Evening, and for its term whether, the
Morning; and consequently, that the motion was made in a Subject to which it
agrees to have Evening and Morning, that is, in the Earth; and that it was from
West to East, that is, toward the Light.

6. Again, And God said, let there be a FIRMAMENT in the midst of the Waters,
and let it divide the Waters from the Waters: In the Hebrew, an Expansion.
Either word is properly taken, since it was a Space unpassable for its
vastness and expansion, and, by consequence, fixed, and fixing the division of
the Waters.

7. But those words in the midst of the waters are to be noted; which teach,
that no Substance was made a new, but only between the waters and the waters:
which is evident, too, from the word, Heaven; which name he gave the Firmament;
by which very word, it is expressed, that, before, God created the Heaven. The
Etymology also of the word is to be noted; which, both in the Hebrew and Greek
Idiom, signifies as much as whence the waters, or, whence or where it drops:
that it may be evidenced, even from the name, that the Air it self is the
Firmament.

CHAP. V.
A Philosophical discourse of the works of the other four days.
1. FArther, by the operation of this vast Fire, not only the Water, but much
of the Earth, too, with the Water must needs have been raised up. For, Chemists
know that the intense heat of fire can raise up and carry away crasse Oils and
Ointments; nay even Salts and very Gold it self. Since, therefore, the Earth,
before the operation of Light, was dissolved in minutest parts and Dust, as,
void of all Moisture: it must needs be that the Heat mixed every where the
Water with Earth; and thus all muddy carried it up into the Air; but, most of
all, about those parts over which the Fire perpendicularly hung.

2. Whence, it is plain, two Effects must needs have risen: one, that the Earth
in that Circle should become more hollowed and low then in the rest of its
Superficies; the other, that the Water, from the remoter places, should flow
into these hollownesses: whether by the attraction of the Fire; or by natural
connection; or by some power of Gravity, which, through the operation of the
Fire, by little and little, attained a force.

3. It Is plain, therefore, that, since the motion of the Earth was, of
necessity, by the greatest Circle: the Earth, by the course of the foresaid
causes, must be drained and dried first about the Poles of that Circle; and the
waters gathered together in the empty hollownesse under that Circle.

4. I said, by the course of the foresaid causes: for, if we consider what was
likely to be done by accident, this consequence will not be universally
necessary. For, it is clear, that the Earth by the boiling of the water, being
unequally mixed and remixt, with continual agitation; must, according to the
law of contingency, have produced, by the meeting of different parts, as many
kinds and species of Earths, as we see diversities of Fossils; which we divide,
generally, into four kinds, Stones, Metalls, Mold, and concrete Iuyces.

5. And, since, from the varieties, also, of those great parts of that mass
now tempered with water, a notable variety must needs follow; the Earth, yet
covered with Waters, may easily here and there have boiled up into
Excrescencies; as Islands have often grown up in the Sea. By this irregularity,
therefore, some Mountains growing, may have appeared before the Polar Regions
of the Earth.

6. From the same principles, it follows, that the Earth did not appear wholly
squallid and desert, but already impregnated with the Seeds of all things: nor
with Seeds only, but with Plants, too; those especially which either require or
can endure more moisture; the rest, by little and little, as the dryer Earth
grew more apt and fitly disposed for their birth, they, too, sprung out.

7. And, because an Animal is nothing but a more-compounded Plant: by the same
reason, the Earth, then most aptly tempered and disposed, brought forth perfect
Animals; as it now being barrener, of its own accord, produces such as we call
insecta, as Mice and Frogs, and sometimes new fashioned Animals.

8. But, because the waters must needs have been very muddy, even They, before
the Earth, must have sprung into Animals fit to inhabit them; viz. Fishes,
small and great; as also into certain middle Animals, which might fly up to the
higher parts of the Earth, that is Birds: as, even now, we see all kind of
Birds that are bred of Putrefaction, by the Sea shores and Lake's sides, grow
out of the rottenness of wood tempered with water.

9. 'Twas necessary, too, that, by the force of that mighty Flame, parts of
Earth and Water of a vast bulk, carried up above the Air, should, by natural
attraction and the power of the baking Fire, coagulate into many vast Bodies:
whereof, some should more abound with fiery virtue, and therefore, both
conceive and belch out abundance of Flames; so that being entirely lucid they
should be apt to enlighten other bodies, too, within a fit distance: and, that
others, less abounding with fiery parts, should be fit in a congruous order
and method, to be concocted and enlightened by Them; and themselves, too, be
able to reflect light from the former to the rest.

10. Wherefore, were they set and moved in a convenient site to the Earth now
inhabited, they might always more or less enlighten it: nor would there be
any longer need of that vast light made by the Angels. And this formation of
things the Egyptians, Aethiopians, Empedocles and other natural Philosophers,
as it were, by the conduct of Nature, out of the very steps and order of
Generation which they still observed in nature, have emulated and attempted,
though not thoroughly attained.

CHAP. VI.
An Explication of Genesis concerning the same.
1. THe sacred Commentaries, concerning these things, tell us thus, And God
said, let the Waters which are under the Heaven be gathered together into one
place, and let the dry Land appear. Here is the first mention made of gravity,
whose effect is said to be, to congregate into one place: that we may see
Gravity is not a motion toward any particular Site, but toward the unity of a
body; and that it was made out of the Order of the Universe now established,
after that, between the acting Light and the Earth upon which it acted, a great
distance full of Air was interposed, wherein the motion of things ascending
and descending might be free.

2. Job 38. it is said, that the Sea flowed, as it were, out of a womb; whence
it is understood that the Earth thoroughly moistened with Water, sweat out on all
sides, into the lower Vaults, and increased the Water, where, by the extreme
force of the light, it had been too much sucked out; and so left the Earth in
its due temperament. Whence there is evidenced, another cause, too, Chap. 5. N. 5.
besides what we have explicated of the Earths appearing, viz. because, by the
permixtion of hot water, it swelled into a far greater bulk.

3. It follows, and God called the dry, Land, and the gathering together of the
waters he called Seas: For, it was not Earth in the same sense wherein, at the
beginning, 'twas said God created the Heaven and the Earth; for, there, the
Element of Earth was called Earth, but here a certain mixed body consisting of
infinite variety. And, for the same cause, he called the Firmament, Heaven:
for, at the beginning, Heaven signified Air and Water in the purity of their
natures; but, here, a mixed body made of the Elevation of the Waters with the
Air.

4. We understand farther, because the waters are commanded to be congregated
into one place, and yet the effect is called Seas; the waters, which, from that
mighty celestial fire, had contracted Saltness, though, to appearance, they
possess several places, yet have a communion between themselves and truly
constitute one place, though outwardly interrupted: as it is evident of most of
them, out of Cosmographicall History.

5. It follows, And God said, let the Earth bring forth the green herbs and
which produces Seed etc. Whence it is understood, that the generation of Plants
proceeded from the very springing fecundity of the Earth, through the activity
of so much heat; without any extraordinary and miraculous concourse of God.
For, if, in fifteen days, Plants ripen under the Equator, which, with us,
require a three months space for their generation; what doubt, but, much more
copiously and sooner they started out of the womb of the Earth justly tempered
by the operation of Angels?

6. Nor need we believe, because the Plants were perfect, therefore Oaks and
such like Trees must have been at the full strength which they attain not under
an entire Age: for, it suffices, that the barren Trees yielded Shade and the
fruitful their Fruits, against the sixth Day.

6. The Text goes on, Let there be Lights in the Firmament of Heaven, and let
them divide the day and the night. And, even from hence, it is evident that the
office of Light created the first day, was to dry the Earth; which being done,
there was no longer need of so mighty a Fire, and therefore the Angels ceased
from that operation.

8. There appears, again, the difference between that Light and the Sun: for
the Sun is not called light, but a light'ner, as a Candle or a Torch, wherein
one part is flame and another fuel of the flame, or that yields the light. It
appears, therefore, that the SUN is a concrete of combustible matter, and a
certain Vulcanian Globe all over full of pits vomiting flames: and, that it
received the office of the former light, which was to divide between the day
and the night.

9. But, in that it is said, in the firmament of Heaven (the Original
expression has it, in the expansion of Heaven, or of that whence the waters)
it is evident, these lights were placed in the Air; and that there is no
difference of nature between the Firmament wherein the Stars, and that wherein
the Clouds and Birds are, and, consequently, that neither are there any Spears
in which the Fixed Stars should be, but they are moved as Fishes in the water.

10. Upon which grounds, 'twill not be hard to believe them made of Waters
raised up out of the Earth; as the 103 or 104 Psalm clearly teaches: For, where
our text has it, who covers with waters its upper parts, (viz. of Heaven), the
Hebrew has, who framest its chambers of waters: Chambers are lodgings or
abiding places aloft; the Stars therefore (if indeed there are any People in
them) are elegantly called the chambers of Heaven: and they are said to be
framed of water, that is, built and compacted; the watery parts, commixt with
which the terrestrial were raised up, partly being drained into the
concavities, (as we said concerning our Sea), partly keeping a consistency
about the globes to thicken the Air, partly remaining in them, for a due
mixtion sake, according to the variety of the parts of the Globes.

11. But, that the Angels, which before kindled the Light, were divided amongst
the Stars; especially the Suns (whereof, it is evident, there are many) Job
shows by those words, when asked where wast thou when the morning Stars marched
triumphantly, or, exulted alike or together; and all the sons of God sounded
their trumpets? that is, when the morning stars began to be moved (as, in the
Psalm, it is said of the Sun, he roused up himself as a Giant, to run his
course), that is, stars making morning or light; to which conjoining the sons
of God, he teaches that each of them had its Angel, to excite their first
motion, as it were sounding the Alarm and giving the sign for motion, or,
making the start and first impression. And this interpretation is best
accommodated both to the Hebrew words and to the matter whereof He spoke: and
the word, together, shows that, in one day they all began their motion.

12. The holy Author adds the End of these Lights, that they might be eminent
day and night, for so the original propriety has it, where our text says to
rule over; that is, that they might be very conspicuous: And, for Signs, or,
according to the force of the original word, Miracles or Prodigies; that is,
that they might make men admire; whence by little and little they might be
elevated from terrestrial things, to know God and his works, and worship him.

13. Lastly, for days and years. Whence, it is deduced, that the Earth had been
hitherto moved only about its own Center; but, from thenceforward, began to be
moved under the Ecliptic; viz. Because the motion made by the first fire was
so violent, that the waters were only drawn toward the light, or if any moved
any other way, they were so few, that they were in no measure able to alter the
course toward the light: But, the force of the Sun being far less, did so
make the Waters move about the Earth, that yet the impulse of the returning
Waters was notable; whence the Earth was moved about the Sun in a line mixed, in
a manner, of a Circular and a right.

CHAP. VII.
Some Animadversions about the Text of the first Chapter of Genesis.
1. FRom the whole Story it is evident that our Earth is situated in the very
middle of the Universe. For, since all the rest of the World was formed by
evaporation from the Globe whereof our Earth was the Center; and this, by Fire
intermediate between the Earth and the other parts of the World: it is evident,
that the rest of the world is, with a certain equality, remote from it, and
consequently, that it is placed in the midst.

2. Which I would not have so understood, as if the Center of the Earth were
the very middle point; but, that the Great Orb, (that is, all that Orb, which
the Earth makes with its circle about the Sun) has the notion of a Center: for,
that it scarce makes a visible Magnitude, in respect of the rest of the world,
Astronomers find by experience.

3. Add to this a conjecture from the Phaenomena's. For, the Zodiac is fuller
of great and conspicuous Stars then the other parts of the Heavens; as it must
of necessity have happened, if the World began, after the manner we have
explicated: Besides, of all those Stars which are illuminated from our Sun, the
Earth alone is carried under the Ecliptic, that is, through the middle of the
very Zodiac, to whose course the rest seem to yield and give place.

4. In the middle, between the generation of Plants and Animals, the Celestial
bodies are reck'ned: because they are compacted of the crassest evaporations;
and therefore, ought not to be counted, 'till the Earth had already showed it
self, wherewith the generation of Plants was conjoined; but, before Animals,
because they are not animated themselves, but are only for animated things:
And, because they are adventitious to the Earth, as helps; before that Animals
were created, but especially Man, for whom the Earth was chiefly made, (who,
yet, is but a kind of Animal, and therefore ought to be generated together with
the rest), 'twas necessary a habitation should be prepared, and consequently,
furnished with lights.

5. From the same order it is deduced, that Plants are not said to be animated
or living, in the same sense as Animals: Since Animals have in themselves the
principle of their increasing; but Plants are filled from without, from the
order of the Universe.

6. Now, three things are to be remarked concerning the explicated Texts.
First, that God saw all things good, besides the Firmament and Man: the reason
whereof is, for the Firmament, that it had only the notion of a Place, and (the
Stars not being yet created) remained imperfect; whereas the name of good
signifies perfection: but Man was the complement of all, and therefore, not in
any special regard, but, looking upon the whole, he is comprehended in this,
that all things were very good.

7. The second is, Why God, of all others should name Day and Night, the
Firmament, the Land and Seas, and lastly Man; but none of the rest? The reason
is, because, of those things that are made, some belong to the Universe as
formal parts, that is, without which it is no longer a Universe; others, as
material parts, which may be changed without the destruction of the Universe:
the first God named, that is, fixed and established their nature; the rest he
omitted, as mutable.

8. The third is, Why God blessed only the Fishes, Birds and Man; and not the
Plants nor Animals? The reason is, because the blessing was to fill the Earth
and the Sea: and, if he had commanded the Trees or Animals to fill the Earth,
there had been no room for Man: These therefore were to increase to such a
degree only; whence, otherwhere, God said to his People, that, by little and
little, he would destroy their Enemies, least the Beasts should be multiplied
against them; and it is a saying, too, amongst us, concerning domestic Animals,
that It Is a good land which nourishes more Men then Beasts: But, because the
Sea was not the habitation of Men, 'twas said to Fishes, that they should
multiply without any other measure then that of the Sea it self; and the same
reason is of Birds in the Air.

9. Farther, we have the reason why the Creation of the World was distinguished
by Days. For, since all these works were perfected by means of fire or the
Sun's heat; and that, not in one Quarter only, but over the whole globe of the
Earth: by consequence, the whole Orb of the Earth was entirely turned to the
Light, whilst every thing was made; now, we call a Day an entire conversion of
the Earth to the Sun.

10. It appears, too, that these days were unequal. For, since the Globe which
was to be turned, at the beginning was vast (for Water and Earth were created
of such a bulk, that all the Stars might be made out of them); it is plain it
was a mighty Mass, and not to be entirely converted to the light under a long
time.

11. The first three days, therefore, were very long, and the following still
shorter then the former: but the later three were shorter and like ours or
little longer; so that an Animal, at least in three of those days, might be
brought to a congruous bigness, a Fish in two; but the Plants, even before the
Earth was altogether dried, already sprung up.

12. But, 'twas necessary that those things which could not be produced at the
same time and together, should be made in several days: wherefore, three days
were assigned for constituting the orb, other three for its adorning: and for
establishing the Firmament, viz. that vehement sucking out and elevating of the
vapors, the second day; the first having been spent in acquiring, as it were,
velocity; but the third day finished the work* that we might look upon these
three days, as it were, the beginning, middle, and end.

13. In like manner, because some space was to be allowed for breeding the
Fish, the first day is assigned to the Stars; in which whatever was to be
wrought (at least, in respect to us) required nothing but their being show'n in
the Firmament, which is* perfected in once turning about: And, because the
procreation of the Water is more abundant and quick, then that of the Earth;
the generation of Fishes is placed between that of the Stars and Animals. And
thus, the necessity of twice three days is resolved.

CHAP. VIII.
A natural Discourse of the Creation of MAN.
1. BUt, because all these things consisted in Motion, nor could sustain the
proper notion of an end, 'twas necessary a Creature should be made, which
should so transcend and grow above Motion, as that, yet its beginning should be
in motion: which, because, according to its form it exceeded Motion and Matter,
a pure and, as it were, casual heap of Physical indivisibles, and a Mixtion
otherwise then particularly artificial could not frame.

2. A Body, therefore, by Angelical hands, was formed, which God alone, beyond
the power of Angels, could effectively Animate; and so, by their joynt-labour,
MAN was made: with that capacity of Body and, particularly, of Brain, which
should be most fit to polish his life conformably to Nature, according to the
conditions of the Time wherein he was set.

3. In a little while, therefore, beholding all kind of Plants, as also of
Animals and Birds, he learnt the nature of things: but, when he would have told
his thoughts in words; there was nothing among them all which could apprehend
or answer him. Falling asleep, therefore, with much solicitude, God made a
WOMAN to spring out of his side: To whom, at first sight; the Man joynd himself
with extreme love; and taught her which fruits were wholesome, which noxious
and unwholesome.

4. She, believing her Husband, but not knowing, her self, as he did; being
overcome with the deliciousness of a certain fruit provocative to Lust, both
eat her self and gave it to her too-uxorious husband: Whereupon, being out of
countenance with the swelling of their natural parts raised without their
consent, they sought for coverings.

5. Mean time, by the command of God, the Sun, raising the Wind and the Flux of
the Sea, turned the Earth aside, which before had its Axes direct and even with
those of the Ecliptic; and spoiled the Country where Man lived, of all its
beauty: and introducing colds, brought in the mortal state of the World: and
Man was forced to guard himself with Garments.

CHAP. IX.
An explication of Genesis, concerning the Creation of MAN.
1. THese things are dictated out of Nature; concerning which, there is an ampler
relation out of the sacred Records. For first, God is said to have spoken thus
to the Angels, let us make Man to our Image and Similitude: the word, let us
make, signifies a special concourse of God and not a general only, as to the
other things.

2. An Image differs from a Similitude, in that an Image speaks a relation of a
thing either measured by or derived from a pattern; but, a Similitude neither:
Besides, an Image may be and, for the most part, is of a nature inferior to
its pattern; but a Similitude falls so far short of the perfection of a
Similitude, as it participates of another nature. Man, therefore, was created
to the Image of God and to the Similitude of Angels; according to that, and
they shall be like the Angels of God, and again, Thou have abas'd him a little
lower then the Angels.

3. The Creation of Man is described thus, He formed of the Mud of the Earth;
the primitive propriety has, thinking to make, or, to frame as a Potter;
whereby is expressed, that the work of Man was a greater task then that of
other Creatures, and that it specially required the operation of an
Intelligence. Where our Text says, of the Mud of the Earth in the Original
it is, dust of red Earth: Now, of framable Earths, that the red are the best;
Pots for Pleasure made of them witness, which yield a savoury relish to the
drinkers: And the force of the word Dust is, to make us understand the Earth
was decocted into minutest parts; for, almost in all Arts, the more the matter
is divided, the more exquisite the work proves.

4. It follows, And He breathed into his Face the breath of life: in which
words, there is a clear expression of another operation, after the forming of his
body; to show that the production of a Rational Soul does not adequately
proceed out of second causes.

5. And the words which follow, And Man was made a living Soul* show that there
is no other but the rational Soul in Man, since his vegetation proceeded out
of that. That there are not, therefore, more subordinate Forms in any Matter,
appears from the propriety of the sacred Doctrine.

6. Again, the holy Writ says, God, therefore, took the Man, and placed him in
a paradise of Pleasure, to work and keep it: and He commanded him, saying, Of
every Tree, etc. Though it be not expressly taught that the knowledge of God
was infused into Man; yet, in that it is said, He breathed into his face, and
again, that He took him and commanded him, it is apparent enough, that God was
first known to him, and, by God, his science was derived to other things. For,
his first object, at the opening his Eyes, was his Inspirer before his face:
Him, therefore, first he knew, adored, and loved; and being showed by Him the
Herbs and Plants, the Beasts and Birds, he distinguished both the Virtue and
natures of each, and received them of Him for his own Use and Service; It Is
plain, therefore, that he could not choose but Believe God's sayings, Hope in
his Promises, and Love him as his Father.

7. That he learnt of God the Virtue of Herbs and Plants, it is evident, out of
those words, Thou shall eat of every Tree, etc. for, whilst He puts both an
Universality and an exception, he insinuates that Adam knew both. Moreover,
those words, where he is said to be placed in Paradise, to work and keep it,
(which he could not do, unless he knew the nature of Plants,) argue that he
knew them. Lastly, since it is expressly said of the Beasts and Birds, that, by
only seeing them, he thoroughly saw into their nature, in those words, to see
what he would call them, and again, whatever Adam called any living Soul, that
is its name; since it is most certain that the names were fitted* to the natures
of things, and consequently, were imposed upon the knowledge of them: It Is
clear that the inferior natures, too, were as easily known to him.

8. The sacred Author adds, But to Adam there was not found a helper like him:
the primitive expression is, And to the Man he found not a help as it were
before him, or, as others explicate, as it were against him. It appears,
therefore, that the WOMAN was made, not out of the necessity of nature alone,
but by the consent and will of Adam: God governing Man, a Reasonable Creature,
by persuasion and induction, not by force and command; that is, according to
the nature which he had given him.

9. It appears, again, that the Man was not only in his Matter, but even in his
Mind, the Author and Superior and, as it were, the Maker of the Woman.

10. But, since Adam had not yet felt the stings of the Flesh; neither knew he,
as yet, the need of a Woman, as Woman: but only he desired one to discourse
with, to whom he might declare his knowledge, and confer about his doubts.
This is that which was so grievous to the Man, that God said, 'twas not good
for him to be alone; and provided, not only for the present but for ever, that
he should have such as he might teach and converse with.

12. Nor makes it against this, that a Man may seem more proper for the
conversation of a Man: for it is not true, neither in regard of his Mind, nor of
his Body: For, it is known, that, as to his Body, a Man chooses to converse with
the beauteous, and Beauty is proper to Women (as they are condistinguisht to
Men): And, as for the Mind, a knower chooses to converse with one that will
learn and acquiesce, rather then one that will be refractory; but Women are
more credulous and obedient then Men: And, in respect to both Body and Mind,
the conversation is more sweet and agreeable with such as reciprocate love; but
Women are more obnoxious to love then Men.

12. And that she was required for Conversation, the very genuine expression
shows, in those words, a help, as it were, against him: For, since the
countenances of those that talk together are mutually turned toward one
another; and Man is made to be moved forward; it appears, that the faces of
those that discourse together are, as it were, of entrers by opposite and
contrary ways, and consequently, the faces themselves, according to the same
line, are opposite and contrary. Such a help, therefore, was not found amongst
all the Animals: whence, 'twas ill with Adam.

CHAP. X.
An explication of the same, concerning the Creation of WOMAN.
1. GOd, therefore, cast (the holy Text proceeds) a sleep upon Adam: the
Propriety is, and He made a sleep fall: for, sleep begins from the Brain and
the Head, and descends upon the rest of the Members: as also, the Cold of the
Night (which proceeds from Vapors that, having been raised up high by the Sun
and, refrigerated by its departure, descend) is a cause of sleep: in both
respects, therefore, it is more aptly expressed He made fall, then He cast.

2. Moreover, both Sopor and the primitive word express a deep sleep and like
to a Lethargy: the Septuagint interprets it, an Ecstasy; which so binds up the
Senses, that the ecstatick person cannot feel any, under the intensest, pain.

3. Now, it is easy to observe, that this sleep, at least in part, proceeded
from the former great contention and travail of his Mind to discern the natures
of all Animals, and from his pensiveness that he found not his comfort or
satisfaction in them all.

4. Adam lay down, therefore, on his right side: for Aristotle teaches, that
this posture is the aptest for sleeping. And what did God? He took (says the
holy Writ) one of his ribs, and filled up Flesh for it: In the Hebrew, the
Letter is more obscure, but thus, with propriety, it is expressed, and He took
one of his sides; and shut up flesh under it; and built the side, which He had
taken from the Man, into a Woman. The word which we have expressed by He took
is very large, and includes whatever manner of taking, for example, to lay hold
on; and the word which we have interpreted He shut up, is taken largely, too,
for He compassed about: The very Letter therefore, in fine, yields this sense,
God took to him one of Adam's sides and encompassed it with flesh, and built,
that is, framed or erected it into a Woman: So that the sense may be, that God
multiplied the flesh about one of his sides, and the flesh or side already
swollen He, by little and little, distributed and fashioned into a Woman; so
that, the Woman may seem to have proceeded out of the Man, as a Bough out of
the Trunk.

5. For, as the Sun drawing up the moisture of the Earth into the Trunk fixed
in the Earth, by percolation through the substance of the Trunk, makes the
moisture assume the nature of the Tree, and increase the Trunk, and rise up and
be distributed into parts befitting the entire Plant: So God, straining that
sleepy humor through the side of Adam, first made the side swell out with a
great deal of flesh* then be distributed into all the similary parts, and
lastly into the dissimilary.

6. And, besides that this Sense is very apt to the words, nothing is more
agreeable to the nature of things. For, to the three degrees of Man, the triple
procreation corresponds; Adam, as a Mixtum, was formed; Eve, as a Plant, grew
out of Adam; Abel, as an Animal, was born of Animals. Besides, reason requires,
that, since in Adam there was the next and immediate matter of the Woman, she
should not be made out of any other then that: but, like is made out of like by
accretion, according to Nature.

Moreover, She is produced out of his Side, because there is both flesh and bone
and, through the nearness of the Bowels, especially of the Heart to the left
side, it necessarily participates more of the Vegetative Virtue then any other
member of the exterior Cataphragm. Bringing to, here, is, clearly, to be
interpreted, not for a translation from place to place; but, for an Oblation or
exhibition. It follows in the Divine History, This, now, is bone of my bones;
and for, now, the Hebrews read this time: The force of both terms is the same,
viz. that God otherwhiles offered him incongruous things; but, now, something
agreeable, and natural.

8. Under the name of Bone and Flesh the whole Body is understood; that is, the
rest of the similary parts whereof a Man is compacted.

9. She shall be called, etc. Since what Adam called every living Soul, that is
its name, the term given the Woman must signify the proper notion of Woman;
which is desum'd, not from her Matter, but from her Form and End: how comes,
therefore, this name which Adam imposed (even himself being witness) to be
taken from the Matter? It must be said, that those words, because she is taken
out of Man, do not signify because she is made of Man, which is common with
her to Lice and Fleas; but, because she is of the same nature with Man. And,
it is to be observed, that the Hebrew word signifies prince, or chief, or
fundamental, or subsistent: so that the sense may be, Because she is of the
nature of Man, to excel the Animals as He himself.

11. Adam says farther, that they should be two in one flesh, or, as the
primitive reading has it, into one flesh, viz. three manner of ways; in the
Issue, which proceeds from both; in the Woman, since Physicians affirm that the
Seed of the Man disappears, being transum'd into the flesh of the Woman; and
lastly, by Consent for Copulation: for, since that is perfect which is apt to
make its like, neither the Man nor the Woman, without one another, is perfect;
both, therefore, as they combine to the production of their like, integrate
one, Physically-perfect, Animal.

11. Whence, it is understood, why God neither said let Woman be made, nor, let
us make Woman; but, I will make; for, so, the truth of the holy language has
it: namely, because the mixtion of the Elements into Flesh, which was the
proper action of the Angels, was already done in the forming of Adam; and the
augmentation of that exceeded not the power of Adam's nature; the rest,
therefore, was only the concreation of a Soul, which belonged to God alone.

CHAP. XI.
An explication of Genesis concerning PARADISE.
1. THus, Man was entirely perfected: what misfortunes afterward befell him
let us enquire out of the mystical Book. It says, therefore, And the Lord God
had planted a Paradise of Pleasure from the beginning, wherein he put the Man
whom he had formed: The Hebrews read a Garden, which says the same thing; but,
what is signified by these names must be sought out of the description. First
of all, therefore, we are taught, that, out of the ground, there was born in it
every Tree fair to sight and sweet to eat; which, from the description of the
Third day, it is clear, agrees to the whole Earth.

2. The next is, that the Tree of Life, and the Tree of the Science of Good and
evil (as Eve witnesses) were in the middle of Paradise; now, it is an Hebrew
propriety to say in the middle, for that which is among or within: The letter
has it thus, And God made to spring out of the Earth every Tree, fair to sight
and sweet to eat; the Tree also, of Life in the middle of Paradise, and the
Tree of the Science of Good and evil: that is, All kind of Trees pleasant to
sight and taste; among which were good Trees and conducing to life, and some
which were apt to make a Man experience evil things as well as good.

3. It Is added, that A river went out from the place of Pleasure; the force of
the Hebrew word is, out of Pleasure; to water Paradise, and thence it is divided
into four heads; in the Hebrew, and from there (that is, already in Paradise)
it is divided and is into four heads. The sense is, that out of the abundance
and fertility of the Earth, water sprung in four heads or great Rivers: for
it is incongruous that one river divided into more, should be said divided into
heads, but into branches or arms; nor are there any where found appliably to
Paradise, four Rivers, which can ever be conjectured to have flowed from one
head; nor can any other place of Pleasure or a more fertile place then Paradise
be imagined, from whence this river should flow to water Paradise.

4. And what is here called fertility and abundance, is described to have
agreed to the whole Earth, at that time; it being said, that a Fountain
ascended out of the Earth, watring the whole superficies of the Earth: Where,
the native Text, in stead of Fountain, has a Vapor; whereof the Book of
Wisdom seems to speak, when it says that She covered the whole Earth as with
a Mist; and, perhaps, the Psalmist, when, after the forming of the Earth, he
subjoyns, The Abyss is the vestment of its clothing, waters shall stand upon
the Mountains.

5. An example, too, of such like we have in some very hot and moist regions;
in one of the Canaries, in the Island of Saint Thomas, and some others; that
there issues a Vapor out of the Earth, which being refrigerated with the
shadow of the Trees, descends in a Rain and feeds the Fountains and Rivers.
And, it cannot be, but, out of the Earth yet moist, by the power of the Sun,
for some time, such a Vapor must issue and water the Earth, and be derived
into Rivers.

6. But, now, the enumeration of the Rivers makes the matter manifest: for it
takes the four greatest Rivers known to the Hebrews, and which washed the whole
world that they knew; and says that Paradise was watered by them. But, those
that labor to derive these Names to other Rivers, run into mere and incoherent
Conjectures.

7. The Scripture adds, The Lord God took, therefore, the Man and put him in
the Paradise of Pleasure, that he should work and keep it. Chapter 10. N. 4.
The Hebrew word for, he took, is the same with that above, when we spoke of
Adam's side, and signifies the same as, take in the largest sense; nor, in this
place, does it express any other thing then an application or conjunction of
God to Adam, and not a local carrying, as, before, it is said of the word He
brought. But it is said above to Adam, that he should take the Earth for his
matter to work on, and fill it: We have it, therefore, that the Garden which
Adam was to cultivate and inhabit, is the same which he was commanded to fill
and subject; and whereof it is said that, as yet, there was not the Man to
labor it, but a Vapor ascended and watered its universal superficies. Add to
these, that the whole Earth was cursed; that the whole, before the curse, was
created for Adam and his Issue; which, in a Garden only, could not have had
room enough.

8. Consider the honor of Husbandry: both that, of all the Mechanics, it is
the work that is most proper to mankind: and it is a keeping or preserving of the
Earth; for the Earth grows better by cultivation, but uncultivated it grows
barren and, as it were, perishes.

9. Besides this precept, God added another positive one for nourishing
himself, and a negative one for not killing himself by intemperancy.

CHAP. XII.
The History of ADAM'S FALL, out of Genesis.
1. THe divine Author begins the following History, saying, Moreover, the
Serpent was more crafty then all the living Creatures of the Earth: the word
which corresponds to Serpent, in the original, is derived from a Verb which
signifies to observe or to pry into secrets; wherefore, a priori, it signifies,
an Observer, a lier in wait and what in the Gospel, the Tempter: and where the
Latin Interpreter puts all living Creatures, the sacred Author uses a very
large word which comprehends Man too: So that the sense may be, the Tempter was
craftier even then Man himself; as, also, it appeared by the event.

2. He came, therefore, to the Woman and said, Why has God commanded you, etc.
in the original letter, even that God has said: as if it should say, was it
not enough for God to have obliged you to keep his Garden, but even must he
not-permit you to eat? To whom the Woman answered, Yes, we do eat of the rest,
but should we eat of the Tree of the Knowledge of good and evil, we should die.
It Is evident, therefore, this command was given by God, not as out of power and
prerogative, but for the good of those to whom 'twas given, and Man is governed
by God always for the good of Man himself.

3. The Tempter therefore reply's again, You shall not die, but you shall be
like Gods: the Analogy of the two Temptations is to be noted, Say that these
stones be made bread, and, He forbids you to Eat: He has commanded his Angels
concerning thee, and, Ye shall not die: lastly, All these will I give thee,
and, Ye shall be like Gods.

4. It Is added, The woman, therefore, saw that the Tree was good to eat, and
fair and delightful to behold, etc. The Tree is put for the Apple; or,
certainly, in respect of the Apple, these things agreed to it. And whereas it is
said, she saw the apple to be sweet to the taste, or good for food, as the
original reading has it; it argues that the Woman, too, to some degree, from
the sight of Plants, especially the earnest looking on them, knew their
natures. And the Author, instead of this, delightful to behold, has, desired
to look earnestly upon, or, to understand; and the sense is, that the Woman saw
her Appetite so to have increased, that she could not turn away her Eyes: Or
else the word saw signifies considered; and the sense will be, She considered
that the Apple was desirable for the Knowledge that would follow it, upon the
Tempter's words.

5. The Woman, therefore, eat, and gave, too, to the Man; who was not deceived,
that is, did not eat upon a false persuasion, but, as it is subjoined, obeyed
the voice of his wife: For, alas! he was effeminate, and durst not, through
excess of love, oppose his Wife.

6. It Is collected out of the circumstances, that the Tempter or lier-in-wait
had observed the Woman absent from her Husband, near the forbidden Tree, at the
hour when her Appetite to eat made way for his treacheries.

7. But, let us see the effect. The sacred Text, therefore, says, that the
eyes of them both were opened and they knew they were naked. But it is plain
that, not presently upon their eating, but after some time (suppose, when, by
concoction, the poison of the Apple was digested into their bowels,) this
effect happened: for, if, immediately as soon as the Woman had eaten, her eyes
had been opened, she would have blushed and not dared to appear before her
Husband; or, at least, being sollicitous and troubled about the change she
felt, she would have told it him.

8. But, how their eyes were opened and how they knew themselves to be naked,
appears by the following action, that they made themselves aprons or girdles,
to cover with them the parts destined for generation. Evident, therefore, it is
that, by their eating the Apple, their flesh rose and was moved without their
consent. The effect, therefore, of the Apple was immediately to provoke Lust;
and, through the intoxication, as it were, of luxury, to shake off the use or
command of Reason.

9. The very description, too, of the Fruit insinuates it to have this virtue.
For, Physicians say that sweet is primely nutritive, as consisting of hot and
moist connaturall to the Animal; and that, whatever nourishes does it, in as
much as it is sweet: Good, therefore, for food (when it is spoken by way of
eminency) is, what is very nutritive: but Seed is made of the superfluity of
the nourishment: Good, therefore, to the taste, or, for food, shows it was
provokative of lust. The splendor, too, of color, since it proceeds out of a
good commixtion of subtle and oily parts, is apt to follow the sweetness.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Punishment of our first Parents: out of the same.
1. IT follows in the History, And when they had heard the voice of the Lord
God walking in Paradise, at the cool, after noon; The Hebrew says, when they
had heard the noise of him coming into the garden at the aspiring of the day,
or daybreak: and the sense is, that God, in the Morning, with the cool air
which goes before or accompanies the Sun, came into the Garden; namely, to be
adored by Adam: whence, when Adam appeared not, but had hidden himself in the
middle of the Trees of Paradise, that is, among the Trees, which were very
thick, He called him. And this sense seems the better: for, what could be the
end why God should appear a-walking? besides, that the cool of the day is
better understood the Morning then the Evening; whence, in the Canticles, it is
said of the Morning, 'Till the day aspire and the shadows be inclined: for, not
that which is done by the day retiring, but what the day brings along with it,
is properly attributed to the Day.

2. It Is added, how God examined Adam and Eve; but He punished the Tempter
without an examen, as being a professed enemy and of a known malice. The first
punishment is, that He should be cursed of all living Creatures; for so, the
primitive expression has it, not among living Creatures. The second the Latin
Interpreter puts to be, thou shall go upon thy breast: but the Hebrew word
derives from a verb which signifies to sigh, or, to burst out, as it were, the
issue out of one in travail; so that, the sense may be, In sighing and grief as
of one in travail, that is, Thy whole life and all thy actions shall be full of
grief and pain.

3. The third is, Thou shall eat Earth, but the Hebrew says, thou shall
destroy Dust all the days of thy life; which seems the better; for Serpents
corrupt the Earth with their breath, but do not eat it, that I ever read. Nor
hinders it, that, in Isaiah we read, To the Serpent dust is his bread: for,
That was not to be in the holy Mountain, which was the effect of Malediction:
Better, therefore, it is explicated, to the Serpent ashes to warm him; that is,
the Serpent shall be no longer an enemy to Man, but shall dwell in the
Chimnies, (as it is read of some domestical ones); whence, it is immediately
subjoined, They shall not hurt nor kill in all my holy Mountain. In the text of
Genesis, the same word is put for dust which was in the forming of Man: that
the sense may be, Thy design shall not be against Angels, like thy self; but
how thou may undo such as are made of Earth.

4. Out of what has been said concerning the Tempter, it appears, there is no
necessity of interpreting that the Devil should have come to the Woman by the
means of a real Serpent, or in the figure of a Serpent; but in a form like
that, in which he came to our Lord Christ: For, first, most of the things that
are said agree not to a real Serpent; viz. to be craftier then any living
Creature; to be able to speak, without frighting the woman; to speak not of
things they saw, but of Gods.

5. Again, his being cursed of all living Creatures, his being cursed to eat
Earth, agree not to a real Serpent: and that one only thing which agrees, viz.
to go in upon his breast; since it is a natural manner of creeping, was had by
Creation. Wherefore, the opinion of a Serpent or a Serpent's figure seems to
have proceeded from the equivocation of the Hebrew word, or, a Metaphorical
use of a Serpent for the Devil.

6. The following Prophesy, too, concerns the Devil, not a Serpent: For a
Serpent is no more an enemy to Man then to the other Animals; but the Devil is
to Christ; and he bruises the heel of Christ, in as much as he debauches and
masters the lowest rank of Christians, or the wicked; Christ too, breaks his
head, both because He is to judge the Angels, as also because He takes away the
power the Devil has in the world.

7. There follow, the Evils which seize on the Woman through sin; that She
should have more and harder labors; that She should be under the power of her
husband, and be oppressed by him. And, that this violent Subjection proceeds
from sin, is plain enough; since it rises from the indiscretion of both
parties: Bringing forth, also, with pain, evidently, proceeds from the same;
for, even yet, many Women under the Equator, bring forth with little or no
pain: now, the pain in Travail comes through the dryness of the members, by
reason whereof the Bone cannot give place, which is easily conjectured to
proceed from the intemperatenesse of the Air and of Meats.

8. Lastly, that her Conceptions are more is manifest, in respect of Abortions
and imperfect Conceptions: but, whether through the intemperancy of Copulation;
or the shortness of the time of going with child, which, may be, should have
been longer; and lastly, whether, because in the immortal state of Paradise
there should not have been requisite so copious an Issue, therefore the
Conceptions should have been fewer, it is disputable.

9. Among the maledictions of Adam, the rest appear plainly to proceed from the
sterility of the Earth; but this, that he should eat the herb of the field,
seems, from the beginning, to have been indulged him as a blessing, and here
it is reputed amongst his punishments: But, the sense is, that he should be
compelled to lay up in Barns the herbs of the field to eat; because, sometimes,
the Earth should yield none.

10. Moreover, those words, 'till thou returnest into the Earth out of which
thou art taken, etc. clearly show that he should have been immortal; that is,
have lived a long time, and afterward, not be divested but cloathed-over, as
the Apostle speaks.

11. It follows, how he was cast out of Paradise; and it is said, that, Adam
being cast out, God placed, before the Paradise of Pleasure, a Cherubim and a
flaming and turning sword, to keep the way of the Tree of life. To understand
which, we must reflect upon the universal cause of the Corruption of all
things, especially of Living Creatures. And, because Animals are cold in death,
it is plain, that Cold is the cause of Death; whence, we see, that Winter is, as
it were, the old Age of the Year, The years, therefore, had continued in one
state of heat and cold in Paradise; and to introduce Winter, is to make life
shorter, and to have brought Death nearer.

12, The cause, therefore, of the variety of the year is the cause of Death:
and this, Astronomers teach, happens, because the Earth keeps not still its
same parts to the Sun, or in that it conforms not its Axis to the Axis of the
Ecliptic, but always turns it from the Poles of the Ecliptic to the Poles of
the Equator; and this, Naturalists teach us, happens through that motion, by
which the Flux of the Sea turns the Earth; and, the Flux of the Sea, from a
Wind which the Sun under the Equator raises.

13. Let Us see what the sacred monuments express concerning this: First,
therefore, They say, that which was to be done was, therefore, done, least,
perhaps, he should reach out his hand and take of the Tree of Life, and eat,
and live a full age, or a thousand years: whence, it is evident, that the virtue
of the Tree of Life was not wholly to exempt from Death, but to defer it and
make to live in seculum, that is, a long time; which virtue there is no doubt is
taken away by the empairing of the Fruits.

14. Then, that which our translation says before Paradise, others render from
the East to Paradise. If, therefore, (as we have said) the whole Earth was
Paradise, and the motion of the Earth proceeds from the Sun, the cause of the
conversion of the Earth is from the East, and, to be from the East is, to be
before the Earth and Paradise. Moreover, that which ours renders a Cherubim and
a flaming and turning sword, in the original is a Cherubim and the edge of a
sword turning it self. The one Phrase shows that the force of Death proceeded
from a Cherubim by flames and fire; and the other, by turning: Now, that the
Sun's motion proceeds from a Cherubim or an Angel, Metaphysics demonstrate:
If, therefore, that winding of the terrestrial Axis to the Poles of the
Equator, be derived from the Sun; and, from that, the nature of Death, by the
variation of light and heat; is it not evident (if a sword may signify a
killing power) how a Cherubim, with a flaming and turning sword, keeps the way
to the Tree of life, least Man should live by it a full age.

15. And, he that thinks this interpretation, of a sword for a killing power,
too hard; let him remember the Angel, in the threshing floor of Ornam, holding
a drawn sword to bring the Plague upon Jerusalem. Let him consider, also, if
the name of Sword be taken materially, how disagreeable the narration will be:
for, the Angel should have been placed, not from the East, or, before Paradise,
but round about: nor would there be any need of a turning sword, but of a sharp
one; for, the Angel could have turned it, as he pleased.

16. Lastly, the clothing of Adam and his wife with Coats made of skins,
manifestly insinuates that the Cold grew upon them; the Year, as it were, now
inclining toward Winter: whence, it seems, 'twas Autumn in that Region where
Adam was created. Yet, it is not necessary, that God must have given them those
Coats of skins immediately upon the malediction, but after some time; when,
having done Penance, they had sacrificed Beasts to God: with whose skins God
covered them, not so much for their nakcdnesse sake, which was covered with
Aprons, as for the Colds, and therefore they were made of skins with which
Beasts are kept warm.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Evils derived to posterity: out of the same.
1. NOne doubts, nor can, according to what we have said, but this state of
infelicity and Death is derived to us, the Posterity of Adam, from his Sin:
but, what evil or corruption we derive, as to the Mind, it is to be considered.
And, first, it is evident, that the Understanding of Adam was most happy; which
so easily attained the knowledge of things, that, at first sight, he could
impose significant names upon every one.

2. Which is not so to be understood, that he perfectly saw through all things:
for, from the deceit of Eve, and both their hiding themselves from the face of
God, it is clear, their discourse was short and imperfect at that time. Nor, is
it believed that they lost their natural force: wherefore, by nature, their
understanding was so hinderable by Passion, as to bring them to such
Inconsideration.

3. But, we read, too, that they were naked, and blushed not before their Sin,
but afterward: whence, we understand, there were before no inordinate Motions
in them, since, in lust, the most vehement kind, they had none.

4. Now, for Man to have no inordinate Motions in him, may happen two ways:
One, that we should assert there were indeed such Motions, but, as it were,
rooted out by a long use and exercise of Virtues: another way, that we should
imagine his nature so temperate and equally balanced between Passions; that it
should submit it self entirely to Reason, out of its own equability, and not
out of an acquired dominion of Reason.

5. And, since God might have created Man in the perfection of either of these;
if we consider the circumstance of the newness of nature, we shall rather
assent to the later description: for the former state is of one already
proceeded from power to act; but this later is a certain species of
potentiality, or of Man, as to his Soul, existing in power: that, the state of
Man grown good, of evil that he was; this, of Man not yet knowing good and
evil, or, untaught by experience: To that Man it is now hard to Sin, and certain
that he will not be separated from the love of Christ; to this, it is easy
not-to-sin, but Sin is rather unknown to him then hard, and consequently, his
entrance to good or evil is doubtful: That state is more established in the
Brain through the exercise of Reason; this more in the Body, through the
goodness of its Temperature; whence, this is more propagable to his Issue,
though that be so, too, in some degree.

6. Since, therefore, Philosophy teaches, that even that complexion of nature,
which rises from acquired habits and exercise, is apt to be derived to the
Issue; much more that, which was by Nature planted in Adam, would have passed
into his Posterity. His Children, therefore, had he not sinned, would have
attained, from their Origin, a certain equability of Passions, whereby they
would have grown easily obedient to Reason; or rather, they would have had no
passion more vehement then was just fit, so that they would have felt no
difficulty in following right Reason: from which disposition he seems not to
have St. Bernard* been far, of whom it is wonderfully said, that Adam, in him,
had not sinned.

7. Whence, the perverse motion of the will in our first Parents, was apt to
proceed only from extrinsecall solicitation: So, we see, in the answer of Eve,
that she was content with the command; 'till the Devil, proposing a show of
fallacious reason, which she could not see through, had fastened, as it were,
her mind to the delectable form of the Apple before her; by which fastening,
that natural equality was corrupted: which, too, in like manner, happened to
Adam, through his amorous fixednesse to his wife; as may be collected out of
his words, wherein there is no praising of God the giver, but only a
commemoration of the loveliness of the woman. It Is evident, therefore, that
the natural principles of motion and passion were corrupted in both our
Parents; and so, in Generation, an inequality was derived to their issue: not
one equal to Theirs, but one far greater; it being now corrupted from the
change of site to the Heavens, and the quality of the Air and Food: and so,
irrecoverably their Posterity drew from the Womb of their Mother an Origin or
inclination to sin.

8. Which negation of equability, because it is in a subject to which an
equality is due by its Creation, attains the nature of a privation: and,
because the guilt of Adam is in it, or, because we derive our Origin from him,
it is, therefore, called ORIGINAL, not formal, SIN: and, because it is
impossible that Man, infected with this, can live without sin, by the strength
of nature and without new Grace; therefore Nature is called the Slave of Sin,
and given up into slavery to the Devil. But, whether Original sin comprehends,
besides an indisposition of the sensitive Soul, a privation of Charity
consequent from it, in the Issue, (because there is nothing offered out of our
text, spoken concerning that matter) I leave to the curious.

9. It suffices us that, out of what has been said, it may be understood, how
Original Sin is singular in every one, how it is derived by Generation, and how
it proceeds from the fault of another.

10. Of these things that have been said, I know not whether we have not, in
some measure, an Example in Cain and Abel: Cain being conceived in Sin,
(perhaps, the very night after eating the forbidden fruit, before God, by
punishment, had provoked them to Penance); Abel, in the time of Penance:
whence, Cain contracted, in the conception, his Mothers envy against God; Abel
her humility and piety; wherefore, what our Interpreter renders I have possessed
a Man by God, may be more truly translated, I have loved a Man against God.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Propagation of Mankind: out of the same.
1. AFter the Death of his Brother, Cain departed into the barrener parts (as
appears, from his Curse): And, this was the first occasion of filling the
several quarters of the Earth. And, he is said to have sojourned toward the
East from Eden; or rather, toward the West, for the original letter has it,
he sat down in a strange Country before Eden, that is, he dwelt in a far
Country before Eden, that is, to which the face of Eden is turned, (Adam and
his Family being supposed to look after him when he went from them), that is,
to the West, or, having Eden Eastward. Now Eden seems to be called that Country
in which Adam dwelt, in memory of the Pleasure he had there.

2. And the sacred Author prosecutes the Generations of Cain to the seventh
descent; and tells us the Cities that were built, and the Arts both for use and
pleasure invented in them. But, how many years each generation contained, he
mentions not: but, it is likely, they were shorter then the generations assigned
to Seth; whence, in the time of Enos (which extends to about a thousand years
after the nativity of Henoch, the firstborn of Cain) the children of Adam, on
Cain's side, may have been exceedingly multiplied, and that happened which is
written, that, in his time, The invocation of the name of the Lord was
polluted, viz. in most of the posterity of Seth and Adam, through their
Marriages with the daughters of Cain.

3. For, since the Sons of Seth, and the rest that lived with Adam, may seem to
have followed a Pastoral life, and to have lived temperately; but the
Daughters of Cain to have been delicate and luxurious: there appears on the
Male's side strength and virility; and, on the Female's, abundance of Moisture,
figurable by heat; whence, it is consonant, that a vast and robust issue was
born out of their conjunction. And, out of confidence of their great forces,
men are prone to fall to injuring and oppressing the weak: whence, Lamech
called it a consolation, to kill all mankind; according to the byword that
says, It Is better to be alone then ill accompanied.

4. But, whether they were of a huge stature of body, such as we call Giants,
appears not out of the sacred History; where nothing else is said, but that
they were Oppressors, Strong, and such as got themselves a Name, or fame.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the FLOOD: out of the same.
1. WHen, therefore, they were impenitent, whilst Noe built the Ark, to save
the few just, that is, eight persons; the waters began to pour down upon the
Earth; which Genesis describing, says thus. Such a year, month, and day, all
the Fountains of the great Abyss were broken up, and the Cataracts of Heaven
were opened, and there was made a Rain upon the Earth forty days and forty
nights. The original text, for were broken up, has, slit themselves, and, for
Cataracts, a word which signifies occult cavities, from a word which imports as
much as, to ly in wait; as if it would say, that the Repositories of heaven,
wherein God had placed, as it were, waters in ambush, were opened.

2. To these is to be added that place, in the Second of Peter, wherein it is
said, there was of old a Heaven and an Earth, of waters and by waters
consisting, by the word of God, by which that world, then, overflow^d with
waters, perished: But, it cannot be understood, as if the Earth consisted of
Water; which is no where written, but rather the contrary, viz. that the Earth
was created together with the Waters: the sense, therefore, is, that Heaven
consists of waters, the Earth by waters, to wit, mingled together by that
mighty fire (whereof largely above): Chap. 3.
Consisting, therefore, is referred to both, though it be construed with the
later.

3. It says, then, that the old world was overflowed by these two waters;
whence, it is evident, those are distinct waters which are, here, called the
Cataracts of heaven, from those called the fountains of the great abyss. Now,
we find no more about Heaven, after the Fourth Day, but that, a vapor ascended
from the Earth to water the universal face of the Earth: and, that the Earth
was covered with a Mist: and as much concerning the Sea; Job speaking in the
person of God, when I put it on a Cloud for its vestment, and wrapped it in
darkness as in the clothes of Infancy. For, these signify, that the Air was
thick, and misty; there sweating, by the Suns force, as it were, a perpetual
watery humor out of the Earth, whose thinner parts were of necessity
continually raised up into Clouds: which could not fall, for a time, whilst the
Air, quite up to them, was thick and as heavy as they: but, after, the Earth
being dried, the Air between the Earth and the Clouds, became it self, too,
more dry and subtle, the terrestrial humidity being spent; then, at length,
with a mighty vehemence, the long-treasur'd-up waters in the clouds descended;
in such abundance, that the Fountains which broke out from the more eminent
parts of the Earth were so over-charg'd, they slit their channels and, with
open Torrents, roul'd into the Rivers, and they, oreflowing their banks, all at
once into the Sea. Thus, therefore, by the waters whereof the former Heavens
consisted, that is, the midst between the Earth and the Stars, and by which the
Earth consisted, viz. which lay hid in its bowels, the whole Earth was
o'reflow'd in the time of Noe.

4. And the History tells, that the waters rose fifteen Cubits above the tops
of the Mountains: now, it is not incredible that some Men were so tall; so that
this quantity of water was altogether necessary; nay, if there had been strong
Trees upon the highest Mountains, which could have resisted the water, this
proportion of water had been less then needed.

5. For, since, after the Deluge, Og may seem to have been nine Cubits high;
before the Deluge, it is credible enough, there were some near fifteen: Though,
to persuade one's self, there were ever Men of that vastness which is
attributed to the Cyclops, and certain Relics found in the New World, there
needs a great faith; for, these stories depend on uncertain memories, or on
conjectures of Men talking, according to likelihood, of old Bones.

6. But, to return to the abundance of the waters. The severer Mathematicians,
now adays, do not believe any Mountain to be higher, perpendicularly, then one
Italian mile: nor need we believe the Mountains, before the Flood, were so high
as they are now the valleys are hollowed deeper with continual Rains. If,
therefore, fifteen Cubits be abated from the highest Mountains, make account
the water rose a Mile, perpendicular, about the Earth.

7. Whence, 'twill be deduced, that about an equal proportion of water out of
the Clouds and out of the bowels of the Earth concurred to the Deluge: for, if
a Pail set in the open Air in a very violent rain, will be filled a cubits
height in an hour; in forty days and forty nights, a continual and vehement
rain from all parts of the Heavens, would overflow the whole Earth little less
then a thousand Cubits high: as much, therefore, or more water was to be
strein'd out of the Earth, that the Flood might rise to a thousand Paces high.

8. Which to render credible, reflect upon the artifice of Husbandmen, not
unusual amongst us, by which they draw some feets depth of water over their
barrener grounds; with the weight whereof the superficies of the Earth being
loaded, is pressed down and constipated with the lower Earth, and so fills
those hollownesses into which the Air's entrance caused the barrenness;
whereupon they are rendered fruitful. From which experiment, it is evident, that
a huge weight of water brought upon the Earth must compresse it, strein out the
water which was hid in it, and repress its swelling; and consequently,
constipate the Earth and force it into a lesser Circle. Since, therefore, the
power of the Deluge may easily be believed to have extended it self three miles
perpendicular within the Earth, (for the Sea is judged so deep, now, in the
deepest parts): let the Earth but have contracted it self one sixth part of
those three miles, and you have water pressed out of its own bowels to cover it
five hundred paces round about. We have, therefore, a fit proportion of water
for so great an effect, if we can contrive whence so much water may have
ascended into the Clouds.

9. But, if the little less then two thousand years space be reflected on, in
which the Sun raised up perpetual vapors to the very Sphere of the Moon, and
perhaps higher; and kept them there, by reason of the continual thickness of
that Air between the Earth and Heaven* It will be easily credible, that there
were Clouds amassed together enough to pour down forty days and nights
violent Rain; which, we have said, is sufficient for the effect.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Cessation of the Deluge: out of the same.
1 THe inspired Writer prosecutes the abatement of the water; which he divides
into four parts: to the resting of the Ark upon the mountains of Armenia, a
hundred and ten days; thence, 'till the appearing of the mountains tops, about
seventy days; from those, to the time when the superficies of the Earth showed
it self; and from thence, to the entire dryness, almost as many days as in he
first part, divided almost equally.

2. The causes of so unequal decrease are two, deduced from the letter: a Wind
which God raised; and a motion of the water, proceeding from the Wind. As for
the Wind, it is clear, when the Sun began, now, to shine bright, the Clouds
being dispersed, and there was nothing but water upon which it might act; there
could no other wind be raised, then such as, even now, we experience in that
vast Clime of the Pacifick and Atlantic Seas: though we must needs think 'twas
far more both vehement and ample, when there were no Shores at all whence
Contrary winds might blow, and contract its bounds.

3. The first part, therefore, of the abatement was made by this Wind, through
the mediation of the Sun, which turned the Waters into Wind: and the Wind, now
dried, dried the waters by adhesion, as we see it does Linen clothes, by
carrying away with it the watery parts.

4. And the Ark is believed to have rested upon the highest Mountain in those
parts. The Hebrews say, that it sunk twelve Cubits into the water; still,
therefore, by this account, the water was twelve Cubits above the neighboring
Mountains: but, these Cubits by reason of the former contraction of the Sphere
of the waters, were less, in proportion, then those whereof there were fifteen
before above the highest Mountains; as also, then those which the water had
abated, from the top of the highest Mountain to the top of that upon which the
Ark rested: wherefore, to these Cubits, about seventy days are assigned.

5. From the discovery of the Mountain-tops, to the appearing of the Earths
superficies, about fifty five days more are counted: both because every day
the Sphere became more contracted, and the Sun more ardent through the
reflection from the higher parts of the Earth; as also, because the motion of
the water, now, concurred; whereof the divine Book says nothing but and the
waters returned from the Earth, going and coming, and again, but the waters
went, and decreased. There can be no doubt, but this motion of the waters,
since it proceeded from the Wind, which rose from the Sun, followed,
principally, Its course, that is, was from East to West; and consequently, that
the water is said to have gone and come, because the water which was moved
under the Equator, farther off from the Equator returned, by the force of
gravity; because the water was lower in those parts out of which it had been
expuls'd by the Wind: And this, 'till the mountain tops appeared, was regular;
but, afterward, by incountring the mountains and higher parts of the Earth,
this course of the water, at least in those parts, was interrupted.

6. Whence, there is no farther mention of it; though its effect toward drying
up the water began then to be greatest: For, by this flux of the water, the
Earth, by degrees, was heaped up toward the mountains, and there was a more
ample Channel dig'd for the waters, especially in that part which was to
remain covered with them. Whence, the fourth book of Esdras witnesses, that, at
the Creation of the World, there remained only a seventh part covered with
waters; but, now, Cosmographers will have the Superficies to be half Sea.

7. Moreover, by this agitation, if any Cave remained empty within the Earth,
there was a passage opened to it for the waters. Whence it appears, what became
of such a mighty bulk of water: for no little part of it was consumed by the
Sun in Wind, and to condense the upper Air to that proportion which was
convenient for the nature of things; another part was swallowed up into the
cavities of the Earth; the rest, having dig'd it self a vast Channel, remained
in that part of the Earth, which we, now, call Sea.

8. But, I must not pass over this place, without advising that the Cause of
the flux and reflux of the Sea is clearly taught to proceed from the Wind, B.
3. Les. 13.
as it is explicated in Physics, the Scripture straight adding, and the waters
returned from the Earth, going and coming, immediately after the bringing the
Spirit upon the Earth. But, some may object, that, during the forty days
rain, there was no such wind; and consequently, no Flux of the Sea neither;
and, because the Diurnall motion follows from that, neither can there have been
Days and Nights.

9. It Is answered, Such vast Clouds and Rain could not happen without Tempests;
and consequently, since this Rain was regular, a regular Wind, too, accompanied
it; and this, according to the course of the Sun, since the greatest heat is
not to be expected but under the Sun: The Wind, therefore, was more vehement
those forty days, to roll about such a Mass of waters; whence the equality
of days and nights may have been preserved either wholly or very near. It Is a
sign, too, of a Wind, that the Ark is said to be carried upon the waters, and
to have rested upon a Mountain, whereas 'twas made in a Valley.

10. The sacred Historian seems to add two other causes of the decrease of the
waters, viz. the shutting up of the Fountains of the Abyss, and of the
Cataracts of Heaven, or the prohibition of Rain from Heaven: But, this later
cause is clearly an effect of the wind's being calmed and of the Clouds being
all spent, as already fallen down upon the Earth: And the former is an effect
of the drying of the Mountains; for because the Mountains were dried, vapors
began to ascend into their tops, which flowed out in little channells and
rivulets, as before the Deluge: whence, it appears that their reading, too, who
interpret it the fountains of the Abyss were revealed, comes to the same thing.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Covenant made with NOE after the Flood: out of the same.
1. AT length, Noe and his family being gone out of the Ark, God made a
Covenant with them, that he would overwhelm the Earth no more with waters: and
placed for a sign of the Covenant, His Bow in the Clouds. And that the Rainbow
is, indeed, a sign there shall be no Deluge at that time, is evident from
hence, that, unless the Sun shine otherwhere, there appears no Rainbow; it is
clear, therefore, that there is not enough Rain in the Clouds, to o'rewhelm the
Earth.

2. But, since, these words were said to Noe, who had already lived six hundred
years; if he had beheld the Rainbow so many years, and afterward experienced
the Flood; he could not but have wondered it should import such a signification:
We must say, therefore, that, without doubt, the Rainbow was never used to be
seen before the Flood; nor is it hard to render a reason on it, out of what has
been said.

3. For, since Naturalists tell us, a Rainbow is made out of a double or triple
reflection or refraction of light in every drop of a light show'ry cloud;
whence proceeds this variety of colors: and light, so weak and scattered, or,
the foresaid colors, cannot reach our Eyes at such a distance, unless the
Air be very clear and pure: and, through the humidity of the Earth joined with
heat, a thick Air inveloped the Earth all that time: 'Twas absolutely
impossible a Rainbow should be seen.

4. Besides, it seems, that, for all the later years, a great mass of Clouds
must needs have so covered the face of the Heavens, that the Sun was rather
felt then seen; as we find it is, for whole weeks, sometimes, together, in
Winter in those Northern Countries which, yet, are not excessively cold. No
wonder, therefore, the Rainbow had not showed it self before the Flood.

5. Next, it is to be observed how God contracted the Age of men, and with what
he requited it. Now, it is evident, that the Earth, by means of the Deluge,
became far colder and dryer: That 'twas colder, after such a Mass of waters,
so long, not only covering and compressing it, but penetrating into its very
bowels, any one will believe.

6. But, that water should dry, will perhaps hardlyer relish: but, if we
consider, that sodden things are rendered dry, through the extraction of their
natural moisture, when they are too much boiled: if we reflect that Trees are
thrown by Timber-men into water, least their native moisture should exuberate
into rottenness and worms; and after a convenient time they are taken out
again dryer then at first: if we observe that Distillers, to extract the
moisture of Herbs, besprinkle the plants they are about with water or some
other proportionate liquour: if lastly, we remember that Goldsmiths, to
separate the Silver, mixed, in a little quantity, with other metalls, mix more
Silver withal: 'Twill be evident, that, when the Earth redounded with
well-digested moisture, there was no better way of drying it, then, by adding
another moisture, to render that was in it more separable, and press out both
together; as Nature it self operates in rottenness.

7. Supposing, therefore, the Earth became both colder and dryer, the Plants
and Animals must of necessity have drawn a more malignant juice and food out of
it. For, since Vegetation consists in heat and moisture; Death, and Old Age
must be in their opposites, and out of them, be derived to living Creatures:
wherefore, since, after the Deluge, men sometimes lived 150 and 200 years, the
long life of the Patriarchs before the Flood, mentioned in the Scriptures, is
not incredible. Hence it is that Animals were now assigned to man for food: and,
it is not said, that he shall rule over them, as at the beginning; but the
terror of him shall be upon the other Animals: For, at first, they served him
as Instruments; but now they were to become fierce and wild, whence man would
contrive to kill them, and they, consequently, like perverse servants, fly and
be afraid of him, as their chastizer.

8. And, these indeed God gave to man; but another thing far greater. For,
because the Earth was become dryer, the Air too round about man was made purer
and thinner; and, both by his Food and by the Air, his Body was rendered, as,
not so vast and durable, so, more subtile-spirited and more apt to be subjected
to his Soul, and fitter for the operations proper to it.

9. Men, therefore, grew sharper witted and more addicted to Sciences and Arts;
and, by consequence, computing all things, the World became better and
perfecter: since, there would, necessarily, be many more men, by reason of the
littleness of their Bodies, and such frequent changes, through the shortness
of their lives; and yet, nay much the rather, more forward and riper for the
eternal life of the future world.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the second propagation of Mankind into several Countries: Out of the same
holy History.
1. IT remains, for describing perfectly the Beginning of the World, to declare
how the benediction, given to Noe and his Sons, to increase and fill the earth,
began to be fulfilled. The divinely-deliver'd History, therefore, says, that
the first offspring of Noe agreed perfectly together, and were very unwilling
to separate: which is collected out of those words, that, in the original
text, say the Earth was one lip and the same words: for, that a lip signifies
the words of men, is found, by the sense, every where; as, when they are called
Deceitful lips, Our lips are from our selves, and in a thousand other places;
but, where it is taken for a Language, I know not.

2. But, because the sense of the following terms must be different, and the
same words; this Phrase will signify that they desired and sought how to
remain united, as it is said more manifestly below. Whence, it is no light
suspicion, that this mind in them proceeded from the instigation of some One
that affected a Tyranny over Mankind; which some Historians, also, witness.

4. Proceeding, therefore, in this thought, they sat down in the fields about
Babylon; and there, either mutually impelled by one another, or else by some
one, as I said, they deliberated from the opportunity and commodiousnesse of
Bricks and Pitch, to build themselves a City and a Tower: for two reasons, To
get themselves a Name, and to prevent their being dispersed over the Earth;
for, so the Hebrew reading has it, least perhaps, or rather, least at any time,
which ours renders before.

5. They imagined, therefore, that, fixing their abode, by reason of the
commodiousnesse of the vast City, and for the famousnesse of the Tower, which
would have no fellow, all men would willingly stay about those places. Of the
Tower it is said in the Hebrew, whose head in Heaven, that is, where the Birds
fly, or even the Clouds; intimating, that they designed to continue on this
edifice even to the Clouds, which Naturalists say, sometimes, are not raised
more then 340 paces above the Earth: which height is not so vast and
extravagant that it might not fall into the thoughts of men, and even be
perfected, too; according to what God said, that They would not desist, till
they should have accomplished them in deed.

5. But God turned their own very counsels upon their own heads: for the fond
pains, and perhaps, (which some Histories insinuate) because the Tower, when it
had been brought to a very great height, was thrown down by the winds and
lightnings, (as it uses to happen to extreme high Fabrics) made them weary of
the work and its Author, so that they would no longer obey him, nor even agree
together: but several Companies, as they could agree among themselves,
departed into several countries; the Author of the work, with those that
consented to him, remaining still in Babylon.

6. And, this explication is clear, nor in any sort violent to the letter; and
according to the nature of things: whereas, that which the most follow contains
so vast a Miracle (and whereof we have no other example, unless, perhaps, in
the effusion of the Holy Ghost); that it may seem violent to extract it out of
words, in their ordinary sense, signifying another thing. For, to be of one
lip, and lips to be confounded or Tongues, agrees with common sense to
signify, the one, consent, the other, dissension: but to transfer these to
multitude of languages is less natural: which yet, if otherwise there were a
sufficient Authority, to show the effect done, is no ways to be rejected; but,
if the whole story draws its original from this only Text, it will have no
bottom nor solidity.

7. But hence, perhaps, some may ground their belief, that It Is not easy to
imagine whence Languages should have been divided amongst mankind, and have
grown into so many kinds. To which we reply, that, whoever shall but observe
what is usual in his own City or Country, will easily discern how so great a
variety of Dialects has grown into the world. For, it is evident, the perfection
of a Language consists among the Better-bred; and the rude People corrupt the
less usual words, those that speak fast cut them short, the Country folks
likewise make a special pronunciation of their own. Add to these, that diverse
Cities and Provinces have formed Dialects of their own; which yet, there is no
doubt, are contained all under one Idiome.

8. Consider, then, the minglings of distinct languages; a Country sometimes
being subdued by a Nation of a different Idiome; sometimes, by the frequent
Travels of single persons, the words of one Idiome being derived to another.

9. Lastly, let us reflect on the original root of diversity: Which consists in
this, That, words are composed of Vowels and Consonants; and the differences of
Vowels rise from a wider or a more formed and regular opening both of the Mouth
and Throat; but, that of Consonants proceeds from an interception of the Breath
going out through the diverse organs of the Teeth, Lips, Tongue; from its
allision to them and the Palate of the mouth; with some help of the Nostrills
and the shutting up of the Throat.

10. Now, it is evident, these members and instruments of Voice are composed of
the Elements; and consequently, from their temperament, are more disposed to
one motion then to another; and, which follows, that, from the Site of the
Regions where men live, they are more inclined to some Vowels or Consonants
then to others: whence it comes to pass, that, without any farther pains,
Vowels and Consonants are changed by little and little, and there is such a
diversity made, that they can no longer understand one another.

11. And, that the difference of Idioms grew after this manner, from the very
beginning; it may be hence conjectured, because the Chaldaick, Syriack, Arabic
Tongues discover a manifest derivation from and affinity with the Hebrew. And,
that the Egyptian, too, of old sprung from it, seems hence conjecturable, that
In all the Peregrinations of the Patriarchs, or even the commerces of the Kings
with Egypt, there is no where any mention that They did not understand one
another: moreover, the Egyptian names commemorated in Scripture, as Moses,
Pharao, Nechao, Putiphar etc. are Hebrew names, too. Farther, it is plain, that
the very name Babel is Hebrew; which, yet, remained to the City from which the
Family of Heber is believed to have departed, and to have gone and resided far
enough off; if indeed Melchisedech was of that Family.

12. To conclude, it seems natural to the Original Tongue to be very short,
viz. of Monosyllables only, as much as concerns the primitive words: and the
primitive words, of necessity, are of a determinate number, since, we scarce
find more then seven first-Consonants; for the rest are varied either in a
greater or less aspiration, or by the composition of more together; whence,
'twould be no hard thing to find the number of all the primitive words:
wherefore, it is clear, there cannot be many original Idioms, whose primitive
words should be Monosyllables.

13. Some will object, the Hebrew is an Original, and yet not all its
primitive words are Monosyllables: v. gr. Adam, Eva, Shamaim, (which name God
imposed upon Heaven) Abel, etc. and finally, Babel it self.

14. It Is answered, Adam, Abel, and Eva are monosyllables; for, in Adam, and
Abel, the Article is joined to the name: For, since God imposed the name upon
Adam, it is impossible he should have called him Adam from the name of the
Earth: for, since Adama signifies primarily a special nature of Earth, which
is red, and the name is transferred thence to the whole Earth; moreover, that
sort of Earth took the name of its Color, and the colors name is from the
primitive dam which signifies blood; it is not credible that God gave such a
derivative name to Man. Adam, therefore, is, as it were, ha-dam, that is, the
like, viz. to God. In like manner the name of Abel is Bell, that is, confusion;
as also Babel signifies not confusion, but in confusion. The name of Heaven is
a derivative from the primitive may, which is a monosyllable. But, the
Dissyllables which constitute the Substance of that Language as it is amongst
us, are compounded, though they seem to us primitives.

15 Thus, therefore, the second time, was the world, by division, replenisht
with men: God turning our Evils and Vices into Good to us; and His Providence
so punishing our ills, and changing our goods into better, according to that of
the Apostle, We know that, to those that love God, all things cooperate for
good, to those who, according to his purpose, are called Saints.


