PANTHEOLOGIA, Or the Sum of PRACTICAL DIVINITY Practiced in the Wilderness,
and delivered by our Savior in his Sermon on the MOUNT. BEING OBSERVATIONS
Upon the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Chapters of St MATTHEW. To which is
Prefixed A PROLEGOMENA or Preface by way of DIALOGUE, Wherein the Perfection
and Perspicuity of the Scripture is vindicated from the Calumnies of
ANABAPTISTS and PAPISTS.

By THO. WHITE B. L. Minister of Gods Word at Anne Aldersgate, London.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Jos. Cranford, and are to be sold at the Sign of
the Phoenix in St Paul's Churchyard. MDCLIV.

WHITES OBSERVATIONS

Upon the 4. 5. 6. and 7. Chapters of St MATTHEW.

The Authors TO THE READER.
AUTHOR.

THe Times wherein we live are so full of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemies,
that except our Antidotes and Preparatives are very strong, and we continually
taking of them, it is impossible to be kept from being infected?

Christian Reader. But what are those Antidotes and Preparatives which may keep
one from infection.

1. Take heed of Doctrines that rob God of his Honor, and give it unto man;
Such are the Doctrine of Merits, Free Will, Election out of foresight of Faith,
and Perseverance.

2. Be established upon the plain Texts of Scripture in the Truths you
profess, and take them not upon trust, custom, or education, for such sandy
Foundations will never be able to bear up what you build upon them in times of
Persecution or Temptation.

3. Love the Truths that you know, else God may justly send you strong
Delusions to believe lies, though you receive the Truth, if you receive it not
in the love theroof, 2 These. 2.10, 11. Love and rejoice in them, not upon
carnal ground, for if thou love spiritual truths upon carnal grounds, when
those grounds cease, as all carnal grounds will, thy love of the Truth will
cease, and though thy evidence be never so great, if there be no adherence, if
thy soul cleaves not to the Truths thou know, they will be like the dust
that lies loose upon the ground, every wind of Doctrine will scatter them;
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. 2 Timothy 3.15.

5. Turn the Truths of God into nourishment; We must desire the sincere milk of
the Word of God that we may grow thereby; while meat is in thy hand it may be
taken from thee, if it be in thy stomach thou may cast it up again, but if
once it be turned into nourishment, into thy substance, then thou can never
loose it.

5. Desire to know the Truths of God that thou may do them, Do what thou
know, thou shall know more, Joh. 7.17. We use to take away the Candle from
those Servants that have no work or will do none by it.

6. If Persecution arises for the Truth, suffer it with joy, for if once thou
have suffered for the Truth, thou will never part with it; the way not to sell
Truth is to buy it; and the mother loves the child most because she has
suffered most for it: If once we have paid for Land, if the Title of it be
questioned, we shall endeavor to vindicate it; but if we only be in bargain,
if the title be questioned, we leave of our bargaining, and leave it to others,
take little care our selves to vindicate it; but it may be thou do not live
in such times of persecution, that thou must loose thy estate, life, or liberty
for the Truth, but always thou live in such times that thou must leave thy
lusts or corruption for it; what corruption, what sin, what lust has thou left
for such a truth? if thou have not parted with thy lusts and corruptions for
the truth, thou will part with the truth for thy lusts, etc.

7. Pray, for it is God only that teaches wisdom secretly, thou can not come
unto the Son, unless thou come and learn of the Father, Joh. 6.44. thou can
not know the Father except the Son reveal him, Mat. 11.27. Thou can not say
that Jesus is the Christ but by the holy Ghost, thou can not know the deep
things of God except the holy Ghost seacheth them out, and reveal them unto
you, thou shall learn more of God upon thy knees then by all thy reading or
studying without prayer; If any man lack wisdom let him ask it of God; The
Schoolmasters that Luther learnt most of, was Prayer, Temptation, and
Meditation.

8. Be constant in hearing and reading the Word of God, for those are two
special means that God has sanctified for the keeping of us from error, Be
sure you keep close to that, Heb. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. 2 Timothy 3.13. take heed of
making Traditions, Revelations, or Providence as thy Rule to walk by, for the
Scripture is plain and sufficient to teach you all things which are necessary,
either to be believed or practiced, and the clearing of this Point I conceive
to be the most prope^ Preface to Annotations upon the Scriptures, more proper
to that part of Scriptures here spoke to, then to many others, because that our
Savior evidently shows by his practice that the Scriptures, nay, one Book,
nay, very few Chapters of that Book is able to answer all Satan's temptations:
and as for the times wherein we live, I wish that Discourses of the perfection,
perspicuity, etc. of the Scriptures were less pertinent.

Anabaptists. You speak much of the Ministry and of the Written Word, but
these are needless in our days, or at least the written Word is not the only
Rule whereby we should walk; Is it not plainly prophesied of the time of the
Gospel, Jer. 31.34. They shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every
man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know me from the
least of them to the greatest of them, says the Lord, and Isa, 54.13. and thy
children shall be taught of the Lord, and if so, what need Scriptures or
Mi^istry?

Author. We will first take the words in your sense, viz. that all shall be
taught immediately of God without the Scriptures or Ministry of the Word, so
that from the greatest to the least every one shall know the Lord, that is, so
much of God as is needful to salvation: Then thus I argue, That as far as can
be proved by these words, the Scriptures and Ministry of the Word is needful,
until this Prophecy be fulfilled in this sense, for there are abundance of
ignorant persons amongst us who are not taught of God, and that do not know the
Lord; Many there are that do not believe in Christ, which they should certainly
do if God did inwardly teach them, Joh. 6.45. Now it is so evident that few
there are that believe and by consequence are taught of God, that it ought
rather to be bewailed then proved.

2. Can any one imagine that none of Gods People before in Christ's time, or in
the Apostles time, were taught of God, and yet what is more evident then that
the Ministry of the Word and reading of Scriptures was in use, and commanded
in those times? Therefore to be taught of God does not exclude the Ministry of
the Word, but rather include it: Therefore I answer.

3. That to be taught of God is to be taught of God in his Word, which I prove
by several places of Scripture, 1. as our Savior says, He that hears you,
hears me, and he that hears me hears him that sent me, Matthew. 10, 40. Luke
10.16. Joh. 13.20. and it is evident that the People of God have thought so,
that they have been taught of God in the Ministry of the Word, Act. 10.33. and
therefore you must not oppose those things that are coordinate, and our Savior
explains this very place, that it is to be taught of God in his Word, for
Christ makes to hear and learn of the Father to be the meaning of those words,
for hearing signified the outward, and learning the inward teaching of God, for
if by hearing an inward hearing should be meant, then it were all one with
learning.

4. If these words are to be taken in your sense, it does more clearly argue,
that private instruction and conference are needless, then that the Ministry
of the Word is so, for in private conference and instruction, every one is more
properly said to teach his Neighbor then in the Public Ministry.

Then 5. You of all people should least speak against the necessity of
preaching, since by your practice you are so far from judging it unfit for any
one to preach, that you judge it fit for every one that will to preach; If
preaching be fit why do you condemn it? if not why do you use it?

6. This place is a Prophecy of abundance of Preaching, for the times wherein
his Prophet lived were such, that as in Rome and Spain if any one comes to know
the Truths of God, it must be by private conference and instruction, as it were
one Neighbor teaching of another, as the public Preaching of the Word, there
are none but false Prophets, that are Teachers amongst them.

7. It is not unworthy considering, whether this may be the meaning of the
place, viz. That in these sad times the People were so generally addicted to
Idolatry, and misled by the false Prophets, that few there were that knew
whether Baal or Jehovah was the true God, but the Prophet tells them, that
concerning that Point, to know that Jehovah is the Lord, the time shall come
that they shall not need instruction, as if one should say, that the time
should come in Turkey, that no one shall need to teach them whether Christ or
Mahomet be the true Prophet.

Anabap. But is it not plainly said that ye have an Unction from the Holy One,
and ye know all things, and ye need not that any man teach you?

Author. If the meaning of the place should be, that none need to teach them,
the Apostle would seem to contradict himself, for why does the Apostle write
this Epistle to them if they knew all things, and need not that any man should
teach them?

2. It Is against the whole current of the New Testament: to interpret these
words of the immediate teaching exclusively to the Ministry of the Word, is
evidently contrary to the current of the Gospel: What need we pray that God
would send Laborers into his Vineyard? What need Paul leave Timothy at Creete
to ordain Ministers in every City, if in Gospel Times the Ministry were
needless? And that it is not only needful for conversion but edification, is
evident, Act. 20.32. 2 Timothy 3.17. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. And that the Ministry is to
continue to the end of the world, is as evident; Our Savior promises to be
with his Apostles to the end of the world, with them, as to their persons, he
could not be to the end of the world, because they died, but with their
Successors he was, is, and will be, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13

3. The meaning of the words are, as if the Apostle should say, Do not you
imagine the truth you have learned you have learned of man only, for it is the
Unction of the Spirit of God that has anointed you, that has taught you,
whose teachings are so true, and so full, that you need not that any man should
teach you upon this account, as if there were some defect. As if you had not
been taught all things necessary to salvation, So there are three things that
the Apostle would prove to them in those words. 1. That what they had learned
was not properly from man though by man, but from the Spirit of God. 2. That
the Spirit of God had not been defective as to Necessaries in his teachings of
them. 3. Much less that the spirits teachings were false, as the seducers
pretended and the words are set down, clearly in reference to their seducers.
The words immediately going before the 28. and 27. ver. the Apostle clearly
speaks concerning their seducers who told them that they were all this while
misled, and so the Apostle says, that these things I have written unto you,
concerning them that seduce you, for that it is plain those passages are to be
expounded not concerning their Teachers but Seducers.

Anabapt. But Saint Peter says expressly, 2 Pet. 1.19. That we are to take heed
unto the word of Prophecy until (and no longer) the day dawn, and the Day Star
arise, that is, while we have the Spirit of God to teach us we are to use the
light of the Scriptures, but afterward the light of the Spirit is to guide us,
which is more and certain then that of the Scriptures.

Author. By the Day-dawning and Day Star rise in our hearts, cannot be meant
that light and those teachings of the Spirit which every Saint has as soon as
he is regenerated, for it is evident that those to whom the Apostle writ this
Epistle, were illuminated and sanctisied by the holy Ghost, as appears by the
first Verse, yet the Day Star in the Apostles sense was not risen in their
hearts. 2. It Is as evident that as great Revelations as any that you
Anabaptists can boast of, are less certain then the Scriptures, not only to
others but even to them who have those Revelations; for the Apostle says, that
we have a more sure word of Prophecy; as if he should say, the word is not
only more sure to you that have not those visions which we have had but even
for us also. 3. Suppose the Dawning of the Day, etc. were to be taken for the
illumination of the Spirit, yet it follows not that after we are so illuminated
by the Spirit we need not read the Scriptures; for the word until does not
always refer to the time past, as to exclude the time to come, as Mat. 5.18.
Mat. 12.20. Mat. 28. last. 1 Timothy 4, 13. Can you argue and say, that when the
heavens shall pass away then the Word of God shall fail? or Christ will break
the bruised reed and quench the smoking flax, when judgment is brought forth
to victory? or that Christ will not be with his Disciples and other faithful
Ministers any longer then while the Word last? or that Timothy need preach no
more after once Paul had been with him? and indeed in common sense if I bid a
man stay in a place until I come, I do not then bid him go away, but rather
stay longer that I may speak with him, or do something else when I come? So
Saint Peter bidding the dispersed Hebrews attend to the Word, till the Day
dawn, does not bid them then cast away the Word, or leave it off; but however
he would have them attend to it till that time, and then afterward they will of
themselves attend it without his exhortation; nay, it is observable that in that
very place he preferres the Word before the sight if the transfiguratioin of
Christ, so that the Word has the precedence even of Revelation hnd Visions.
But because that this point will be shortly so exactly cleared, I will omit
further pursuing of it.

Papists. You speak concerning the reading of Scriptures as if that were the
way to keep people from error; Whereas indeed that has been the cause of all
the errors of these times, that every one has been suffered to read and
expound the Scripture. People should stand to the determination and traditions
of the Church.

Author. 1. That every one ought to read the Scripture, and not only
Clergymen, as you call them, but all others, is so evident, that there is no
way for you to keep men from believing this truth, but by keeping of them from
reading the Scripture, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy
children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, and thou
shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets
between thine eyes. It Is evident that the King is commanded to have as much of
the Scripture by him as then was written, and he shall read therein all the
days of his life, that he may learn the fear of the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this Law and these Statutes to do them; and Ps. 1.3. Joh. 5.39. 1
These. 5.27. Ephesians. 3.3, 4. Neh. 8.2, 3, 4, 5. Act. 15.21. Rev. 1.2. 2 Ki. 23.3.
Deu. 31.11. Romans 1.7. Act. 8.28. But if you would not have us to read the
Scriptures, how would you have us know the Truths of God?

Papists. The Priests lips are to preserve knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his mouth.

Author. The words are, The Priests lips should preserve knowledge, it shows
their duty what they should do, but it is apparent in the next verse, that they
did not do so, Ye have departed out of the way, ye have caused many to stumble,
and how frequently does the Apostle say, Judge what I say, Try all things, 2 Timothy 2.7. 1 These. 5.21. We having spoken just before, that we should not
despise Prophecy, he subjoyns, That we should not idolize Prophecy neither, by
taking every thing upon trust that is preached.

Papists. But it shows a great deal of arrogance and pride, for poor, common,
ignorant people to question the doctrine of the learned and pious Ministers,
especially when it is not only the judgment of one but of more Ministers;
especially of such as have been approved; it is fit for them to judge of the
exposition of Scriptures.

Author. It is very convenient and necessary they should so do, and certainly
such shall have praise of God; for it is plain the Scripture praises the
Bereans for doing so; Act. 17.11. Paul an Apostle, and Sylas an Evangelist
preached among them; But they took not their Doctrine upon trust, but preached
the Scriptures to see whether those things were so, and though they found that
to be true which they preached according to the Word of God this day, yet they
examined their preaching this day also, and so toties quoties, and these
Bereans clearly are commended for thus doing; nor does this argue any
unwillingness in us to receive what is preached, nor dislike of the doctrine,
for the Bereans did receive it with all readiness of mind: though they like
the doctrines never so well, as it is plain they did, for they heard it with all
readiness of mind, yet they durst not receive it before they had examined
whether 'twas according to the word of God or no: and suppose our Trachers
should misguide us, it is evident that not only they but we should perish with
them, Matthew. 15.14.

Papists. But I must return again to that which is so apparent, that it cannot
be denied but that in these times wherein every one has been suffered to read
and expound the Scriptures as they please, errors, heresies, and blasphemies,
have more abounded then ever they did.

Author. I grant that for every one to be suffered to divulge and preach the
Expositions, must needs be a certain means of propagating and multiplying
errors; But the fault is not in their reading and knowing, but it proceeds from
their ignorance of the Scriptures; for our Savior plainly sets down that to be
the reason of our erring; and the taking things upon the credit of our Teachers
only, our Savior sets down to be the reason of so many errors among the Jews;
How many times does our Savior say in Mat. 5. You have heard that 'twas said,
whereas indeed there was no such thing spoken in the Word of God.

Papists. But how is it possible that simple, ignorant people should understand
wherein there are such depths, that the learnedest man in the world cannot
fully understand?

Author. Can any one imagine that the Scripture was writ only for learned men
and great Scholars? many things there are hard to be understood there is no
question of it, but those things that are necessary to salvation are plain.
Certainly the Scripture it self says so, Pro. 1.4. that 'twas written for that
purpose, to give the young and ignorant understanding; and the Scripture
commands to buy the Truth, and the ignorant man has a price in his hand, the
fault is not in his head but heart; and he that has any understanding, wisdom
is easy to him, Prove. 17.16. even very children might learn it, Deuteronomy. 6.7. and
the Apostle says, If the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that perish, whether
they be learned or unlearned: And if for that reason men should not read the
Scriptures, because they savingly understand them not, and abuse the Scriptures
to the maintaining of heresies, then the reading of Scripture should be also
prohibited to learned men, for the poor receive the Gospel, or are Gospelliz'd,
as the word signifies, and God does reveal the Mysteries of salvation to those
that are simple, and hides them to the wise, Mat. 11.25. and the greatest
heretics that ever were, were not simple but learned men. 3. If those that are
simple and unlearned, must not read the Scripture, this as if those that were
sick should not use Physic; for since the Scripture only is able to make them
wise to salvation, the Psalmist also plainly says, that the Law of God makes
wise the simple, Psa. 19.7. and 119.130.

Papist. The Scripture with traditions and the Churches Exposition of them are
necessary, for how can you know the Scriptures to be the Word of God but by the
Traditions of the Church? if that had not preserved and delivered it unto you,
how could you ever have had the Scriptures?

Author. 1. I would desire you to consider what intricate Meanders you would
have them walk in, whom you deny to have understanding enough to go in the
plain and pleasant paths of the Word of God; if they say We must believe the
Scriptures accerding to the Exposition of the present Roman Church, then how
shall one know whether that Church be the true Church? If you say By such
notes, universality, succession, etc. then what an endless work do you put
these men whom you call simple people upon, viz. reading over all
Ecclesiastical Histories of the Fathers, to see whether that succession you
pretend be so or no? besides how does it appear whether those notes
Universality and Succession, etc. that you give of the Church be true Notes or
no, If you say? By the Scripture, then you make the Church to be known by the
Scripture, and not the Scripture by the Church, as you pretend, it is as if you
should desire to know whether your Gold were weight or no; If you should say
when he brought his weight, how do I know whether the weight be a right weight?
If it should be answered, If the weight weighs just as much as your gold it is
right; may he not justly answer, If I bring my Gold to be tried by your weight,
I can receive no satisfaction at all if your weight must be tried by my gold?
Besides those places of Scripture set down the notes of the true Church, and
Gods promises of preserving of it in the Truth, etc. which you quote for the
proving that we must be ruled by the Church, and that yours is that Church;
Those I say, your very quoting proves that you will have them read and judged
of by Laymen, and why then not other places of Scripture also? are not other
places as easy to be understood as they, nay, far more easy, especially in
Fundamentalls, both for Doctrines and practice?

2. As for Traditions they are wonderful uncertain, 1. Because there are
diverse Traditions that are very ancient and very false. Clemens Alexandrinus
reports, that it was a constant Tradition in his time, lib. 1. Stro. Clemens I
say, who lived about 14. hundred years ago, reports, That it was an
Apostolical Tradition that Christ preached but one year; Irenaeus that
condemns this as heretical, sets down another as a constant Tradition as
false, viz. That it was delivered by Saint John, That Christ was very near 50.
years old when he died. Nay there was a Tradition that was as old as the time
betwixt our Saviors Resurrection and Ascension: It was generally reported by
godly precious Saints, and from the mouth of Christ (as they pretended) that
John should not die, and the mistake arose by the leaving out or
misinterpreting but of one syllable; Our Savior said, If I will, and the
Report went, I will that thou come; Abundance of other instances which are to
be found almost in every one of the Fathers that lived near Christ's time. 3.
There is abundance of disagreement on the Traditions of the Fathers, for that
which one Father accounts Apostolical, another accounts heretical. 4. This is
no new practice, for 'twas in all ages the custom of false Prophets and
Heretics to plead Traditions, nay, by their Traditions to make the Word of
God of none effect, as Mat. 13. and if you shall say so, Heretics make use of
Scriptures; but as for Scriptures we are on all sides agreed that it is a true
rule, and nothing ought to be taught contrary to it, and we have the example of
our Savior and the Apostles for proving doctrines by Scripture. 5. You Papists
do not give us a Catalogue of Traditions, and indeed those that you call
Apostolical Traditions, wherein you differ from us: It Is a very easy thing to
prove you the very year, or at least the Century when they first sprang up, but
you use to amuse and silence poor simple people by putting upon your error the
glorious titles of Apostolical Traditions and practice of the Primitive Church
which you know they are not able to contradict: in saying of our Religion that
it began in Luther, in K. Henry the 8. days, as if one should say Moses his
Law was no ancienter then in Josias times, because it had lain hid many years
before, and was then newly revived. 6. The wickedness of your forgery appears
in this, that though you pretend the current of antiquity for th innovations,
yet you being conscious to your selves of the falseness of this pretense, have
appointed an Index Expurgatorius, and in your new Editions of the Fathers, have
left out all things that make against you, and then no marvel that Antiquity
seems to be folly, when you make it speak what you please, and hinder it from
speaking whatsoever is contrary unto you.

Papists. But though you speak so much against Traditions, is it not evident
that you have the Word of God by Tradition? for as you cannot know but by
Tradition, that one whose Name was Seneca wrote those Books that go under his
Name, so you cannot know that this was the Word of God, had not you received it
from the Church.

Author. As a Carrier that brings a Leteer from a friend, it is not his saying
that it comes from such a friend that is my main argument to make me believe
it, but I know his hand, and know the matter that he writes to be such that
none could write of but he, because none else in the world knew that business
but only he; Insomuch that though he should bring me a Leteer to which my
Friends Name was set, and he should write of the same business, yet I should
know that it came not from my Friend by the hand and style; and if he knew not
the secrets between my friend and I, he would have diverse mistakes concerning
the business he wrote of, by which I should discover that the Letter came not
from my friend notwithstanding his Name was subscribed; so for the Scriptures,
though the Church delivers them to us as from God, yet that matter is of that
nature, and other intrinsecall arguments, viz. holiness, consent, depths of
mysteries, and discovering all the secret corruptions of ones heart, etc. I
know it to be the Word of God by these Arguments, discover the Alcoran not to
be the Word of God, though the Mahumetan that delivers it to me say it is; and
as for Seneca this is clear, In case I were sure that there was such a one as
Seneca lived, and that those things that are extant under his Name were of that
nature that it were impossible for any one else to write, I should be sure that
these were his works without the Authority of Tradition; and as for us in
England we received neither our Bible nor our Religion from the Church of Rome,
no more then they did from us, we had the Gospel preached amongst us within
three or four years after our Saviors Death, and established by Civil
anthority almost a hundred and fifty years before they at Rome had; indeed the
corruptions in doctrine that we had in Luthers time, we justly ascribe to them,
and Luther and others did but endeavor to purge us from those defilements that
they polluted us withal, and we enjoyed the purity of the Gospel, till you
came and muddied our streams, and now again endeavor as much as in you lies to
bring us back again to that Egyptian darkness: Besides it is as clear as if it
were writ with the Beams of the Sun, that Tradition is wholly for us as to the
Aug. i^ Psa. 8. idem de doctrina Christiana cap. 6. Idem lib. de Vtilit.
Cred^ndi cap. 6. Chrysostom. Homil. 3. in 2 The. cap. 3. Clemens Alexand, in
exhort. ad Ethnicos. Epiphanius haeres. 76. Hieronym. in Isaiae cap. 19.
perspicuity of Scripture; as also for the Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 1. Idem cap.
47. Tertul. lib. contra Hermog. Theod. in 2. Dialogo contra haereticos, Damasc.
lib. 1. de Orthodoxa fide, cap. 1. Chrysostom. Homil. 58. in cap. 10. John. Idem
Homil. 9. in Epist. ad Coloss. Cyrillus lib. de Fide. Basilius magnus lib. de
Confessione Fide^. Athanas. lib. contra gentes. The of Alexandria in 2.
Paschal. Aug. lib. 2. de Doct. Christ. cap. 9. Idem lib. 3. contra Max. Arian.
cap. 14. Idem lib. De Natura and Gratia. cap. 61.
perfection of Scripture. Therefore Wounto you Papists, Jesuits, Hypocrites,
for you have taken away the Key of Knowledge, ye entered not in your selves, and
them that were entering in you hindered; for the Scripture which is able to make
a man wise to salvation is called the Word of Truth; ye would not suffer the
people to read, but in stead of them give them images and call them Laymens
Books, which are Lies, Isa. 44.20. and teaches them nothing but Lies, Hab.
2.18. the Scripture which God commands all to read, and commends all for
reading; The Scripture in which if there be but a word in an unknown Language,
it translates it Mat. 1.23. Mark 15.34. John 1.38. Act. 4.36. etc. but you who
are of your Father the devil, for his works do you do in keeping up the
Scriptures in an unknown language, making it a crime to be punished with
Inquisition, which is worse then death, to have but a Bible in his House.

Woe unto you Jesuits, Papists, Hypocrites, for you teach those Doctriues which
the Apostle calls Doctrines of devils, as forbidding of Marriages, and to
abstain from meats which which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving, and though the Apostle says that Marriages are Honorable
amongst all men, and though all the Apostles were or might lawfully be married,
as the Apostle himself said, 1 Cor. 9.5. yet you forbid all all your Clergy as
you call them to marry, yet they your Cardinals and Popes commit all manner of
Uncleanness with greediness, committing those things that are not fit to be
named amongst Christians.

Woe unto you Jesuits, Papists, Hypocrites, for you deny the Cup of the Lords
Supper to the people, and though our Savior said, Drink ye all of this, yet
you will not suffer any but the Priest to drink of it; If when our Savior
instituted his Supper, he intended he should be received by none but by
Ministers, why do you give the People the bread? if he did intend it to be
received by all, why do you deny them the Cup?

Woe unto you Jesuits, Papists, Hypocrites, for you worship the Images and
adore the relics of the Saints, who were slain in the Primitive Church, and
say that had we lived in those days we would not have been partakers with him
in the blood of the Saints, the Martyrs of Jesus, and yet you that call your
Pope his Holiness, and the Head of the Church, who is a rotten member of the
Synagogue of Satan; you that call your selves the only true Catholics, I say,
he and you though you Pretend so much to honor the dead; It Is yet you have
been and are the greatest Persecutors living upon the face of the Earth; so
that all the blood that ever was shed by Rome Heathen, is but a small thing
compared to that Christian blood, which you have shed for you have made your
self drunk with the blood of Saints and Martyrs of Jesus: therefore you
Serpents, you generation of Vipers, how will you escape the Damnation of Hell,
Rev. 18.24.

Christian Reader. I desire a little satisfaction concerning this, which though
it stumbles not me, yet it stumbles many others. viz. That the Papists are very
charitable, strict-lived people, much given to fasting, Prayer, etc. are very
liberal in maintaining of their Ministers, adorning of their Churches.

Author. Suppose 'twere so that they give all their goods to feed the poor,
yet might they do all that out of hypocrisy.

Christ. Read. But why should you judge their intentions, and ends, and
grounds, upon which they give their alms, since that is becoming a Judge of
evil thoughts which the Apostle condemns?

Author. Though I should not judge them, that they give their alms out of
hypocrisy, yet I have much less warrant to venture my soul, for that if they
be hypocrites they must be damned, which I do if I take up my Religion upon the
account of their charity. But

2. Are they charitable? so are we, for set aside your Monasteries, Nunneries,
and such Superstitions we can show as great, and as many works of charity as
they can.

3. But shall we account the Papists such charitable good people, when they are
the cruellest bloudiest wretches that live upon the earth, witness the
Gunne-Powder Treason, the Massacre of Paris: Besides all the blood that is shed
in Germany, Italy, and wheresoever they go, and those late Massacres in
Ireland, where they were generally betrayed and murdered by those Papists
which were their most intimate and bosom Friends.

4. And surely we have but little hold of their Love and good Natures, who are
bound by their Religion to imbrue their hands in our blood again, as the Pope
Commissions them so to do, and that will be as soon as ever he gets but power
to do it. As in all places where he has power he either damns their souls if
they turn Papists, or slaies their bodies if they refuse.

Christian Reader. But what may be said as to their strict lives, Fasting,
Praying Priest not marrying.

Author. 1. Though some of their lives are in some measure unblameable in
respect of the Duties of the Second Table, yet in Italy, Spain, etc. where the
whole Country are Papists, their Lives are abominable, their Popes, Cardinals,
Bishops, and Priests, being generally and notoriously known to be guilty of
such Predigies of Lust, such as were scarce ever heard of, as Sir Edwin Sands
in his Speculum Europae, has both judiciously and faithfully set down: A Book
very worthy to be read, for he that shall read that Book and believe that
Revelation to be true, cannot but he satisfied of the subtleties and
abominations of Popery, and it is almost impossible for any one, which is not
exceedingly prejudiced, not to believe it to be true: It is written with so
much candor, impartiality, gravity and judgment.

2. The things wherein their strictness do most consist, are of that nature,
That the more strict they are the more abominable: for those things wherein
they do place so much devotion, the Apostle calls Doctrines of Devils, 1
Timothy 4.1, 2. and if they are liberal to their Priests and adorning of their
Images, etc. It Is no marvel then, Fellow-Idolaters that have gone before them
have been as liberal as they; We read of those that pulled their Earrings,
Exodus 22. and of those that lavished Gold out the Bags, Isa. 46. it is not
enough to releeve one in the Name of a Prophet; Paul was of a stricter life and
conversation then any of the Papists, at that very time when he was
Persecutour, and amongst the Philosophers the Gymnosophists even amongst the
Turks; there are Hermites that live with as much outward austerity as any
amongst the Papists.

But lastly, Suppose that you should know one that were very charitable to the
Poor, and liberal to the Ministers, but was a common known Strumpet, would you
account such an one a Religious Woman? much less should you account Papists to
be Religious though they be never so Charitable to the Poor, since they live in
continual spiritual Whoredom, viz. Idolatry, which is far worse then
bodily Whoredom, but the most sure Preservative against Popery and all
Heresies, is that which I began and shall conclude withal, viz. Read, Study,
Meditate, and keep close to the Word of God, and do not satisfy your selves
only with Reading so many Chapters a day, but understand, digest, and practice
them; nay, nor be content only with the understanding of those Truths that lie
plain and open, within the surface of the Chapter you read, but dig deep and
see what lies within the Bowels of the Text, for in the Scripture to that the
words may relate, are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge: That God
is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, lies open and plain in the very words,
when they are read: but this Truth That the Body shall rise again is as truly
contained, though not as manifestly expressed in the words, and our Savior
says, that they understood not that Scripture upon that very ground, because
they understood not this Truth included in it, viz. that the Resurrection was
proved by that Text: and so I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace,
which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them
which are sanctified.

OBSERVATIONS Upon the fourth Chapter of MATTHEW.
MATTHEW IV.I. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the devil.
THen] Immediately, there were no disseminata vacua in the performances of our
Savior; Christ did sometimes rest, but was never idle, if you refer it to
the former verse the last of the third Chapter, the point is this, After great
spiritual consolations or visions, we should do well to expect great trials and
temptations, which are laid upon us, lest by such revelations or comforts we
should be exalted above measure; so 2 Cor. 12.7. If we consider this with that
which follows, the observation is, 1. In respect of us, that God uses to fit
us for great employments, with great temptations. 2. In respect of Christ, that
from the beginning of our Saviors undertaking the work of our redemption, all
was full of trouble and misery, the devil opposes the beginning of good works,
and we should learn from him to resist the beginnings of sin.

Jesus was led] 1. To show that he did not resist, he was not drawn but led, We
may learn willingly to follow the leadings of the Spirit, not to refuse to
follow God into affliction, temptation, etc. 2. It shows that he did not go
himself into temptation. We should not run into temptation, we must resist the
devil, and he will slay; but neither may we call him forth to battle, nor
pursue him when he flies.

By the Spirit] The Spirit, that is, the holy Ghost, for if by the Spirit
should be meant the devil, it should run thus; He was led by the Spirit to be
tempted of him, and that our transtatours take it so is plain, it is written
with a great S, for thorowout the whole Bible when Spirit is printed with a
great S, the holy Ghost is meant: as the Translators imagine, one may be led by
God into temptations, for else it were needless and improper to pray God not
to lead us into temptation, for we never deprecate things that are impossible.

Into the wilderness] This was not the wilderness of Judea, where John
preached; for there were locusts and wild honey, so that Christ need not have
fasted for want of food. 2. When it is meant of that wilderness, it is always
added of Judea; but when it is spoken without any addition, it is meant of the
wilderness where the children of Israel were forty years.

But why thither to be tempted? 1. Because that was the fittest place for that
temptation, which he first was to be tried withal, viz. hunger, for there was
no food, Matthew. 15.33. 2. Because there he was alone: 1. Because the devil
might have full opportunity and liberty to tempt him. 2. To show the excellency
of that victory, none other had any hand in it, for he was alone and without
any assistance, he overcame the devil: that which we may learn from this is,
That by being alone one gives the devil opportunity to tempt one, take heed
therefore of being alone: but if you shall say, Does not our Savior advise us
to be alone, to enter into our closet and shut the door, Mat. 6.6. all
meditation, private prayer, and reading would be taken away by this advice? I
answer with our Savior, John 16.32. So if thou have the company of God, and
art in his presence by meditation and prayer, or any holy duty, thou art not
alone, therefore the advice still stands in force, be not alone, but be sure
that when thou art corporally alone, thou be not spiritually alone, but by holy
thoughts have God in thy company. 2. Learn from hence the way to overcome
diverse temptations, Art thou alone, and does Satan set upon thee by melancholy
thoughts, or lustful thoughts? humbly, fervently, and shortly desire almighty
God to assist thee, and go into some company, and do not stay to grapple with
the temptation: this thou shall find in these cases the safest remedy.

To be tempted] The reasons why our Savior was tempted, were not the same for
which his members are tempted; for they are tempted, 1. Sometimes to humble
them, and that they may not after great revelations and consolations be exalted
above measure, so St Paul. 2. To make them see that their strength is not of,
nor from themselves. 3. To purify and cleanse them, for none of all these
reasons was our Savior tempted; but 1. That he might be touched with, and bear
all our infirmities that were without sin. 2. That he might overcome Satan in
all his ways and vanquish him at every weapon. 3. That no man be he never so
holy may think himself free, but expect and provide for temptation. 4. As for
caution so for comfort, that no man may judge himself out of Gods favor,
because he has grievous temptations. 5. That he might show us by his example
how to demean our selves in, and how to overcome temptations.

Of the devil] Some take the devil here to mean the Prince of the devils, for
so in some places it is taken, Matthew. 25.41. the devil and his angels; and
likely it it that the chief of the devils might undertake himself a business
of so great difficulty, and consequence; our Savior was not capable of some
kind of temptation, he could not be tempted of the flesh, for all such
temptations argue original sin, and that one is compounded of the flesh and of
the Spirit.

Verse. 2. And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was
afterward an hungered.
And when he had fasted] Four kinds of religious fasts we read of, 1.
Propitiatory fasts to take vengeance of our self for some sin we have
committed. 2. Castigatory fasts to subdue the body and keep it under, least it
should make us too prone to the lusts of the flesh which may be thought was the
meaning of St Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27. I chastize my body. 3. Preparatory fasts when
we have any great work to do in the service of God, to prepare our selves to it
by fasting, as before the receiving of the Sacrament, and to fast and pray
before ones child be baptized, for that end also are Ember-weeks. 4.
Devotionary fasts, when out of the ravishment of our spirits we forget to eat
our bread, this kind of fast (if any of those that had been named) may this of
our Saviors seem to be, but it may be it was rather a fast partly necessitated
upon our Savior, not as if he did not fast willingly, but that he must needs
have fasted, unless he would have wrought a miracle to eat, and this it may be
was done that he might suffer the temptation from the flesh as far as might be
without sin, or at least give occasion to the devil to tempt him.

Forty dayes] The fast of our Savior did exceed the fasts of Moses and Elias:
for Moses fasted but he was in the Mount, in the special presence of God, and
sustained by the especial and immediate hand of God, but our Savior by the
strength of his humane nature, the temperature and constitution of his body was
so strong, and so even the reason why he fasted so many days might be, because
he would not be inferior to any that went before him, in any duty of religion.
Since therefore Moses and Elias fasted so long, he also would fast no less
while: for the reasons which are brought for the number, they are such as show
more invention then judgment, one might find out far more then as yet are
found out; but it were magno conatu nihil agere, why he fasted no more then
forty days before he was hungry, might be, that he might not do any thing
that might give occasion to think him not to be man.

And forty nights] This is added lest happily some might think, that our Savior
fasted as we generally fast, for when we keep a fast, we abstain only from
refection all day, but eat our Supper.

And after that he was an hungry] All that while he was not hungry, and therein
very likely he differed in his fast from Elias, and from others; all that fast
almost for any while are hungry: but why was he afterward hungry? 1. To show
himself to be man, and that he bore all our infirmities. 2. It might be that he
might be fitted for that temptation, and that he might as much as could be
without sin, be tempted with all manner of temptations that we are, for there
was no other way for him to be tempted from the flesh, then by hunger and
thirst, as I said before, and indeed they are the strongest of all, and most
there is to be said, why we should yield to them, then to any other desire of
the flesh.

Verse. 3. And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the son of
God, command that these stones be made bread.
And the tempter] He is called the tempter, 1. Because he was the first
tempter. 2. The cunningest tempter, he tempted the woman in Paradise, and still
his business is to tempt the children of God: but why should the devil delight
in tempting, and making men sin? The reason is evident, for he being quite
contrary to Almighty God, the very end of his actions is contrary to the end of
Gods actions, the end of Gods actions ad extra, is his own glory, and the good
of the creature, now apparently God is dishonored when any man sins. 2. For
the good of the creature, especially man, and because the devil knows no way to
hurt man so long as he is in Gods favor, he strives by tempting him to sin,
to put him out of Gods favor: from this may be observed that he that tempts
any man to sin supplet vicem diaboli, and takes upon him the office of the
devil.

Coming unto him] We read not of his coming to him before, Why did he not? 1.
Was it not because he had strong presumptions, that he was the son of God, and
so God, and by consequence it was in vain for him to tempt him? for as long as
he fasted, and was not an hungry he had no argument against his Deity, but upon
his hunger he had, and then he tempted. 1. Howsoever, before he hungered, he
could not have that opportunity of tempting him, for as long as one is not
hungry, one will not seek means, much less unlawful means to get food;
therefore he stayed while he was hungry, before he would tempt. 2. His coming,
Is it not to distinguish the manner of this temptation from the former? for he
was tempted of the devil all the forty days he fasted, as St Luke plainly
makes mention, Luke 4.2. but those temptations were of another nature, and the
Scripture speaks little of them what temptations they were, all that gives
light to guess at them, is Mark 1.13. where it is said that he was with the
wild beasts, it may be the devil might provoke the wild beasts, to run upon
him as if they would devour him, likely it is that whatsoever they were, they
were not so much for our instruction, as these are, nor for imitation; for if
the wild or venomous beasts did threaten him with destruction, his carriage,
which as it is likely was not stirring to avoid them, is not sit for us to
imitate. 3. It is supposed (and I do not know why it should be very improbable)
that the devil came in the shape of a man, the better to deceive him, for if he
supposed him to be man only, he might also justly suppose him to be fallible,
and that coming in such a shape he might not be discovered, it is very probable
it was in some visible shape, for else it could not so properly be said coming.
4. It is said coming, it may be to show the difference between the tempting of
our Savior, and the devils tempting of other men: for other men, the devil
may, and often does tempt either by troubling their humors and temperature of
the body, as also by putting strange phantasmes into the brain; now all that
Satan could do to our Savior, was from without, he could not otherwise tempt
him, The Prince of this world has nothing in me, John 14.30. 5. Coming, that
is, when he was come, for he did not say so, before he came unto him: the
Question may be, How Satan knew that our Savior then hungered? I answer, 1. By
our Saviors seeking for food, it may be: or, 2. Because no man ever fasted
longer: or, 3. Because Satan being a spirit knows the several dispositions of
our inward parts, and therefore knows when the parts languish for want of
nourishment, and when upon this want, they draw the veins, and the veins the
liver, and the liver the miseraick veins, and so at last when the stomach is
gnawed, which gnawing the stomach we call hunger.

He said unto him] With an audible voice, for he did not, as sometimes he does
to us men, inject any such thought in him, and cause our Savior to think with
himself, If I am the son of God, why should not I make these stones bread?

If thou art the Son of God] The Question is, Whether the devil knew our
Savior then to be the son of God? For, 1. If the devil did know him to be
the son of God, how could he choose but think it altogether impossible that he
should sin, and so in vain to tempt him? 2. How could he choose but think him
God, since he knew the strangeness of his conception, and he being of a Virgin
was that Emanuel, and also the Angels called him Lord, Christ, the Lord? Yet
the other opinion is, That the devil did not then know our Savior to be God,
and that now he takes the best way he can to find it out, whether he was or
no. If the main thing the devil drives at, is to breed in us a doubt of our
sonship, and make us to think our selves not to be the children of God, and you
see he uses that twice in the next temptation also; three main temptations
there are in these words, 1. Of vainglory, he would have him do a miracle to
manifest and show his excellency, for every man he knew would be willing to
magnify himself. 2. Every man is willing to satisfy his hunger. 3. Of despair
of Gods providence, as if he should say, thus long you have fasted, and you see
God has not took any way to relieve you, relieve your self and wait no longer.

The Son of God] Four ways there are to be the son of God, 1. By eternal
generation, that is, the most excellent of all. 2. By personal union, when the
manhood is married to the Deity, so we account those our sons who are so by
marriage. 3. By regeneration. 4. By adoption; the first two ways Christ
according to his Divinity and humanity was the son of God; the third and
fourth way the elect, the children of men.

Commanded] The difference betwixt the works of God and of man, God makes what
he makes, only by his Word, but man what he does, he does, 1. With labor, non
oresed opere. 2. With instruments. 3. He must have time. 4. When he commands
there must be something that understands to obey, for if he commands stones
they will not obey him, but God if he commands the sea, or the winds, or
stones, they obey; nay though there be neither person nor thing to obey him, as
at the Creation, yet what he commands is done, Deo non minus obedit id quod non
est, quam id quod est. 2. And indeed this was the way to try whether he was God
or no, for he that turns stones into bread by his command only, surely is God.
3. You may see how easily God can provide for his, for he can but command and
it shall be done, sood or raiment, or whatsoever he will he can do.

That these stones] How can we despair of Gods providence, for he can quodlibet
ex quolibet facere? 2. The observation I gave you even now, That when God
commands they obey, but when we command we must not command senseless things,
for senseless things will not obey us.

To be bread] The original so, not to be made, but to be bread, for he does not
command any man to do it, but only commands what he will have to be, and when
in any thing he uses the Ministry of Angels, it is to honor them or some
other such end, not for any need he has of them. 2. Except God could command
things to be, and they upon that should be, it is impossible that any thing
should be, for since once there was no creature, whom should he command to make
the first creature that was created? for before the first there could be no
creature, for then the first were not the first if there were one before it.

Bread] Why bread? Satan did use all his craft that he had to deceive our
Savior; for he tempts him here to a sin, which scarce seems to be a sin,
for to use extraordinary means to attain what ordinary means will not attain,
seems not to be evil; to work a miracle to relieve himself, and to satisfy one
in the belief of such a truth, as that he was the son of God, what sin seems it
to be? and then he does not wish him to turn these sins into delicates, but
bread. To tempt very holy men to gross sins would not be so proper, especially
at first.

Verse. 4. But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.
But he answered] The Question may be, Why our Savior did not turn those
stones into bread? whether because the thing it self was not fit to be done, or
because Satan proposed it? I answer, because the thing it self was unlawful,
for if it had been because Satan desired him so to do, then he would not
afterward have yielded to any of Satan's desires, but apparent it is that God
himself yielded to Satan in the trial of Job, in the deceiving of Ahab, and
Christ in bidding them to go into the swine. 1. Our Saviors answer does not
import any such thing, but he answers to the temptation, not the tempter; for
his answer shows that the thing it self ought not to be done whosoever had
moved it, and so all his answers are. 2. Why did he answer Satan? 1. To show
that there cannot be so much said for sin, but all may be answered, and more
said against it. 2. If by power he had overcome Satan, he had not left us an
example, for we have not the power our Savior had, we have the same Scripture.
3. If he had overcome him with power this time, he should have hindered Satan
from tempting him any more. 4. Some say there were two things that Satan
desired to sinde out and accomplish, 1. He desired to make Christ sin. 2. He
would fain know whether he were the son of God; now if our Savior had by power
overcome the devil, he had satisfied him in one of his intentions, for he had
fully showed himself to be the son of God.

It is written] That is, in the word of God, for as we call the word of God the
Bible and the Scripture, because it is the chiefest of all books, and of all
writings; so did the lews. 1. He does not say where, that it was written in
Deuteronomy, for that were needless, for one book is not of more authority
then another. 2. It was needless in respect of Satan, for our Savior well
knew that Satan was so versed in Scripture that he need not tell him where any
thing was written. 3. To teach us that we also should be so well versed in
Scripture that when any thing is quoted for Scripture, we should not only be
able to know whether it be Scripture or no, but to know the very place where it
was written. Why did not our Savior say what he pleased to say upon his own
authority, since our very Saviors words are of equal authority with the holy
Scripture? But by Scripture, 1. That he might not appear to be God. 2. That he
might so overcome the devil, that we might follow him, which we could not if he
had used his own authority. 3. That we might not rely on reason in things of
salvation, for reason is not able to overcome temptations, for reason is not
able to find out all sin; so St Paul a learned man confesses, that he had
not known it to be a sin, except the Law had said, Thou shall not covet, Romans
1. and if one cannot by reason find out sin, we cannot know what is a
temptation, for how is it possible to know when one is persuaded to sin, if one
does not know what is sin? 4. That he might show us the sure way to vanquish
all the fiery darts of Satan. Gildas the ancientest of all our English Divines,
calls the two Testaments the two shields of the Saints. 5. But where is it thus
written? not in the self same words any where, for the words are not so in the
Hebrew, the Septuagint have them so, but why did not our Savior use the words
according to the Hebrew? I answer, that it does not appear that our Savior
used these words, for this Gospel being written first in Hebrew, and after
translated into Greek, diverse things are added in the Greek which very probable
were not in the Hebrew copy; as for example Matthew. 1. You shall call his name
Emanuel, which is says the Text, God with us; and so here, because the
Septuagint translation is generally known more then the Hebrew; but you will
again say, Since the Septuagint differs in diverse things from the Hebrew, how
can one bring any proof from it? I answer, that though places of Scripture are
often quoted after that translation, to prove; yet the passage of such places
where the difference of one lies, never is brought to prove any point, as in
this place of Scripture.

Man] He does not say, the son of God lives not, 1. For it is not so written,
and he would confute Satan by Scripture, for the reasons above mentioned. 2.
Because he would not make it known that he was the son of God. 3. And chiefly
because he would give him such an answer, that might agree with us: if he had
said the son of God, and not man, we could not have said so. 2. Man, to show
the special providence of God toward man; for other creatures God does by his
perpetual ordinary providence feed and sustain, but works not miracles; but for
man he does.

Lives not by bread only] Three things are included, 1. That man does live by
bread, that is one thing by which he lives, or the instrumental cause of his
bodily life and nourishment; for if bread were not any thing whereby he lived,
it were not proper to say, he lived not only by bread. 2. That bread is not a
sufficient cause of life, though one have bread one may die. 3. Not absolutely
necessary, though one have it not we may live.

But by every word that proceeds] The meaning may be this, 1. That though a man
have no bread, yet God can give other things to nourish, as he did Manna in the
wilderness, upon which indeed these words are spoken in Deuteronomy. 2. Or
thus, that there are other things required for nourishment then bread, for if
God had not by his word as well given the stomach a power to digest and
chylifie, and to the liver to sanguifie, there could be no nourishment. The
answer of our Savior stands thus: 1. It is not necessary that I should make
these stones bread, since God can otherwise provide for me, notwithstanding I
am in the wilderness. 2. As your advise is not necessary, one may not follow
it, and yet do well, so it is not full if you take the second sense of the
words, for though one has bread, yet there is more required, for every word of
God, the word whereby the stomach has power to digest, is required: or thus,
there are two lives of men, and two words of God, the life of nature and the
life of grace; the word of God may be taken for that command of God, whereby he
created all things; or it may be taken for the Scripture: if you take life and
the word the first way, I have explained it already. Bread also may be taken
for natural bread, and sacramental bread; if you take it the second way, then
thus, the life of grace is not only by eating the sacramental bread, but also
by obeying the rest of the commands of God, this is the fittest place of
Scripture that can be chose; for when the children of Israel were in the same
place, the wilderness, and in the same straits, wanted bread, God sent them
Manna, and the end why he sent them Manna was, that they might know that man
lives not by bread alone, but by every word of God: as there it is set down, so
that whenever they or any other, should be in the straits of wanting food in
the wilderness, that very work of giving Manna, and this very point should
come to their remembrance, and our Savior does remember it.

Verse. 5. Then the devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a
pinnacle of the Temple.
Then] The devil flies to another temptation, he does reply upon our Saviors
answer: observe therefore, 1. The fullness of our Saviors answer, the devil
could not cavil at it, but was silenced for that temptation. 2. Observe the
authority of the word of God, the devil cannot deny, either that it was so
written, or that such writing is authentical, for if we were not bound by it,
it were not a sufficient argument to prove, that we should or should not do
such or such a thing because it is written so. 2. Then, St Luke related this
temptation last, how is it that Matthew puts it in the second place? The
Question is, Which of them was the first temptation? I answer, This that St
Matthew relates first; the reasons are, 1. Because that has a nearer relation,
and more fitly follows the first, then that which St Luke relates, in the
second place, and this in two respects, 1. Because upon our Saviors quoting
Scripture, most likely it is that he should by Scripture go about to deceive
him. 2. Because the first temptation being to bring our Savior to despair, or
at least to diffide of Gods mercy and providence, the next most probably should
be to make him presume of his protection, for the remedies against one vice do
almost incline one into the other, as he that keeps himself from being pushed
backward, he bends his force forward: In the primitive Church those arguments
which were brought to prove the Deity of Christ against Arius, were so strong
that they occasioned Apollinarius to deny his humanity. The devil therefore
could never take so fit an opportunity to tempt Christ to presume, as then when
he found him so confident of Gods mercy. 2. St Matthew uses words of order,
for he says then: St Luke seems not to intend to observe the order, for in his
relation he uses not then but again, but and he took him and he carried him.
3. St Matthew when he relates the last temptation, he says, Again the devil
takes him up into an exceeding high, etc. If the devil had not took him up
before, he should not have said, he took him up again. 4. In the third
temptation (according to St Matthew) our Savior bids satan, Avoid, Satan
therefore did surely leave him for that time, else our Savior should have
commanded the devil to do that which he did not: now our Savior never
commanded the evil spirits that which he did not make them do, when he bid them
come out they came out, and when he bid them avoid they avoided: Satan
therefore after our Savior bid him avoid, left him for that time, it was
therefore the last temptation: But you may say, Does not Luke mistake, and can
it be true what he writes, and yet true what Matthew writes? for the same
temptation cannot possibly be the second and the third, except our Savior was
twice tempted with the same temptation? I answer, that he that says, that God
created man and beasts, and the light and the sun, says as true, as he that
says, that God created the sun and light, and beasts and man, though he does
not relate Gods works in the same order as they were made; so St Luke, when he
says that, And the devil took him into an high mountain, and also took him and
set him upon a pinnacle of the Temple, says as true, as if he had related them
in the same order that they were done.

The devil took him] Some may wonder why our Savior would suffer himself to be
taken and carried up and down at the devils pleasure: But I answer, it is no
marvel, for he suffered himself to be used far worse at his death, and daily
in his members. 2. By his suffering satan to take his course, and to restrain
him in nothing, he did more fully overcome him, for if he had been restrained,
it might have happily be said, if he had not been restrained, he had prevailed
against our Savior. 2. He did not himself go, but was carried, to teach us,
that we must not be active, but only passive in our temptations. 3. See how
incessant the devil is, and how indefatigable in the temptation: It is a
caution to us not to content our selves, and leave off our watch, though we
have overcome one temptation.

Up into the holy City] That is, Jerusalem: so St Luke, called it holy, 1. To
distinguish it from all other Cities of the Gentiles who worshipped Idols. 2.
Because in that City only the main duties of religion were to be performed; now
before we go further let us see the subtilty of this temptation; 1. As I have
showed the former temptation being to diffidence, the way to defend him from
that, must needs be something that might make him to confide in God, and
whosoever is free from one extreme, if he be vicious or faulty is guilty of the
other extreme, therefore the likeliest way to prevail is to try him in a
temptation of presumption, that is free from despair. 2. The second point of
subtilty is, that he fights with him with his own weapon, and tempts him with a
place of Scripture. 3. That he did tempt him with so many temptations in one.

And set him upon the pinnacle of the Temple] Why should he set him there? 1. To
tempt him to fear of falling. 2. To have a fit place for his temptation, for
the place must be high, or it was not fit for the temptation; these are the
reasons why he carried him to so high a place: But why to that place, for if he
had carried him to some cliffe of some high rock, it might be as well fit for
that? 3. Therefore it was to tempt him to vainglory, for all the people
looking on him, as they could not choose but wonder, to see one standing on the
pinnacle of the Temple, and it would be a great deal of honor for him before
all the people to do such a miracle, and to get himself honor before all the
people. 2. To make the temptation take, therefore it is as if he should say,
When I was alone with you in the wilderness, then it was not to so much
purpose to prove thy self by some rare work the son of God; but now here are
holy men that come to the Temple, it is a very necessary point for them to
believe, therefore now show thy self who thou art, fear not, for it is written,
and therefore he was set on the pinnacle the most conspicuous place. 2. It was
not only conspicuous that they might see him, but such a place that every one
would stand gazing upon him; for not only they would wonder how he could come
down, but how he got up thither, there being no scaffolds, nor ladder, nor,
etc. Josephus writes that these pinacles were upon the Temple set with sharp
pikes of iron, that birds might not set upon them to defile the Temple.

Verse. 6. And says unto him, If thou be the son of God, Cast thy self down:
For it is written. He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in
their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone.
And he said, If thou art the son of God] 1. Why does Satan use these words
again, If thou, etc? 1. Because he was not resolved of his doubt, nor yet
satisfied whether our Savior was the son of God or no, and if you observe in
our Saviors answers to others, when out of malice intending to entrap him, or
out of curiosity, any one went about to have him manifest that which was not
fit in those respects to be known; he though they never so cunningly enquired
of him, always answered so, that they could not be by his answer resolved. So
you may see the subtilty of this temptation appears, that none, especially this
temptation, was not single: For, 1. Of fear and diffidence, for it would make
one afraid of falling to be set so high, and have so little hold. 2. Of pride,
to show himself and his power needlessly to the people. 3. Of presumption, in
casting himself upon the immediate providence of God, when he need not. 2.
Because these words are very fit for his other purpose, viz. to persuade him to
presumption, as in the other not to stay while God have provided for him, for
he had power in his own hands. 3. Because Satan knows how prone every one is,
to seem rathes more then less then he is; but our blessed Savior never
desired to glorify himself, but in stead of being puffed up, seeming to have
what he had not, he emptied himself of what he had. 4. The whole 91. Psalm
seems to be meant of the son of God, and therefore it was convenient to say,
If, etc. that the place of Scripture might more fitly so agree with the the
occasion, and to be meant especially, if not only of him.

Cast thy self down] It does not follow either, if one be the son of God,
that one ought to cast ones self down; nor if one cast ones self down, that one
is the son of God. 2. Why did not satan cast him down, but wish him to cast
himself down? 1. It might be because that Satan had not so much power over our
Savior, he had power to tempt, he had not power to throw down. 2. Because if
he could have attained one end of his temptation, viz. to know whether he was
the son of God, yet he could not that way have attained the other main end,
which was to cause him to sin, for it had been no sin to be cast down, a
sin it is to cast ones self, for the other does not tempt God. 3. Or might it
not be lest our Savior should think that he intended any hurt unto him? for
Satan all this while concealed himself, and would not be known who he was, nor
did our Savior but in the last temptation take any notice who he was. 4. Or,
was it not because he would not do any thing so that might occasion our
Saviors confidence in God, or if you will, occasion the presence of the holy
Angels, for fear they should assist our Savior, or discover him, or because he
loved not their company? for all these he knew would have come to pass, if he
had cast our Savior down; for supposing our Savior only to be a very holy
man, he knew that the Angels in such a case would bear him in their hands. 2.
The advice of Satan stands thus, It is not for thee to stand here always, and
it is not possible almost, for the very wind will blow thee off, and besides
thou will be starved, and to get down is dangerous, for how could one get down
from such a place and not fall? therefore it will come to this that thou will
fall, therefore better to cast thy self down, for by doing so, thou shall prove
thy self the son of God to all this people. If in thy striving to get down
safely thou should chance to fall, then indeed the Angels would keep thee
from any hurt, Gods providence over thee might appear, but thy considence in
him would not so appear, nay thy diffidence would happily too much appear, for
the people seeing thee on the pinnacle of the Temple, suppose that thou came
up for some such end, to do something of note, not that thou wentest up only to
come down again. 3. Cast thy self down headlong, not leap down, that the
miracle may be more apparent. 4. Great comfort and instruction may be raised
from this; Satan tempts thee to make away thy self, thou may be the child
of God for all this, for our Savior was tempted to cast himself down.

For it is written] 1. The devil uses not any place of Scripture in the other
temptations; in the former he did not, because our Savior had not discovered
his great esteem of Scripture, now he had: in the latter he did not, for he
could not find any place fit to persuade to idolatry. 2. The reason why he
uses it here, is because he would see if he could beat our Savior at his own
weapon, and because he knew that he would be more moved with a text of
Scripture, for since man lives by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God, here is the word that proceeded from God, It is written, it is the word of
God, therefore you need not to fear death, though you cast your self down. 3.
Happily he might think easily to deceive our Savior, for he knew that our
Savior was never brought up in learning, he was neither like Moses brought up
in all the learning of the Egyptians, for he came thence very young; nor as St
Paul at the feet of Gamaliel, but with his father Joseph, Luke 2. ult. 4. He
brought this not only as if our Savior might, but ought so to do, as if this
had been a prophecy of our Savior, and he ought to fulfill it. 5. You may see
how expert the devil is in the Scripture, for in the whole Bible he could not
have chose a fitter place for the temptation. 6. That we must not think the
cause good, because they that were the greatest heretics do bring Scripture,
but like Satan, where they bring Scripture once, they bring and stand upon
reason twice as much, but you art to try whether they rightly allege it.

He shall give his Angels charge] You see the wonderful love of God to those
that are his, 1. He makes Angels our servants to look to us and keep us, and to
wait on us, we should rather be servants to them; Kings and Queens are nursing
fathers and nursing mothers. 2. He has given his Angels, those about his own
throne; all Angels are his, good and bad, by creation, but the good, Angels are
now only called his Angels, the other are called the devils angels, Matthew.
25.41. 3. Angels, which if you compare with that which follows there, you may
see that every good man has many Angels, not only every man his titular Angel.
4. A charge, a special command. 5. To keep thee, not only as David gave a
charge concerning Absalom, Do the young man no harm 6. And they shall bear thee
up in their hands, they are not only to look to us lest we fall, but to carry
us lest we fall. 7. Lest at any time, not a moment that their vigilance
cease. 8. They keep us, that not only not often, but not once. 9. Why all
this care? all lest we should hurt our foot, not thy feet, the foot, the lowest
and the meanest part, pars insima, pars unica, that he says thy foot, a
fortiori, it follows, he takes care of all the rest of the body, he that takes
care of the lesser things will take care for the greater. 1. It is only to keep
one from hurting; the next thing to be considered is the subtilty and falsehood
of the devil in citing this place, 1. They appear in citing so fit a place, for
it is as if it had been a Prophecy on purpose for that very occasion, for it
speaks of bearing up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
2. He leaves out that which would make against him. 3. He quotes it as if it
was particularly meant of our Savior, whereas it is meant of all holy men; for
our Savior wanted not the protection of Angels, but they his: see how fitly
this follows upon the former, as if he should say, Thou will not turn stones
into bread, but thou will cast thy self upon the providence of God, do so now,
what need thou trouble thy self to come down, cast thy self upon the
providence of God, cast thy self down? and since the word of God is that thou
so much reliest upon; here is the word of God, it is written.

Verse. 7. Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the
Lord thy God.
And Jesus said, It is written again] Here was no pausing, it put not our
Savior to a stand. 1. You may see the great wisdom of Christ, which appears
first that he answered Satan; for doubtless this was the subtilest temptation
that the devil could invent, yet our Savior answered him. There is a story of
a Limner, that to show his Art drew a white line so small, that it could hardly
be discerned; another to show that he could excel him drew a black line through
the middle of it, it required an accurate sight to discern either; but our
Savior at first view immediately discerned this black line of temptation to
run through the plausible advice that Satan gave our Savior. 2. The next thing
that shows our Saviors wisdom, was in giving so speedy an answer: When we are
a disputing many times, we are forced to give such an answer, which may face
the objection whilst we have time to rally our forces that we may be able to
give such a full answer as may wholly rout it: but our Savior at first gives
such an answer as gets a plenary victory over the temptation, and that is the
last act of Christ's wisdom that he gives such an answer, which considering all
things a more proper and full answer could not be given by the wisdom of men or
Angels, nor of Christ himself, though they had never so long time to consider
of it; for it may not be said of Christ that his second thoughts or actions
could be more wise. 2. The holiness of Christ does exceedingly appear in
giving so speedy a denial: for as it would have argued some defect in his
wisdom not to have been able at first view to discover it to be a sin, which
Satan persuaded him to, so having discovered it to be a sin, it would have been
a sin in Christ to have consulted whether he should have done it or no, for
it argues coldness of love to consider whether we should offend God or no, and
it argues a great deal of folly; for there is no proportionable weight between
any motive that can be brought to persuade us to sin, if it be compared with
the evil of the least sin to which it persuades us. So that to stand weighing
(that is consulting,) which of those two have greatest weight in them, argues
as great folly, as if one should stand weighing whether a feather or a talent
of lead were heavier. 3. It Is against the nature of consultation, for Deus and
peccatum non cadunt subconsultatione, God and sin cannot be consulted of, we
may consult how we may serve God, but not whether we should serve God. He
without any stay answered and said, our Savior still answers by Scripture, to
show us that the Word is not profitable to answer one, but all kinds of
temptation. 2. To show that the abuse of a thing should not take away the use
of it. 3. Again, not to argue any contradiction in the Scripture, but to show
us the best way to understand Scripture is by comparing one place with another.
2. To show us how excellent it is to balance and counterpoise Scripture, to put
those places that command a duty, or set down promises, should be taken and
joined with those that sets the limit to the duty, and the conditions to the
promises: But the Question may be, Why did not our Savior, since the devil
alleged the place falsely, show the error and take that way to answer, since
it is very dangerous to let the Scripture be misunderstood, and we should not
let any go on in an error? The reasons might be, 1. If he had took that way,
happily Satan might have brought another place to that purpose, to which the
answer to this place would not serve; therefore our Savior brings rather a
place of Scripture to confute him: now this answer would serve not only for
this place, but for all other places of this kind whatsoever. 2. Because this
did in effect answer and show the very words that the devil left out; for to
tempt God is to expect Gods protection out of his ways. 3. That he might show
us that Scripture is sufficient to resist and avoid all temptations of all
kinds. 4. As has been said before, that we might have a rule to expound
Scripture. 5. To show us that faith, that is, the object of faith, the word of
God is the only way (not reason) to quench the fiery darts of Satan. 6. The
reforming of the erroneous understanding of Scripture, need not be done to
Satan, 1. Because Satan is incorrigible, and so it would do him no good. 2. He
did not cite the place wrong out of ignorance, but out of subtilty and craft.

Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, etc.] 1. The meaning is not as if he
should say, Why do thou tempt me, I am the Lord thy God, and it is written,
Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, therefore thou shall not tempt me? 1.
For then he should have forbidden the devil to tempt him any more. 2. The
Scripture is written for our not for Satan's instruction. 3. Because it had not
been so fit for us, for if that be meant of the devil, it belongs not to us
principally. 4. Because evidently the command in Deuteronomy is given to the
Israelites, and not to Satan. 2. In the text in Deuteronomy, it is; you shall
not tempt the Lord; here, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God, Why this
change? 1. Was it not to show us, that we ought to apply commands, and
prohibitions to our selves, those that are spoken to all, and so also promises,
if we are in the same case. 2. Was it not because that here it is written so in
the Septuagint, and not in the Hebrew, not verbatim according to the Hebrew,
because the Septuagint being in Greek, was far more generally had and
understood. 3. It is to be considered, what it is to tempt God; by what it is
to tempt man, we may find out what it is to tempt God; to tempt a man is to
desire, or some way to endeavor to incline him to break that Law that ought to
rule him, and that is imposed upon him: now you must understand that God has
proposed a Law to himself to follow in the ruling of the world, viz. to work
and bring to pass all things by means, not immediately, as to preserve man's
life by nourishing him, and nourishing him by food, not immediately; and this
Law God does observe, except some necessity requires his immediate providence
and power; whosoever would have God break this Law, and have him work wonders
and miracles to bring to pass that which by means which he has afforded us
may be done, is said to tempt God, as apparently in this tempration it is. 2.
Tempting is the same with trying, to make a needless experiment; now all
experiments concerning God are needless, for needless are those means without
which the end may as well be attained, or with which the end cannot be
attained, 1. Therefore, those tempt God, who cast themselves upon the immediate
providence of God; now he does not cast himself, who necessarily ventures, and
puts himself upon Gods immediate providence by observing Gods Laws, as the
three children, but God brings them into it, and God will deliver them: so also
if by any other one be brought to such straits, that without Gods immediate
providence one cannot escape, so were they. 2. Those that tie God to such and
such means, or prescribe the manner or time how, and when God shall deliver
them. 3. There are two kinds or ways of tempting God, one when the end of our
words or actions is to find out whether God be powerful, wise, good, this is
called an express temptation. The second kind is, when one does or speaks any
thing, which although we do it not with that intent, yet there can be no other
end why one should do it, then by that to be certified of some thing concerning
Gods Attributes; for if one would make an experiment one would use that very
way, and this is called an interpretative temptation; now to tempt God that is
always a sin, for it always supposes infidelity and ignorance of some
inherent excellency in God, or from distrust of his goodness to us, or out of
idleness that we will not trouble our selves to find out, or use the means,
which God has afforded us: But James 1.13. God is not tempted with evil, if
God cannot be tempted, what need we be forbid to tempt him? I answer, 1. There
are two kinds of temptation, proving and seducing; wicked men do tempt God the
first way, and that is the thing we are forbid; but the second, to go about to
persuade God to any sin, none does tempt him so, and of that kind of
temptation does the Apostle speak, for the other words show what kind of
temptation is meant; God tempts no man, says the Apostle, that is, not to
seduce him, but to prove him he does, therefore the other words are to be meant
of the same kind of temptation. 2. God is not tempted with evil, may be meant
thus; God is not allured, no evil does any way incline him, but he is utterly
averse from all evil: If one should see some curious ripe fruit, and one were
forbid all fruit, one is used to say to see such curious fruit would tempt one
shrewdly, and when one answers no, it would not tempt me; ones meaning is, it
would not incline me or make me desire to eat it: so no evil does incline God
to like it. It is said, The Lord thy God, to give us a reason why we should not
tempt him; for since our tempting God comes from our doubting, and the things
we usually doubt of are his power or his goodness to us; here is a word for
each, The Lord, there his power; Thy God, there his goodness: But why is it
said, the Lord, and thy God, and not thy Lord? The reason is, because we use to
doubt of Gods power, without any relation to our selves, but when we doubt of
his goodness it is in relation to our selves.

Verse. 8. Again the devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and
shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
And again the devil took him up] This again being referred to the taking up,
shows that this was the second time that the devil took him up, and by
consequence that the taking up to the pinnacle of the Temple was the first, and
by consequence that that temptation was before this, though St Luke relates it
before this. 2. The reason why our Savior would again be tempted, was, because
he had not yet left us an example of the most commonest of all temptations,
viz. ambition and covetousness. 3. To show the indefatigablenesse of the
devil, as long as there remains any way untried he cease not. 4. The Question
may be, Whence Satan took our Savior? and most probable it is, that it was
from the pinnacle of the Temple, for it is not likely that he came down thence;
and that may be one reason, why it is said an exceeding high mountain; for the
pinnacle of the Temple was higher then ordinary mountains. For Jerusalem it self
was built upon an hill; for the devil after he had set our Savior upon the
pinnacle he left him a while to see what would be the issue of it, to which it
may be those words of Luke do relate, viz. And he left him for a season; for,
it was convenient to strengthen the temptation, that he should withdraw
himself. 2. Because we do not read of, nor is it very probable, that the devil
did ever tempt our Savior any more after this manner vocally, because he knew
him to be the son of God; and our Savior immediately after this began to
preach and cast out devils: but I submit, and am willing that any man should
think otherwise.

An exceeding high mountain] It is happily not possible for any man to tell out
of Scripture, or any other way, what mountain this was, whether it was the
mountain from which Moses beheld the Land of Canaan, or any other, is a
curiosity to enquire. 2. The reason why he carried him to so high a mountain,
was, that he might have the fuller and larger prospect.

And showed to him all the kingdoms of the world] How could that be, for though
the mountain had been as high as the Sun, or a thousand thousand times
higher, impossible it is for a man to see half the world from thence, for the
Sun that is so high and far bigger then the earth sees but a little more
then half at the same time? Nay ones eye cannot see to discern Cities, or any
such thing not many miles; for upon the sea with the help of glasses, they
cannot see very far, Galataeus his glass, the excellentest now in the world,
shows not above fourscore miles any whit distinctly. 2. He did not with his
finger pointing say, There is Rome, and there lies Grecce, etc. and then tell
him the commodities, wealth and glory of those Countries, 1. Because he might
as well have done that on the pinnacle, and never carried him thence. 2. Because
he showed them as St Luke relates in a moment, and a discourse of the glory of
such kingdoms, would be long: likely it seems, that by some apparitions and
sights in the air, he might show those things he desired to present to our
Savior; and the reason why he took him to an high mountain to show him this
sight, was that by the real being upon the mountain, the rest might not seem
prestigious, for if he had showed these things while he was on the pinnacle, he
might surely know that whatsoever he saw besides the City of Jerusalem and the
Temple, were mere figments.

And the glory of them] He omits not any thing that might make for his purpose:
All the kingdoms, he therein showed the largeness of the dominions he offered,
And in the glory, the magnificence of them. 2. He showed the glory of them, but
not the cares, the manifold dangers of them: Satan always, sets the best side
outward, and conceals that which might displease, St Luke says, All this was
done in a moment; 1. To show that the glory is momentany. 2. That he might see
them all at once; for if in long tract of time, and successively they had been
showed, they would not have been so strong a temptation, for the simultaneous
sight of all would much more affect. 3. In a moment, lest having a long time to
behold them, the fallacy of the sight might appear.

Verse. 9. And says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if thou will
fall down and worship me.
And he said unto him] He presently said unto him, he would strike while the
iron was hot: for, 1. The freshness and delight in these earthly things
quickly cloy. 2. Time of consideration is an advantage: Satan loves not to give
to any.

All these will I give thee] See how large his offers are, he will bid all, nay
more then he has, lest there should be any failing that way; with others a
piece of bread, or a pair of shoes were enough to persuade them to sin. 2.
The temptation was very strong, and as he hoped very likely to prosper, for our
Saviors parents (though of the bloud-royal) being but poor, it would be so
much the greater.

If thou falling down wilt worship me] 1. The things the devil offers are poor
and temporal, the things God offers are glorious and eternal. 2. The conditions
upon which Satan offers them are wicked and abominable, he always makes us pay
too dear for his vanities, but the condition upon which God offers eternal
life, is holy, and such, that one would, if one fully understood, choose,
though there were no reward. 2. There are two kinds of Gods attributes, his
communicable and his incommunicable, and the endeavors and desires of the good
and bad are differenced by them: for Satan, and his Angels, and his followers
strive to be like him in his incommunicable attributes, as worship, honor and
glory, and to be loved and feared above all; but the righteous they strive for
holiness, mercy and love, and patience, and restore the image of God which is
so much defaced: and the image of God which man was created in, did certainly
consist in the participation of those attributes which are communicable, for
God created him in his image, good and bad strive to be like God, Ero ficut
altissimus, says Lucifer, And be you merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful, says our blessed Savior; but the one he will be like God in power
and glory, sicut altissimus, the other in holiness and power, Ero sicut
sanctissimus: This temptation differs from the former, 1. He quotes no
Scripture for this, the reason is, because for this sin and gross error of
idolatry there is not any thing in holy Scripture to countenance, but not any
sin whatsoever more spoke against then idolatry. 2. In the other temptations
he promised nothing, before this he prefixes a promise, and a large offer. 3.
In the other he says, If thou art the son of God, not so here, the reason
may be, that that clause was against him here, for if he was the son of God,
the offer of giving him all these things were vain, for they were his before.
2. To wish him to worship him were madness; for the son of God ought to worship
none, much less, whom none should worship, Satan.

Verse. 10. Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee behind, Satan: for it is
written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Then Jesus answered and said, Avoid Satan] Our Savior bids him not avoid
before, 1. Because he had not suffered, and by consequence not left us an
example, and a rule how to answer all kinds of temptations. 2. To teach, 1.
That we are patiently to bear injuries offered to our selves, but for injuries
and blasphemies against God, not so much as to hear them with patience. 2. To
teach us what company to avoid. 1. Blasphemers, for here Satan makes himself
God, in saying, all things were his. 2. Those that tempt us to idolatry, we are
to avoid their company; nay indeed in Deuteronomy, whosoever tempted one to
idolatry, though it were ones child, one wife, or ones friend, one were to
reveal him, and have him stoned. 2. Our Savior took no notice that he was
Satan before, but now he does, and now he plainly showed himself, for whosoever
says, that all things are his to bestow, and will be worshipped, is either God
or the devil. Satan is an Hebrew word and signifies adversary.

For it is written] All Christ's answers are by Scripture, and all the places
out of Deuteronomy, and every one cited verbatim from the Septuagint, and not
from the original: the reason why our Savior answers all by Scripture is
already shown.

Thou shall worship the Lord thy God] Why does not our Savior answer him some
other way, he might have answered him, that all those things were not his to
give, but our Savior does not give such an answer, as might only satisfy that
temptation, but all temptations whatsoever there were or might be to that
since; for if our Savior had been only to defend and answer for himself, he
might and happily would have answered otherwise, but he being in our stead, and
to leave us an example, he answers so as it might be best for us, and that we
might have a pattern and answer left for us to answer all temptations of that
kind; for suppose he had said to Satan, the things that thou offerest are not
in thy power to give, two inconveniences would have followed, 1. That answer
would not have served us, when man, suppose the King or some great man had
offered such preferment as was in his power to give; our Saviors answer would
not have served us, and so one, if not the only end of his temptation had
failed, viz. to leave us a way to overcome all kind of temptations. 2. It
might have seemed that he would have fallen down, if he had had power to give
what he promised. May it not be to show us that we are first to consider to
what we are persuaded to before we consider the motives by which we are
persuaded; and if it appears to be a sin, that we ought not to consider the
motives, for that will prove a snare unto us, and therefore Christ discovering
this to be abominable idolatry, he answers not to the motives but to the
temptations.

Verse. 11. Then the devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and ministered
unto him.
Then] 1. When our Savior had commanded him to avoid. 2. As soon as he saw he
was discovered, for in all the rest of the temptations our Savior took no
notice who he was. 3. So soon as he had ended all his temptations, the devil
stays not any where willingly longer then he is in hope of doing mischief.

The devil left him] 1. That one may do that which Christ commands, and yet be
as bad as the devil, for Christ commanded the devil to get him hence, and so he
did; we do not obey God by doing what he commands, but because he commands;
when the devils do what God commands, it is rather in them an act of subjection
then obedience, and the will of God is more properly done upon them then by
them.

2. Observe, how easy it is for Christ to deliver his out of temptation, if he
does but rebuke him it is all that the Angel does desire; Jude.

3. This is the difference betwixt Christ and not only the Saints, but the very
Angels themselves: if Christ rebukes Satan, and bid him get him hence, he
cannot resist, yet by way of indignation they may bid him get him hence, but
authoritatively they cannot.

St Luke has it, That he left him for a season; two things may be gathered
from that, 1. That he left him not for ever. 2. That he left him not for any
certain time, but for a season, (...) not (...), while he could find a fit
opportunity to tempt him again, which should teach us not to go into places of
temptation, for the devil leaves thee no longer then while he can find an
opportunity to tempt. 2. It should teach us to take all opportunities to do
good. 3. To consider what temptations every place, action and employment are
subject to, and to provide for them.

The Angels] The good Angels, you may see what we may expect if we resist to
the end, more comforts then temptations; for we read but of one that did
tempt, but here are many that do comfort. 2. You see no sooner the temptation
ended, but the Angels come.

Came] Why, where were they not with our Savior? It seems therefore it is said
they came, to show that they were not with our ^aviour before, lest one should
think, 1. That our Savior could not himself alone overcome the devil, but had
coadjutors to help him or assist him. 2. Or at least we should think that he
did not alone in other victories over Satan's instruments, subdue the malice of
his enemies, and so we should ascribe part of our redemption to Angels.

And ministered unto him] Our Savior did not want their ministration, but it
was their honor, and not our Saviors want that caused them to minister unto
him.

Verse. 12. Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed
into Galilee.
Now when Jesus heard] It is not to be supposed that this is to be meant, that
he immediately after the temptation was ended went into Galilee, for many
things were done before, as the calling of many of his Disciples, as Andrew and
Peter, as John 1. as also his turning water into wine, and all things which
preceeded John's imprisoning. Why did our Savior stay while he heard the news,
for he knew not only the very instant, when it was done, but long before when
it should be done, and need not stay while the news was brought him? 1. He
stayed while the news was brought, because he knew that before that the
Pharisees knew that work was accomplished, they would not go about to do any
thing against him, and so long while the news came of John's imprisonment, he
was safe. 2. Because if he had departed from Judea before it was known that
John was imprisoned (though he knew it) the cause of his departure would not
have been known, and he might have seemed to have fled upon mere surmises of
danger, so to have been timorous.

That John was delivered up] John Baptist, what man be he never so holy can
escape the fury of the wicked! the occasion of his imprisonment is set down,
Matthew. 14. but though Herodias was the promoter of that persecution against
John, and Herod by his power put him in prison, yet the Jews were the betrayers
of him; for our Savior says, They did whatsoever they would, and that they
betrayed John, 1. Here it is said, that When John was delivered up; for our
Translation, when he was cast into prison, stands not with the original. 2.
John was out of the jurisdiction of Herod, as appears Matthew. 3.1. Luke 3.1. for
the wilderness of Judea was not within the precincts of Galilce, and Herod was
only Tetrarch of Galilce at that time. 3. If the Jews had not had any hand in
this, why should our Savior flee out of Judea upon it? And if you shall say,
Why should our Savior flee into Galilee, where Herod ruled, for he might
expect the same usage? I answer no, for the reason why Herod persecuted John,
our Savior never did, viz. reprove Herod for his incestuous marriage; but the
reason which made the Jews so incensed, viz. the reproving of their hypocrisy,
and not standing for the Ceremonies, our Savior was no less exact then John.

He departed into Galilee] The place from whence he went is most reasonably
thought to be Judea, from whence he went to avoid the persecution of the Jews:
the whole Country of the Jews was called Palestina, which was in length from
Dan to Beershoba about two hundred and ten miles, in breadth from Endor to
Gilead ten miles, it was divided into four Provinces, viz. Judea, Trachonitis,
Samaria and Galilee.

Verse. 13. And leaving Nazareth, he came and dwelt at Capernaum, which is upon
the seacoast, in the borders of Zabulon and Nephthali.
And left Nazareth] The reasons why he left Nazareth, were 1. Either because it
was not so far off from the Jews his enemies. 2. Or because he should not
have done so much good there, for a Prophet is not honored in his own
Country. 3. Or to fulfill the Prophecy, 1. We may learn, That temporal
privileges do not obtain any thing from Christ, except they are holy withal,
Matthew. 7. they thought because they had eaten and drunken, etc. and we think
that if we had been acquainted with our Savior we should have had a surer way
to heaven: no, no, that which brought them to heaven was faith, not their
knowing Christ, but their believing on him, and obeying of him, and we have
that way still, and if our means of believing are not so great, the reward of
our believing shall be greater. 2. Christ left his kindred, acquaintance and
fathers house to preach the Gospel.

And dwelt in Capernaum] He dwelt there, because it was very remote from
Jerusalem, where dwelt the Scribes and Pharisees his enemies, the reason why he
dwelt there rather then elsewhere thereabout, was because it was the place of
most concourse of people, being the metropolis of Galilee; the name signifies
the City of Consolation, and seems not to be built in Joshua's time, for there
is no mention of it in the Old Testament.

In the borders of Zabulon and Nephthali] The reason why St Matthew does not
set down to which Tribe Capcrnaum did belong, may be, 1. To make the Prophecy
plain to be understood, to set it down in those words: for if a great light
appeared in the confines of Zabulon, which was next to Nephthali, or in the
confines of Nephthali, which was next to Zabulon, it must needs be seen of
both. 2. Because happily that City might not belong to either Tribe wholly, but
to both, as Jerusalem to the Tribe of Judah and Benjamin; so also other Cities
belonged to two Tribes, as appears Joshua 17.8, 9. and as among us some Towns
belong part to one Shire, and part to another.

Verse. 14. That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the Prophet,
saying.
That it might be fulfilled] The phrase seems strange, for it seems more likely
that it should be, and so it was fulfilled then that it might be fulfilled, for
it seems that things were foretold, because they shall come to pass, and not
that they came to pass because they were foretold. I answer, that diverse
things that God foretells, he does not foretell to that end, that he might prove
himself omniscient, and to know things before they come to pass, for if so,
then things should not come to pass, because they are foretold, but be
foretold, because they are to come to pass, but God fore-tels them, because
he intends to do them, and rather to prove his omnipotence then his
omniscience, or his goodness, so that Christ might dwell in Capernaum, to
perform that promise which God had made in the Prophets time; for although the
performing of that Prophecy was not the only cause of Christ's dwelling in
Capernaum, yet had there been no other cause, that had been a sufficient cause;
this is certain, that God first intends to do good to a man or people before he
promises so to do, and promises so to do, if at all he promises before he
does it: Gods intention to do good, considering his immutability, is the
primary cause of the doing that good which he intended, but his intention lays
no obligation, whereby any man may challenge of him so to do, but his promise
does lay an obligation, and therefore it is very good sense to say, he did so
that it might be fulfilled which was promised. If it had been said, that so it
was fulfilled which was prophesied, it had only showed Gods omniscience of
things to come, but by being said, that it might be fulfilled, it shows his
power, being able to bring to pass what he promised, and also his sidelity and
truth, in bringing to pass what he had promised. Again, if it had been said,
that so it was fulfilled, it not importing any act of Gods providence in
bringing of it so to pass, but only of his prescience in knowing that it
should so come to pass, it did no way oblige, or at least not so much, those
that received that blessing to thankfulness, it might make them admire him for
his omniscience, but not bless him for his goodness; for there is little or
no thanks due to him, that tells me what good shall hereafter befall me, but
there are many thanks to him that fore-tels and promises that such a good thing
he will do for me. Observe 1. That all that God promises he brings to pass
though it belong after, wherefore it is impossible that one trusting in his
promises should be deceived. 2. That we should as Christ was be careful of
fulfilling what was written, although there be no Prophecies written of us
which we may fulfill, yet there are commands given us which we may fulfill, and
commands are as much Gods word as Prophecies.

Which was spoken by the Prophet Esaias] St Matthew does the oftenest quote
Scriptures, in respect that he wrote to the Jews.

Verse. 15. The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali, by the way of the
sea beyond Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles.
The land of Zabulon, and the land of Nephthali] That that Prophecy in Isa.
9.1. was fulfilled by our Savior dwelling in Capernaum, these reasons make
evident, 1. Because St Matthew interprets it, who is of equal authority with
the Prophet Isaiah. 2. Because the rest of that Chapter in Isaiah is meant of
our Savior, by the consent generally of the Rabbis, and where there is no
pregnant argument that any place of Scripture should be interpreted otherwise,
if the following verses are without controversy meant of our Savior, the
precedent verses are meant of him also. 3. The coherence of the words shows
it also, for it is said, That the people that had sat in darkness had seen a
great light, and some other blessings more that should be bestowed upon them,
in the next following verses, and then in the sixth verse, he sets down how all
these blessings, and who should accomplish them, or if you will, the reason why
all these things should come to pass, in those words, viz. For to us a child
is born, to us a Son is given.

Galilee of the Gentiles] The reason why it is called Galilee of the Gentiles,
is, 1. Either because diverse Gentiles lived there, it being upon the border of
the Land of the Jews. 2. Or, because Solomon gave twenty Cities there to Hiram,
1 King. 9.11, 12. Galilee was divided into two parts, the upper and the nether,
the upper was that which here was called Galilee of the Gentiles.

Verse. 16. The people which sat in darkness, saw great light: and to them
which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up.
The people that sat in darkness] These people that lived in Galilce were very
ignorant, and very wicked, though in the Prophet Isaiah it is said, They walked
in darkness, not that they walked toward the light, hence is that saying, John
7.52. hence the reason of their ignorance and wickedness, 1. Their remoteness
from Jerusalem the place of Gods worship. 2. The vicinity and mixing with the
Gentiles. 3. Capernaum being a Garrison town and full of soldiers; by darkness
is meant in the Scripture ignorance, it is said, they sat in darkness, the
light came to them, they did not come to the light.

Saw a great light] 1. It is not said, they embraced the truths of the Gospel,
but that they saw them. 2. Christ called a great light to distinguish him from
the Prophets, or else it is meant of the Gospel which revealed diver; truths,
either utterly unknown, or very obscurely known in the time of the Law.

And to them that sat in the region and shadow of death] 1. Those that sit in
ignorance of divine truths, sit also in the region of death, that is, in that
place where death has dominion over them. 2. In that it is said, they sat in
the region and shadow of death, it shows, that they did not strive to be
delivered, but were content and secure in the state wherein they were.

Light is risen up to them] The word properly signifies the Sun rising, not as
it is in our Translation, is sprung up, which is proper to flowers, and things
that grow out of the earth, and it shows that by no endeavor of theirs did
this blessing rise up to them, but as we have no hand in making the Sun rise,
for it rises though we sleep, and are so far from causing it to rise that we do
not so much as expect it.

Verse. 17. From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.
From thence Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent] It is not meant
exclusively that Christ did not preach before, for it is apparent, John 3.24.
that our Savior did baptize, and very probable it is that he did not baptize
without preaching before John was cast into prison; the reasons why our Savior
began with the same doctrine that John Baptist did, 1. Because it was the most
convenientest doctrine for him to preach at first, and there was no reason why
he should avoid it, because John preached it before him; and therefore when he
sends his own Disciples to preach, he bids them begin the publishing of the
Gospel, with the self same words, which appears by comparing those two places
together, Mark 6.12. Matthew. 10.7. 2. It might be to confirm their high esteem
of St John, for it much concerned them to have an high esteem of St John, who
testified of our Savior. 3. That he and his doctrine might be better received
at first; for St John being accounted so great a Prophet, and so much honored
by the people, they must also receive any one that went his way, and for the
great inconvenience that might have come upon this, that the people might have
thought our Savior St John's Disciple, it was taken off by the frequent
testimonies of St John before given of him, as also by John's Disciples
following of him, and by his doing so many miracles, whereas St John did none.

Repent, etc.] 1. You may see the nature of repentance from the word, for it
signifies the changing of our minds, and (...) is taken for the understanding,
judgment, will, thoughts, and so by consequence whosoever does truly repent,
his thoughts, judgment, will, and all are changed, they are set upon other
objects. 2. By consequence it is not an outward change, but argues some
repentance, one may have restraining grace without repentance. 3. It argues
that all are gone astray, or else there need be no returning. 4. It shows that
the Gospel is the right way to bring one to repentance, And the kingdom of
heaven is at hand, is brought as the reason and motive of repentance, the
hammer of the Law may break us in pieces, but it is the fire of the Gospel that
purges us from our dross. 4. The Gospel is a kingdom to rule us, as well as
promises a kingdom to be bestowed upon us. Diverse look upon the Gospel as
promising a Kingdom of Glory, but not as it sets in us a Kingdom of grace, but
except the Kingdom of God first come into us, we shall never come into it. 5.
It shows that Christ and John preached for the substance the very same Gospel,
for both begin their preaching with the same words. 6. The Gospel is now seen
clearer, because it is nearer.

Verse. 18. And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon,
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea; (for they
were fishers.)
And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee] It is the same which St John calls the
sea of Tiberias, which City was built by Herod after he was reconciled to
Tiberias, which in honor of him he named Tiberias, and from thence the sea
also took his name, it was about sixteen miles long, and six miles over: It was
called the sea of Galilee, though it was but a lake, for the Jews used to call
any abundance of waters a sea, as the brazen sea in the Temple of Solomon, so
called, because it held a great deal of water; it was called the sea of Galilee
to show that it was not the main Ocean.

Saw two brethren, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother] These
were not the first that our Savior called to be his Disciples, for Philip was
called, John 1.43. before John Baptist was cast into prison, neither was this
the first time that our Savior saw them, John 1.37.

Casting a net into thesea, for they were fishers] 1. We do generally read in
Scripture that those men to whom God showed any great revelation, or bestowed
any great blessing, he did it in the time when they were well employed in the
works of their callings, so to Moses, so to the shepherds, Luke 2. and so to
these four Disciples in this Chapter. 2. Since it is apparent by John 1. that
these were called to the faith before, it shows that religion, ones general
calling does not hinder industry in our particular calling. 3. It is not to be
understood that our Savior Christ called them just at that time when they were
casting their nets into the sea; for it is probable, that this their casting
their nets into the sea, was part of that unfruitful labor which St Peter
speaks to our Savior of, Luke 5.5. after which our Savior preached to the
people out of their ship, and the miraculous draught of fishes, was before the
following words were spoken, They were fishers: 1. To show us, that every one
should follow their own calling, and not to intermeddle with other men's. 2. Or
to show us that this their fishing was not their recreation, but their calling;
the reason why he chose ignorant men to be his Disciples, was to avoid calumny,
for if they had been learned men, it might be objected, that they by sophistry
or eloquence did convert men to be of their opinion. 2. He chose the poor, lest
if he had chose the potent, Christian religion might be thought to be
introduced into the world by power and by force. 3. He chose the simple, lest
it might have been thought that Christian religion had been brought into the
world by craft and subtilty. 2. That Christ's power and excellency might more
appear, for the weaker the instrument is the greater is his glory that brings
great things to pass by it: or else the reason why he chose poor men, might be
in respect of the Disciples themselves, for if he had chosen those who were
eloquent, or learned, or politic men, they might have thought that Christ had
chose them, because they were so, but he, as the Apostle speaks in 1 Cor. 1.
chose the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and the weak
things, etc. v. 27, 28. and then he sets down the reason, viz. That no flesh
might glory in his presence; for if the wise should convert the simple, and the
strong the weak, they might think that by their own arm, and by their own
wisdom they had brought such mighty things to pass. Again, in respect of those
that were to be converted by the Disciples, for the weaker the instruments is,
the more they that are converted acknowledge that they owe to God for their
conversion; for God would have no one attribute his conversion to man, as to
the cause of it, and this is the reason that the Apostle sets down why the
vessel that conveighs the treasure to us is earthen, because the excellency of
the power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. yet notwithstanding
afterward rich, learned and wise men were converted by our Savior, but not to
be Apostles but to be Christians only, lest any one should think (if all had
been simple that had been converted by our Savior) that our Savior wrought
upon the simplicity and ignorance of the people, as Nicodemus a learned man,
and Joseph of Arimathea an honorable Counselor, Zacheus a rich man.

Verse. 19. And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men.
And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men.] We may
here see the strange course our Savior takes of calling men to be his
Disciples: for, 1. He persuades them not, but commands them to follow him. 2.
He proposes no temporal or carnal rewards, but such rewards as would move none
but such as are holy. 2. By this we may learn, That to convert men is a thing
to be desired and endeavored by all good men, for our Savior does not put it
down so much by way of duty, as by way of reward. 3. It is not said that you
shall be fishers of men, but I will make you fishers of men, to show, that they
had that power, not from themselves, but from Christ.

Verse. 20. And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.
And they straightway left their nets, and followed him.] 1. Here one may see a
difference betwixt ones general call to be a Christian, and ones particular
call to be an Apostle; for when they were called John 1. they still continued
fishers; but now they are called to be Apostles, they leave their particular
calling of fishermen. 2. Here is the effectualnesse of Christ's calling, that
without any delay or doubt of the performance of the promise that Christ made
unto them, they obeyed his command. 3. The Question is, Why it is here said
they left their nets, whereas it is spoken before but of one net, that they
cast into the sea? The order of the History goes thus, Immediately after the
great draught of fishes, and Peter's falling down at our Saviors feet, our
Savior said to Peter, Fear not, afterward thou shall catch men; and after they
had brought their own and their partners nets, which helped them to the shore,
then our Savior said these words, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men. 4. Though it be set down, They left their nets, yet St Luke says, They
left all, to wit, their nets, their ship, and their great draught of fishes. 5.
It is not said, that they disposed of their nets, but that they left them, to
show that they cared not what became of all things so they might gain Christ;
for as when the Sun shines all the stars add nothing to the light, so Christ
and all things are no more then Christ alone, and they knew that Christ that
could work such a miracle, needed not their money to provide for them. 6. This
does not justify those among the Papists, who live in wilful poverty out of
the company of men, living without any calling, for they did not properly leave
their calling but change it.

Verse. 21. And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son
of Zebedee, and John his brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending
their nets: and he called them.

Verse. 22. And they immediately left the ship and their father, and followed
him.


And going on from thence, he saw other two brethren] James the son of
Zebedee, to distinguish him from James the son of Alpheus, Matthew. 10.2, 3.
John is not called the son of Zebedee, though he was so, because there was no
other of his name among the Apostles.

Mending their nets] 1. To show that they were fishermen also. 2. To show that
they did not think of following Christ of themselves before Christ called them,
for then they would not have mended their nets, if they had intended
immediately to leave them. 3. To show the greatness of the miracle of the
draught of fishes, for it is mentioned that the nets of Simon and Andrew were
broken with the great draught of fishes, and that they beckned to their fellows
James and John their partners to help them, and their nets being broken also
(or else they needed not to mend them) it shows that the fishes were taken by
the almighty power of Christ, for broken nets will catch no fishes. 4. It also
shows that Christ calls not them that are idle, but those that are employed in
their callings.

And he called them, and immediately they left the ship] Although it is
unlawful for a child to leave his parents, no not though they be wicked, as a
friend may leave his friend, especially because they did not leave their father
altogether unprovided for; for they left him their ship, and all that they had,
and hired servants in the ship with him, Mark 1.20. by whose labors he might
very well be sustained.

Verse. 23. And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their Synagogues, and
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness, and
all manner of disease among the people.
And Jesus went about all Galilee] Went about, that is, went into every village
of any note, if not all: By Galilee is meant the inferior Galilee, except some
word be added, as Galilee of the Gentiles; the reason why our Savior first
preached in Galilee, was because he was to preach to the lost sheep of Israel,
and in the upper Galilee the greatest part was inhabited by Gentiles, wherefore
it was called Galilee of the Gentiles; the reason why John Baptist did not go
about preaching as our Savior did, was, because 1. For the manner of baptizing
was so, that it could not be but in some river. 2. Because John Baptist was by
his exceeding mortification and austere life (which was best performed, or at
least manifested by living an hermit in the wilderness) to gain credit of his
doctrine, and testimony of our Savior, which since he did no miracle, John
10.41. was no other way to be obtained.

Teaching in their Synagogues] The Jewish Synagogues were the same with our
Churches, where the Scriptures were read every Sabbath Day and expounded, Mark
1.22. which was the same with our preaching, for they had but one place where
they sacrificed at Jerusalem, yet they had very many places where the Law and
Prophets were expounded to the people; the reason why our Savior taught in
their Synagogues was for the concourse of people, 1. Our Savior taught in
their Synagogues, because else he should not have auditors enough to preach
to, but afterward there were so many that followed him, that their Synagogues
not being able to hold them, he was forced to preach in the wilderness, out of
ships, and upon mountains, as in the next Chapter.

And preaching the Gospel of the Kingdome] In the Prophets, as in Isa. 9. and
in diverse other places, it is prophesied of the Messiah, that is, Christ, for
Messiah is the word in Hebrew, and Christ in Greek, both signifying anointed:
our Savior in his Sermon in the Synagogue told them that good news or good
tidings, for the word which we translate Gospel signifies so much, that the
Kingdom of the Messiah which was fore-prophesied was now come.

And healing every sickness, and every disease among the people.] He doubly
confirmed this his Doctrine, to wit, that the Kingdom of the Messiah was come,
1. By doing miracles, for every miracle is Gods setting his seal, that the
doctrine which it is done to confirm is true. 2. By doing these particular
kind of miracles, it was prophesied before that the Messiah should do, as may
appear by comparing Mat. ^.17. with Isa. 53.4. By sickness is meant great and
mortal diseases; by disease is meant, your less and not mortal infirmities as
blindness, deafness, etc. by every sickness and every disease is not meant,
as if he cured every one that was sick and diseased, but that he cured every
kind of disease. 2. Or every one that was diseased that came to him to be
healed.

MATTHEW V.
Verse. 1. And seeing the multitudes, he went up into a Mountain: and when he
was set his Disciples came unto him.
ANd seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain] 1. The strangenes of
our Saviors miracles, and the benefit of his cures, and the excellency of his
Doctrine, all, or some of these take most men, which was the cause of such
multitudes following of him. 2. The reason why he went into a mountain and not
into a Synagogue, was, because that was not able to contain those that followed
him; the reason why he went into a mountain, and not into some private place,
was to show that he was not afraid his doctrine should be known, and that that
might be verified that he said, John 18.20. 3. He chose a mountain to preach
in, that he might have the better advantage to be heard and seen, as partly to
avoid the press of the people; for when multitudes of people pressed upon him,
his custom was to go into a ship, or up to a mountain to avoid the throng of
the people.

And when he was fit] It was the custom of the Scribes to sit when they taught
the people, Mat. 23.2. Psalm. 1.1. and our Savior also used according to their
custom to sit down when he preached, Luke 5.1. Mat. 23.1 Luke 4.20. Joh. 8.2.

His Disciples came unto him] It is to be supposed, that all the multitude came
unto him, when he was sit; but that is said, his Disciples came unto him, the
meaning is, they came next unto him, this Sermon being chiefly preached to
instruct them.

Verse. 2. And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying.
And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying] 1. Our Savior had taught
them often before by his examples and miracles, now he teaches them by word of
mouth, the other ways of teaching were made intelligible, though not vocal. 2.
Before he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, now he speaks by his own. 3.
To show the solemnity of his speech in his Sermon. 4. Or it is an Hebraism, and
is all one with that, He spoke and taught the people; for when it is said, I
will open my mouth in parables, Psalm. 82. it is all one as if he should say, I
will speak parables. 5. Or else it might be to show that he spoke aloud, that
all might hear him.

Verse. 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Blessed are] It is not said, they shall be, but they are blessed, 1. Because
that which infallibly shall come to pass, is accounted as already done; as
when it is said, To us a child is born, Isa. 9. 2. Those things which are not
far distant are accounted as present. 3. They have the right, though not the
possession of blessedness. 4. They have that possession since that grace
differs not specifically but gradually only.

The poor] It is very seriously to be observed and considered by all rich men,
how often the Scripture makes mention of several promises to poor men, and
never so to rich men, for you shall never read Blessed are the rich, but woe
to you that are rich, and many cautions given us concerning riches; surely
there is something and very much in it, yet poverty is not in it self a
blessing, nor riches a curse, for Prove. 30.8. Agur deprecates poverty as well
as riches, but neither as in themselves bad or curses, but as temptations to
sin, and therefore Luke 6. it is not Blessed is poverty, nor woe to riches,
but Blessed are the poor, and woe to you rich men, for the good or bad is not in
the things, but in the persons: Rich men are worse then riches, and poor men
better then poverty; and when it is said by Luke 6. Blessed are the poor, it is
meant that generally more poor men are blessed then rich men, for the poor
receive the Gospel; more poor are converted then rich, for so St Paul says,
Not many noble, nor mighty, 1 Cor. 1.27. for these temporal blessings do steal
away our hearts from God, and make us look no farther for happiness, and those
rich men that have been good, have generally been good before they were rich,
not rich before their conversion.

In Spirit] 1. Those may be called poor in spirit who do not desire nor love
riches, and so he that is rich may be poor in spirit, if his heart be not set
on riches, and he that is poor in estate may not be poor in spirit, if he is
not content with his poverty. 2. Poor in spirit may be interpreted, Blessed are
the humble, poor-spirited men, not your high spirits, those that think poorly
and meanly of themselves, where the chief grace of a Christian is humility,
which is a foundation, the more profound it is, the stronger and firmer are all
the graces that are built on it. 3. It is not to be understood that those are
blessed that are poor spiritually, who have a poor and small measure of the
spirit; nay those who are most empty of themselves are fullest of God, and of
his spirit. 4. The blessing is not to the outward humility or poverty, but to
the inward, for though inward humility stand with outward pride, yet outward
humility may stand with inward pride. 5. Or he may be thought to be meant, who
by choice and voluntarily carries himself, as one who is a poor-spirited man
does, by nature, only he who is a poor spirited man, is so in all things, but
this man of whom Christ speaks is so in all things but the things that belong
to God.

For theirs is the Kingdom of God.] 1. This being brought as a reason to prove
them blessed, it infallibly argues, that those who are the heirs of the Kingdom
of God, how great afflictions soever the world lays on them, or how low esteem
the world has of them, are the only blessed men. 2. Whereas it is said,
Theirs is the Kingdom of God, it shows the difference betwixt the Kingdom of
God, and of men, for in earthly Kingdoms there is but one King, all the rest
are subject* but in Heaven all are Kings, as the Sun would not shine more on
thee, though there were no more men in the world, so in heaven the multitude of
possessors neither hinders nor diminishes one another abundance. 3. Whereas
there is but one Kingdom and many to enjoy it; it shows that all shall have
the same happiness, though happily not the same degree, as every one has the
same Sun to look upon, though every one sees it not equally, because their
sights are not equally strong, to behold it. 4. Theirs is, it may be said to be
theirs already, for the same reasons that are mentioned for Blessed are. 5.
Though the Kingdom of God has many several significations, yet here it may be
taken especially two ways, 1. For the Gospel, which may be said to be the
poors in spirit, 1. Because it was intended on purpose for them, Christ was
anointed, that is, Christ was Christ on purpose to preach the Gospel to the
poor, Luke 4.18. 2. Because none but they receive it, Matthew. 11.5. 2. For the
heaven of heavens, which is the place of the blessed, which is called the
Kingdom of God, either because God is immediately King there, or because of
his special manifestation of his glory.

Verse. 4. Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are they that mourn] 1. It may be understood thus, that for a man to
be in misery, to mourn, is no certain argument that a man is not blessed, as
the world generally esteems it. 2. Not only those that mourn and lie under
temporal afflictions may be blessed, but they generally are the blessed men,
for they that are afflicted and oppressed are good and holy men, wicked men
generally live in all prosperity, as Psalm. 73. and diverse other places of
Scripture and continual experience do manifest. 3. But it holds in every
particular true, if you add that word in this Verse which is in the former,
viz. [in spirit] so whosoever mourns spiritually, that is, for spiritual evils,
and for their own and others sins, imperfections of their graces, is a blessed
man. 4. Here are set down some marks of true repentance, viz. That it must be
an inward, serious and constant grief; and whereas we are commanded always to
rejoice, and here notwithstanding those that mourn are called blessed, they do
not contradict one the other, since mourning for sin, and rejoicing in the
Lord, may very well stand together; nay those who most mourn for sins, do most
rejoice in the Lord; for he that is most grieved that he ows much, does most
rejoice in him that pays it for him, but he that rejoices in his sins, cannot
rejoice in the Lord; as of charity it is said, It rejoices not in iniquity,
but in the Lord who is Truth. 5. This is the coherence of this Beatitude with
the former, they that are sensible of their own poverty of graces and
goodness, are always great spiritual mourners; or thus, it is not sufficient
to see ones want of graces, except one mourns for it.

For they shall be comforted] 1. Thus shows that the cause of their mourning
should be spiritual and not temporal; it must be such, that the removal of it
must make one blessed; and the removal of a temporal affliction, though it be a
blessing, does not make him blessed from whom it is removed. 2. It is not said
who shall comfort him, but it is implied, that God shall comfort him, because
he must comfort him that is able to make him blessed, and none can make him
blessed but God. 1. In diverse causes of mourning, as sin, and the want of Gods
presence and the breathings after Heaven, none can comfort save only God. 3.
The time when they shall be comforted is not set down, to teach one always to
wait for it, yet the time is implied, which is death; for before that, those
that mourn never rest from their labors, so they are never fully comforted;
while then some causes of their mourning may cease, but not all.

Verse. 5. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the Earth.
Blesed are the meek] 1. As they that are poor in spirit being sensible of
their own vileness, so those that mourn for their offenses against God, easily
forgive men's offenses against them, and easily bear those afflictions that lie
upon them. 2. It is not said, Blessed are the courteous, but Blessed are the
meek, because it is an easier thing to bestow a courtesy, then to forgive an
injury, the world always commends the one, and counts the other generally
pusillanimity. 3. There are two kinds of meekness, as is partly intimated, the
first makes us patient in bearing afflictions from God, which makes us not to
murmr; the other, which consists in the bearing of injuries from men, and not
revenge them.

For they shall inherit the Earth] Whereas diverse will say, that the bearing of
one injury is but the inviting of another, and so by many wrongs one shall be
quite undone at last; Christ answers, there is no such matter, for none shall
inherit the Earth but they that are meek; and indeed generally it costs one
more to revenge an injury, and one suffers more damage by it, then by the
injury it self. 2. They shall inherit the Earth, may be taken two ways. 1.
Either to show that they that are meek do possess the Earth by right of
inheritance; others, wicked men, are but usurpers. 2. Or to show that they that
are meek do possess and quietly enjoy what they have, whereas those that are
furious and angry are so far from possessing the Earth, that they do not
possess their own souls; for if patience makes one possess ones soul, Luke
21.19. then impatience puts one out of possession.

Verse. 6. Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for
they shall be filled.
Blessed are they that do hunger and thirst after righteousnesse] 1. To hunger
and thirst after righteousness may be taken diverse ways, 1. For those who
suffering much wrong, and much desire to have justice, as the widow Luke 18.
was importunate to be avenged, not revenged of her adversaries. 2. Or else for
those, who seeing the Kingdom or place where they live full of violence and
injustice, do earnestly desire the removal of it, and the restoring of justice.
3. And principally, which our English Translation does well import, for them
that so earnestly desire grace and holiness, and to live godly in this present
life. 2. It shows that our desires after righteousness must not be faint,
careless, but earnest, fervent, and incessant, such as hunger and thirst are,
which of all natural desires are the strongest. 3. From the carriage of those
that hunger and thirst, one may know whether one does, and how one ought to
love and desire righteousness; for they that are very hungry and thirsty, 1.
Care not what food will cost them, rather then they will famish, they will give
five pound for an Asses head, and six shillings and three pence for half a pint
of Pigeons dung, 2 Kin. 6.25. 2. They relish their meat, even those things that
are bitter seem sweet unto them, Prove. 27.7. but those that do not hunger and
thirst after righteousness, they find no sweetness in it. 3. They are not
curious nor dainty, nor need sauce to make them eat, but any food that is
wholesome comes welcome, it drowns all other desires, they cannot think of nor
do any thing before that be satisfied. 4. Our hungring and thirsting after
righteousness does argue a great want of righteousness, for indeed the more
righteousness the more hunger and thirst after it; for there is a double kind
of desire, a desire of want, and a desire of complacence; some things we desire
because we have them not, but when we have them we see so much vanity in them
that we care not for them, such are all worldly things; other things there be,
of which the more we have, the more we desire, and the not desiring of them
proceeds merely from the ignorance of them; now that to hunger and thirst after
righteousness, does not argue one quite void of righteousness, as in natural
hunger it does of food, is evident, because an earnest hungring and thirstine
after righteousness, is not only an act, but an high degree of holiness: In
earthly things the possession of them takes away the desire, but in spiritual
things it increases it. 5. It plainly shows that one cannot be ever holy
enough in this life, but that still we should earnestly desire to be more.

For they shall be filled] 1. It shows that to be full of holiness is that
wherein the very essence of blessedness consists, and that which makes Heaven
Heaven, is because that there dwells righteousness; for the exceeding love
of God, which is the very soul of sanctification, is the very thing that makes
the vision and fruition of it so delightful, and the being filled with
righteousness could not argue them blessed, except to be filled with
righteousness were true and eternal blessedness. 2. It shows that true
blessedness is not an empty thing, as the happiness of the world is, it fills
the soul that has it. 3. It shows, if you take it exclusively, that none other
shall be filled; for indeed the desires of man being infinite, no creature can
fill them.

Verse. 7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
Blessed are the mercifull] The objects of mercy are two, 1. Misery; and the
act of mercy concerning misery is twofold, 1. To pity. 2. If it lie in our
power to relieve it. 2. Debts, and that twofold, obligatio ex delicto, and
obligatio ex contractu, offenses and debts; offenses are twofold, either
offenses against the Law, and so a Judge is merciful, and so mercy is opposed
to justice and the rigor of the Law; or against our persons, and they are
called injuries, and this mercy is pardoning mercy, and is opposed to revenge,
and these kinds of mercy are in distributive justice; in commutative justice,
concerning debts, mercy is opposed to exaction and oppression, he therefore
that pities or relieves those that are in misery, he that is not severe in
punishing offenses against the Law, nor injuries against himself, that forbears
him that cannot for the present, and forgives him that cannot at all pay him
what he ows him, either of these is merciful.

For they shall obtain mercy] 1. If all that are blessed obtain mercy, then we
are saved by Gods mercy, not by our own merits. 2. This is a double motive to
show mercy. 1. Because it is rewarded, the mercy that we show is not lost, but
we shall hereafter receive it with advantage. 2. Because the greatest motive of
pitying or showing mercy because we or ours are in the like danger, therefore
those that are very miserable, and so under all the calamities that they think
can befall them, and those that are in great prosperity, that think they are out
of the reach of danger, are not pitiful to others; now that we need mercy, and
so in the like calamity, as those are we show mercy unto, the very promising of
mercy shows us: for to promise mercy when one does not need it, does no way
affect one, and so cannot be a motive to any duty. 3. This promise, as it is a
suitable motive to the duty to which it is annexed, so it is a suitable motive to
the condition wherein we are, for we being full of misery and sin, have the
adequate objects of mercy, misery to be relieved, and sin to be pardoned. 4. It
is not said who shall show us mercy, whether God or man, but it is true of
both, for generally merciful men do receive mercy of men, but universally and
infallibly from God, of whose mercy it is chiefly, if not only meant, for none
but his mercy can make them blessed.

Verse. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.
Blessed are the pure in heart] That is pure, which is not mixed with any thing
worse then it self; we are therefore then said to be pure in heart, when our
love and desires are not set on things beneath us, our having of them makes us
not impure, so long as our hearts are free from loving of them. 2. Though our
actions be sometimes impure when we fall into sin, yet as long as our hearts
are upright and clean, we may be notwithstanding pure in heart; David had many
failings besides that of Vriah, but because his heart was right in all the
rest, they are not imputed to him for failings, 1 Kings 15.5. 3. It is not
sufficient to do that that is good, except the intentions and end for which we
do it be pure, we must not only be pure in hands, but pure in heart, for God
requires truth in the inward parts.

For they shall see God] It is not learning, nor a clear understanding, but
holiness and purity of heart, that fits and inables one to see God, for the
secrets of the Lord are with them that fear him; and natural men, though diverse
of them be very learned, yet perceive they not the things that be of God. 2. As
the eye that has dust in it without, or thick vapors stopping the inward
nerves within, cannot see except it be cleansed from the one, and purged from
the other; and as the glass on which there is a mist, does not represent ones
face clearly, before that be wiped off: so neither can we see God, as long as
there is any impurity cleaves to us. 3. They that are pure in heart see God, 1.
In his Creatures. 2. In his Word. 3. In those secret, inward, and sweet
manifestations of comfort and joy, whereby God often reveals himself, even in
this life, to them that love him. 4. They shall see him in the Beatisical
Vision, which is unspeakable and glorious.

Verse. 9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of God.
Blessed are the Peace-makers] This word here used in Greek for peacemakers,
is hardly found in any profane Author, and the meaning of the word is so
plain, that it needs no Exposition: They are to be accounted peacemakers, who
make those that are enemies or adversaries friends, and so restore friendship
that is lost, or take up dissentions and differences betwixt friends, and so
preserve that amity which is likely to be lost. 1. Peacemakers and meek men
differ thus, he is meek that keeps his anger from arising, or speedily appeases
it; so he is meek that moderates his own anger: but he is a peacemaker that
moderates others. 2. Meekness is a grace within us: but peacemaking is an
action without us. 3. A man may be a meek man, though he lives alone,
sequestered from the whole world, and has no commerce with any one: but he
cannot make peace, except he have some commerce with the parties whom he
reconciles. 4. It is not always necessary that he should make those friends
whom he endeavors to reconcile, but whatsoever the event be, his desires and
endeavors be so to do, he is in the sight of God accounted a peacemaker 1.
Those are exceedingly to be condemned who sow dissension among neighbors; and
surely if the one be accounted the Sons of God, the other must be accounted the
children of the Devil. 2. Those who nourish dissentions. 3. That stand neutrals
in case they have opportunity, and it lies in their power to make peace.

For they shall be called the Sons of God] 1. That is, they shall be the Sons
of God, so Isa. 9.6. Romans 9.25. Luke 1.33. in all which places calling is taken
for being; for God does not use to call any thing or person what it is not. 2.
Or if you take it otherwise, then it stands thus, God has but one natural Son,
yet all that are holy are his adopted Sons, though his Essence be not wholly
communicated to them as unto Christ, yet his likeness by regeneration is, they
are regenerated to his likeness, and adopted to his Kingdom. 3. Men shall
call them the Sons of God, and we should account that child to be his son, to
whom he was very like: so peacemakers may be accounted his Sons who is the God
of peace.

Verse. 10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they that are persecuted for righteousness sake] 1. Lest we
should think that one ought to buy grace at any rate, though by the omission of
good, or commission of evil, here it is added, Blessed are they that are
persecuted for righteousness sake; as if he should say, that though men be so
far from being at peace with you, that they would persecute you, if you would
not leave your righteousness, that in that case you should suffer persecution;
so the Apostle, Heb. 12.14. commands us to preserve both if it may be; yet
tacitly intimates, that if we must leave one, we had better have men our
enemies, then God, by leaving of our holiness; for he says not (...), meaning
both, but (...), without which, that is, without which holiness none shall see
God. Necessary it is to follow peace with all men, but no further then usque ad
aras. 2. This is the last and greatest trial of a Christian, S. Paul puts it as
the last and highest act of Religion, to give ones body to be burned, 1 Cor.
13.3. and the ground that received the seed with joy, when persecution arose
withered and fell away; so the house that was built upon the sands, stood no
longer then while the winds and storms, and waves beat upon it. 3. The question
is, Whether all that are blessed must be persecuted for righteousness sake,
for every one that is blessed must be poor in spirit, meek, mourn? Answ. That
is not necessary that every one that shall be blessed shall be actually
persecuted, that is, suffer imprisonment, death, or some corporal punishment
for righteousness sake; yet whosoever shall not be willing to suffer all these
for righteousness sake, can never be blessed. Willing, I say, for a man may
fear, that if persecution should arise, he should not be able to suffer those
torments that he reads others have suffered, and yet notwithstanding be a
blessed man; for as the children of Ephraim, Psalm. 78.9. being armed, that is,
going with courage to war, nay and at first fighting, for it is in the Hebrew,
that they shot their Arrows out of their Bows, and yet turned their backs. so
on the contrary, diverse children of God may go timorously to the stake, and
when they come there they may shrink, and yet afterward get the victory, and
the glorious crown of Martyrdom. 4. For rightcousnesse sake, for it is not the
punishment, but the cause, that makes a man a Martyr, for if we suffer as evil
doers, be our sufferings never so great, God will never reward them. 5. All
that are blessed do suffer some of those kinds of persecutions that are
mentioned in the next Verse, for the world does always speak evil of them,
revile them, and stander them. 6. By this it is evident, that though wicked men
pretend other reasons of their persecutions, yet the true reason why they
persecute them, is for righteousness sake.

For theirs is the Kingdom of heaven] Concerning this reward vide the
Exposition of these words in the third Verse.

Verse. 11. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
Blessed are ye] Before our Savior spoke those things which are quite contrary
to the opinion of the world, for they by no means count them blessed whom they
persecute, but here he sets down that that is quite contrary to the opinion of
his Disciples; for they thinking that the Messiah should be a Temporal King,
thought that they should be so far from being persecuted, that they should have
great preferment under him, our Savior therefore tacitly shows them the
falsehood of that opinion, by changing the person from the third to the second;
for whereas in the Verse before he said, Blessed are they, etc. left they
should think that they were not at all meant when our Savior spoke of
persecution, here he comes home to them, and tells them in particular, that
they shall be persecuted, for it is strongly intimated; for when it is said,
Blessed are you, when men shall persecute you, when men shall revile you, etc.
it is as much as, men shall persecute and revile you, and shall speak all
manner of evil of you falsely for my names sake. 2. Whereas it is here said, ye,
whereas in the Verse before it is said, they, it shows, that especially in time
of persecution or great distress, we must bring the promises of God home to
our selves.

When men shall revile you] The word men is not in the Text in the Original, 1.
May it not be to show that they deserve not the name of men; that persecute any
for Christ's sake? 2. Or else to show that we should not so much observe who it
is that persecutes us, as why we are persecuted. 3. Or lastly, to show us not
only those evils which we suffer from men, but those which we suffer from
Satan, shall turn to our great reward. 1. It is said that when men shall
persecute you, you are blessed, not, You shall be blessed whom men shall
persecute; to show that though persecution do not instate one into Heaven, yet
it intitles one unto Heaven so firmly, that by reason of the certainty of the
promise, it is accounted as already received; to revile, is to use such words
as may make one despicable or odious, not caring whether we speak true or
false, so one disgraceth him whom we revile. It differs from railing, 1.
Railing is seldom or never but in many words, one may revile a man in one
word. 2. Railing proceeds from anger, reviling from contempt; the word
signifies so much, for to revile is to make one seem vile; reviling differs
from slandering, the one strives to make one seem vile and of no esteem;
slander, to make one to be accounted vicious.

And persecute you] Though under the name of persecution in the Verse before,
is meant all evil whatsoever we suffer from men for righteousness, yet here
not all manner of persecution, but only all manner of persecution which is
beside that which the tongue may inflict upon us. Wicked men are to take notice
that they must not think if they do not put to death or imprison the people of
God, that they are not to be put in the catalogue of persecutors, for if they
slander, nay if they speak but scornfully of or to the Saints, nay if you speak
roughly to them, you shall be sure to answer it at the day of judgment; for
you see that revilers are put in the lists of persecutors, and Jude so, that at
the day of judgment wicked men shall answer for speaking roughly to the
Saints, Jude 15.

And shall say all manner of evil against you] All the evil that words can do
to us, is to make us seem vile or vicious; of the former our Savior has
already spoken, now he speaks of the later.

Falsely for my Names sake] But lest one should think, to be spoke ill of, or
persecuted, is sufficient to make one blessed, he adds two qualificatious, 1.
That we are not guilty of those things that are laid to our charge. 2. That it
be for Christ's sake that we are so persecuted; or 2. Those words, for my sake,
are added, lest any one should think under the name of righteousness the
Profession of Christ was not to be included.

Verse. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven:
For so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.
Rejoice and be exceeding glad] Two things our Savior Christ requires of us
when we are persecuted, the first is an inward joy, the second an outward
expression of it, which is exaltation, as the word signifies in the Original,
where we may learn two things, the first, that it is not sufficient to be
patient, but we must also rejoice, and by consequence we should account it,
that some great good thing has befaln us, for patience is of things that are
ill, but joy is of good things. 2. We ought not only to rejoice in our selves,
but outwardly not to be ashamed to manifest it to others, for we are not to
rejoice or exalt, but to do both.

For great is your reward in heaven] Three things there are in the words to
make us be exceeding glad, 1. That we shall be rewarded. 2. That our reward
shall be great. 3. That it shall not be an earthly, but an heavenly reward.

For so persecuted they the Prophets that were before you] For so persecuted,
that is, they reviled, persecuted, and spoke all manner of evil of them the
Prophets, as appears in Esaias, Jeremy, Ezekiel, and by consequence neither your
persecution, nor your manner of persecution is a new thing, for so, etc. and
lest the Apostles should happily think, that surely the Jews could not possibly
be so wicked to persecute the Apostles of the Messiah, he shows that before
they had persecuted the Prophets of God, and they that have already done the
one, one may justly expect that they will do the other also. 3. But how can it
be said that they, that is, those men that lived in our Saviors time,
persecuted the Prophets which were dead long before, especially when they said,
that if they had lived in the days of their fathers, they would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets; and so the persecuting of the
Prophets could not be imputed unto them; since they neither did it, nor
consented to it when it was done, nor approved of it after it was done? Ans. 1.
That though they said they would not have been partakers with their fathers in
the blood of the Prophets, and seem not to approve of their doings, yet our
Savior that knew their hearts, and could not be deceived by their contrary
profession, told them and convinced them, that they did allow the works of
their fathers, Luke 11.48. and the allowing of an action after it is done,
makes one as guilty as the consenting to it before it be done. 2. It is
apparent that they were actually and personally guilty of the death of some of
the Prophets, to wit, of Zachariah the son of Barachiah, Matthew. 23.32. and of
John Baptist, Matthew. 17.12. 3. Or they may be taken for the Jews, for these
words are not here spoken to prove that those Jews which then lived killed the
Prophets, but to comfort the Apostles, when they should suffer the same
persecutions, by showing them that they were not in worse case then the
Prophets before them were, and as the memorial of those Prophets were precious
among all good men, and their persons glorious in Heaven, notwithstanding they
did revile, and persecute, and speak all manner of evil of them while they
lived, so also should it be with their memories and persons, notwithstanding
men should persecute, revile, etc.

Verse. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? It is therefore good for nothing but to be cast
out, and to be trodden under foot of men.
Ye are the salt of the earth] The coherence of these words with the former
stands thus, Men will revile you and persecute you, and speak all manner of
evil of you, but these persecutions must not deter you, or cause you to leave
off your seasoning the earth, by your Doctrine, and your example, for the earth
having no other salt to season it but you, and there being no way to season
you, if you should lose your savor; you must take heed you fall not away for
persecution, for then the whole earth which should be seasoned by you, and your
selves also who cannot be seasoned by any thing else, are undone. 2. Or else
thus, You must not wonder that wicked men persecute you, for you are the salt
of the earth, and therefore you are a great trouble to them, for they being
full of spiritual wounds and sores, you by your reprehensions much vex them, as
salt by its corroding nature, does wounds and sores into which it is put, and
you vexing them, you must expect that they should vex you. 3. The Ministers are
like salt in many respects, 1. Salt makes all things savoury, and indeed if we
will believe the Chemists, all tastes come from the several mixtures of salt. 2.
Salt keeps all things from putrefaction, the earth and every man would putrify
and stink in the nostrils of God, if the salt of the Apostles Doctrine did not
season and preserve them. 3. Salt is of a corroding nature, not pleasing but
smarting to any place that is raw or sore. 4. Ministers of all people are the
worst, if they have lost their savor and are wicked, as salt is good for
nothing if it have lost its savor. 5. You may see here that only to be
morally good is not sufficient, for if so, what need the Doctrine of the
Apostles to season them? moral Philosophy might do it. 6. You are more then the
Prophets were, for they were the salt only of the Jews, but you are the salt
of the earth, not of the Land of Canaan only.

If the salt have lost its savour] It does not prove or suppose, that salt can
lose its savor, but only shows what would follow if it should; as S. Paul
when he says Gal. 1.8. If an Angel from heaven should preach any other
doctrine, he does not say, nor can any prove from thence, that an Angel ever
since has, or ever shall go about to deceive. Two ways the words may be
interpreted, 1. The Earth could not be salted. 2. Which is the proper
signification and interpretation, the salt could not be salted with any thing,
for if all the salt the Earth has are the Apostles, how is it possible that if
they should lose their savor, for them to be salted? for to say that that salt
which has lost his savor may be salted by some other that has not lost his
savor, supposes that the Apostles are not all, but some part of the salt of
the earth: But if you shall say, that though it can salt nothing else, nor be
salted it self, yet it is good for something, our Savior says, no; for it is
not only not good for that which is its proper end, but for nothing else. A
Christian if he be as he should be, is the best of men, but else worse then
beasts, like the Vine, the fruitfullest of all Trees, but if barren, the most
useless, as the Prophet says, one cannot make a pin strong enough to hang any
thing on.

Verse. 14. Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on a hill cannot
be hid.
Ye are the light of the world] 1. Ye being the salt of a corroding nature to
wicked men, and your reproofs cause them to persecute you, and being light
which manifests it self and other things, you cannot be hid, for light of all
things is the most visible, for a spark of fire is seen farther then any thing
else of ten times the bigness. 2. Ye are the light, one light for the doctrine
was the same of all of them, so it shows the unity of their doctrine. 3. They
and we should be like light, 1. It is the speediest in communicating it self,
in a moment it goes from one end of the heavens to the other, Ministers should
be diligent. 2. Light does no hurt, it penetrates glass but it does not break
it; so the doctrine of the Apostles, Christian Religion, does not hurt any
profession, but makes it more glorious, the child is more obedient, the
Subject more loyal. 3. Those rooms in which one can discern no uncleanness in,
in darkness, when the light comes the uncleanness is discovered, which make
wicked men to love darkness better then light, because they cannot endure to
see or have others see their pollutions. 4. Though the light shine upon a
dunghill it is not defiled, it discovers to all the filthiness of the place;
so Ministers should not be defiled with the sins they discover.

Christ is called the light, and the Apostles are called the light of the
world, but differently; for Christ is as the Sun, but the Apostles as they
are called, verse. 15. like a Candle or Torch, and they differ,

1. In respect of unity, there is but one Christ but many Apostles and
Ministers, there is but one Sun but many candles or torches.

2. In respect of purity, the light of a candle is mixed with smoke, but the
light of the Sun has no mixture of smoke or darkness. So the knowledge of
the Apostles is mixed with ignorance, and the Ministers with some error, not so
Christ.

3. The Sun has light from it self, not borrows it from another, but a
candle or torch receives its light, so the Apostles receive their doctrine from
Christ. Further the Apostles are called the light of the world, to distinguish
them from Prophets which preached only to the Jews, but they to the Gentiles
also.

It distinguishes also the Gospel that the Apostles preached from the light of
nature and reason, notwithstanding that the world was in darkness as to saving
knowledge; and that the Apostles might not think that they either could or
should be hid whatsoever persecutions will arise; Christ brings two similies,
one of a City, another of a Candle. The Church is compared to a City,

1. To show the largeness of it, and therefore it is not compared to a
Village, but to a City.

2. To show that it ought to have its Government within it self, although the
Civil State have power over the Church in respect of Civil Government and
Censures, yet in respect of Church Officers and Censures the Church has power
in it self to ordain the one, and inflict the other. Petty villages are
generally governed by officers without them, but Cities by officers within
themselves.

Further the Church is compared to a City.

No man lights a candle, 1. No man, that is, ^o wise man; another speech like
this is in 1 Cor. 10.21. Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord, and the cup of
devils. Quod jure non possumus habetur pro impossibili, so, Quod a sapiente
fieri non potest habetur pro impossibili.

2. The coherence seems to be this, You most expect to be persecuted as all the
Prophets were, and the reason is because you most reprove sin, and you being
the lights of the world, those that love darkness cannot but hate you. For if
you shall think with your self, I, but we will if persecution arises retire our
selves and not preach the Gospel, but that will be quite against you being as
Apostles and Preachers, for it were all one for you not to have those gifts of
edification, as not to use them; as a candle had as good not be lighten, as
being lighten to be put under a Bushel, and I shall do as no wise man does if I
should enable you with that knowledge whereby you should be enabled to give
light unto the world, and they will bid you not communicate it.

3. Ministers may be compared to Candles or Torches, 1. Because they have their
light from another, not from themselves, as the Sun has. 2. A Candle is good
for nothing except it be light. 3. As a Candle wastes it self by giving light
to others, so the labors of Ministers do much spend them, insomuch that Christ
in respect of his labor in the Ministry seemed to be sifty year old when he
was but thirty. 4. Those that persecute Ministers may see what mischief they
bring upon themselves, he that blows out the Candle must expect to sit in the
dark. 5. A Minister by not communicating his light and exercising his gifts
takes the ready way to lose them, as a Candle, not having vent and air goes out
of it self.

4. It shows thus much, that all Ministers ought to have knowledge, that is, to
be enlightened before they can be set up in any Candlestick, as it is to no
purpose to set up a Candle in a Candlestick, except it be enlightened.

5. Every one that has gifts fit for the edifying of others, ought to be set
in a Candlestick (that is) placed in some Congregation where they may exercise
their gifts, but they must not set themselves in a Candlestick.

6. By Candlesticks apparently are meant Churches, as Revel. 7.1.

7. A Minister must not be partial, nor an accepter of persons, he must give
light to all that are in the house, instruct the meanest as well as the
greatest, and the greatest as well as the meanest. Some will comfort rich
people when they are in afflictions, and be very earnest in reproving the
faults of the meaner sorts, but they must also reprove the greatest and comfort
the meanest, for light is taken for comfort, Isa. 50.10. and for the
manifestation of truth, Joh. 3.19.

Verse. 15. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel: but on a
candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house.
No man lights a candle] Besides if it were possible to power, yet not to
wisdom to hide you, for no man does so, but clean contrary, for they set it on
a Candlestick, that it may give light to all the house, for though in it self
it is not, yet to wisdom it is all one, not to be at all, as not to be able to
produce the end for which the thing is ordained; it is all one with a wise man
for a thing not to have an existence, as not to profit him.

Verse. 16. Let your light so shine before men that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Let your light so shine] As if he should say, Do not you be afraid to be holy,
or to let men see, or to preach the Gospel for fear of persecution, but let
your light, the light of your doctrine and of your example shine forth, for we
are as subject to imitation as obedience. 2. It must shine before men, it is
not sufficient to approve ones self to God, for one must do things honest in
the sight of God, and in the sight of men. 3. Before men, not only before this
or that, but all men. 4. That they may not only hear your doctrine, and your
good words may be sounding in their ears, but see your good works; a Minister
should lighten in his conversation and life, as well as thunder in his
doctrine. 5. Thus far an hypocrite may go, but you must go farther, for you
must not seek your own, but your Fathers glory. 6. It is not said, my Father,
but your Father, to show them how much cause they have to glorisie him, for the
nearer relation he has to us, the more reason we have to seek his glory, the
hypocrite will go as far as those words, but then he will leave you; he does
what he does for his own glory. 7. It is not said that your Father may glorify
you, but that men may glorify him, to show us that the glory of God should be
more dear to us not only then the honor and glory we receive from men, but
even then the glory that we shall receive from God.

Verse. 17. Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am
not come to destroy but to fulfill.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets] Our Saviors
bidding them not to think, shows that either they did think so, or probably
would or might think so, and therefore he forbids them to think so, 1. Observe,
that though ones carriage or doctrine be a probable cause of scandal or
offense, yet in some cases we ought not to forbear. 2. But when it is so we
ought to satisfy the parties offended, and to take off the offense, if already
taken, or to prevent it if likely to be taken. 3. Let us see what might
probably induce them to think that our Savior came to destroy the Law or the
Prophets, 1. For the Law, our Savior did not preach, nor did his Sermon go, as
the Law did, by way of command, for he does not say, Be ye poor in Spirit, etc.
but by way of promise, Blessed are the poor in Spirit. 2. Nor is there in all
the beatitudes one of the ten Commandments, in plain terms, or so many words,
not Blessed are they that keep the Sabbath, or that honor their Father and
Mother. 2. For the Prophets, he seemed to destroy them, for as they thought the
Messiah was to come in pomp and majesty, and that his Kingdom should be of this
world, yet he said he was the Messiah though he was poor. 2. He did not as all
the rest of the Prophets did, denounce judgment to come as yet, nor told of
things to come, and indeed in all respects almost his preaching was different
from that of the Prophets before him.

I am not come to destroy but to fulfill] 1. Observe that ones actions,
preaching, doctrine, may be mis-interpreted, quite contrary not only diverse,
for though our Savior came to fulfill, he was thought that he did come to
destroy. 2. Let us see how our Savior did not destroy the Law, for it may seem
that he did: 1. For the moral Law he did not destroy that, the end, virtue and
power of the moral Law, was 1. To set down a rule or way to heaven, and to show
us what we were to do to glorify God, and to benefit our neighbor, and to
attain heaven. 2. To justify those that kept it, and to save them. 3. A
condemning power to sentence them that kept it not: for the two former ends
they still remain; for the Law has yet a power to justify those who keep it,
and to save them; that it does not actually justify us, is because we cannot
fulfill it by reason of any weakness in the Law, Romans 8.4. Food has a power
to nourish, though by reason of the weakness of the stomach it cannot digest,
or of the vicious humors that putrify and corrupt the food it receives: but
for the condemning power, is not that taken away, since diverse that keep not
the Law are not condemned? I answer, 1. That the condemning power of the Law is
not essential but accidental to the Law; so that the Law may not be destroyed
though none be condemned by it; nay though it has no power to condemn; for the
main intention of Lawgivers, is not that men should be punished for not
keeping, but that men should keep them, for the penalty is not set down as a
snare to entrap men, but as a motive to provoke men to keep them. 2. The Law
has still a condemning power, and actually does condemn all those who do not
evangelically keep it, those who are condemned are condemned by the Law. 3. He
has for those who believe in him, not abolisht the power to condemn, but
satisfied the condemning power, and endured the penalty of the Law, for he did
not by force, but by ransom deliver the captives of sin and death; for the
ceremonial Law Christ might not be properly said to destroy that, for when any
thing attains the very end for which it was ordained, though it perish in so
doing, it cannot properly be said to be destroyed; for instance, food, the end
of it is to nourish, though it be consumed and corrupted in the stomach from
the form it had, yet it is not said to be destroyed; as for example, A lease
for lives is not properly cancelled or destroyed, but expired by the death of
the parties; Prophecy, when the thing comes to pass, is not nullified or
destroyed, but fulfilled, though it cease to be any longer a Prophecy.
Ceremonies of the Law were visible Prophecies of Christ, for the Jews being a
superstitious people, and by consequence loved Ceremonies, and God foreseeing
that they would if they were not framed to their hands, stuff their service of
God with idolatrous ceremonies, the Lord set down and chose for them such
Ceremonies, as might (as much as Ceremonies could) profit them, giving them
such Ceremonies as should prefigure the main and most remarkable things of the
Messiast when Christ came he fulfilling all those visible Prophecies and Types
of him could by no means be said to destroy the ceremonial Law, but to fulfill
it; for the judicial Law, it belonged not to the Jews as they were a Church,
but as a Commonwealth, and so our Saviors Kingdom not being of this world, he
did no way alter those Laws, for the Jewish Commonwealth, making them more or
less strict then they were, nor imposed them upon other Kingdoms of the world.
2. Christ fulfilled the Law and the Prophets, 1. The Moral Law more perfectly
then ever it could have been fulfilled, 1. Fulfilled the righteousness of the
Law, by his active obedience more exactly, or at least in an higher degree,
then Adam could have done, or then the Angels do; for although the Angels do,
and Adam if he had stood in his integrity, would have exactly fulfilled the
Law, he would, and the Angels do love God with all their strength, and mind,
etc. yet their righteousness neither is nor could have been so excellent as
our Saviors; for the mind of our Savior being more clear, and the strength
of our Savior more then theirs, our Savior loved God more excellently since
he loved him with all his strength and all his mind. A child though it put
all its strength to it, cannot lift so much as a Giant. 2. For the penalty of
the Law our Savior by his passive obedience fulfilled and satisfied that more
then any way it is, or could be satisfied; for the damned in hell do not so
exactly fulfill and satisfy Gods justice for the breach of the Law, for they
are always satisfying, but never do, nor never shall actually and fully
satisfy the same; for if they did, or ever should, they should then cease any
longer to be tormented, for then the torments of hell should not be eternal:
Now our Savior did, and actually has satisfied the justice of God, and has
paid the uttermost farthing for the dignity of his person, made those
sufferings which were finite both in time and degree of torment, of infinite
merit; for the Ceremonial Law and the Prophets, he has so absolutely fulfilled
them more then any other way they could be fulfilled, that except he had
fulfilled them they could never have been fulfilled, not any one thing or
circumstance is there that was foretold by the Prophets, or typified by the
Law, which he has not exactly performed; Christ has also fulfilled the Moral
Law by making it more full, not by adding more strict precepts of holiness
then the Law has, but by giving the full meaning.

Verse. 18. But verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or
one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled.
Verily I say unto] 1. Here he goes further, for before he said that he did not
come to destroy; and here he assures them that it shall never be destroyed, nor
cease till it be in every point fulfilled. 2. See how Christ preaches with
authority, I say. 3. By one jot or tittle is meant, not the lest part or point.
4. By consequence, that not one jot or tittle, nothing, not a word, not a
letter, not a title of the Law is in vain put there, and as jod and iota, are
not only the least letters, but diverse times though they were written, are not
pronounced, and so seem needless letters: So though some things in the Law
seem not only small but needless, yet they are not in vain, for till heaven
and earth, etc. 5. Till, does not always argue Psalm. 110.1. that when such a
time shall come, such a thing was or shall be done; for when it is said, That
Joseph knew not Mary, till she had brought forth her firstborn, proves not
that afterward he did, for the sense of these words is not as if any part of
the Law should pass unfulfilled, when heaven and earth should pass.

Verse. 19. Whosoever therefore simll break one of these least Commandments, and
shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but
whosoever shall do, and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.
Whosoever therefore] The sense may be thus, The Law is so strict, that though
one breaks the least Commandment, and though one does not break it wilfully,
knowing it to be a breach of the Law, but out of error thinking that one does
well in what one does, one being of that opinion that one ought so to do, for
one teaches others so, yet not only the ignorance of the Law, but the
ignorance of the action does not take away the guilt of sin. 2. It may be taken
as an aggravation of the fault, as if he shall say, If he shall, 1. Only sin of
infirmity not of error, for He that breaks the least or does teach men
otherwise, and knows he does it, and strives against it; or if a man does ill
and divulgeth his error, he is worse then he that infects none, nor hurts any
but himself. The least] that is, as generally Commentators expound it, shall
not at all be in the kingdom of God; He shall be the least] that is, shall not
be there at all, Matthew. 20.16. Calling often times signifies being, he shall be
called wonderful, that is, be wonderful, Isa. 9.6. Matthew. 1.23. called
Emanuel, that is, he shall be God and man, for his name was called Jesus. Two
errors the Papists would establish from these words, 1. That there are diverse
counsels in the Gospel, which if we do we shall be so much the greater, and if
we do not we shall be so much the less, but not shut out of the kingdom of
God. 2. And by consequence some sins are venial, which deserve no punishment,
but only they that are guilty of them shall be less glorious, and have a lower
place in the kingdom of God: For the first, it is not counsels but
commandments, the least of these commandments: For the second, if the least in
the kingdom of heaven signify not at all, then it is nothing, and they
generally interpret it so, and the following verses show it.

Verse. 20. For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven.
For I say unto you] Thus the coherence stands; these words are brought as a
proof of what went before, now they cannot be brought as a proof of any thing,
save of that clause, He that breaks the least of these Commandments; for the
other clause, That he that kept, and taught them should be great, could not
belong to them: Now that the Scribes and Pharisees did break some of the
Commandments, and teach men so to do, is apparent by Matthew 15.3. The Scribes
and Pharisees breaking the Commandments, and teaching men so to do; and since
they should not enter that break and teach men so to do, it shows and proves by
instance, that he that breaks one of the Commandments, and teaches men so to
do, shall not come into the Kingdom of heaven. 2. Observe that the learnedest
men in the world, may and shall if they do not live holily, perish, for the
Scribes were the expounders of the Law. 2. Though men be never so strict in
their lives for outward mortifications, except they are inwardly and sincerely
holy, it will not profit them. 3. Though all men applaud one, yet one may be an
extreme wicked man, for all the Jews applauded the Pharisees. 4. Though one
hold the right for matter of opinion, as the Pharisees did in matters of the
resurrection, yet one may go to hell: It is a strange thing that the Sadduces
who held an opinion utterly destructive of holiness, should not withstanding
not be so much condemned of wickedness as the Pharisees were. 5. It is not
said, Your righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Law and
Prophets, as the Socinians and others would have, but of the Scribes and
Pharisees. 6. The Scribes being the great men for expounding the Law, and the
Pharisees so much applauded for holiness, and so for keeping the Law; our
Savior shows that the one were out for matter of doctrine, and the other for
matter of practice.

Our righteousness must exceed the righteousness of Scribes and Pharisees, 1.
In respect of kind, they preached up only inherent righteousness which is by
the works of the Law, but by the works of the Law no man living shall be
judged, but we must have the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us. The
holiness also which they preached and practiced was defective many ways, 1.
It was not extensive and universal in each: 1. In respect of the Commandments
they preached, and practiced the breach of some, of many of them, as appears
Mat. 15.23. 2. As some Commandments they did abolish by their doctrine, so
those which they did not abolish, but preached up, their exposition extended
not to the full scope of the Law; for it only extended to the outward man, and
not wholly to that neither, for they did not think that by words one might
break the sixth Commandment, as by this Chapter appears. 2. As our obedience
must be more universal, so it must be more constant. 3. It must be more
sincere, they failed in the grounds, ends and manner of their duty.

Verse. 21. Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
kill: and, Whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment.
Ye have heard that it was said by them of old] These words may have reference,
and be brought in as a proof of the 17th verse, and then it stands thus, I came
not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it, to give the full meaning of it, which
thus I do, ye have heard, but I say unto you. Or, 2. Of the words immediately
going before, and then it stands thus, Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness which the Scribes and Pharisees do or teach, you cannot enter,
for ye have heard from them, that he that kills shall be in danger of judgment,
but they never pressed upon you not to be angry, or that scornful carriage or
pronunciation, or opprobrious words were sins. Observe the practice of all
false prophets is to plead antiquity and traditions. 2. That though they do
plead antiquity yet falsely, for though the Scribes plead that it was said thus
and thus of old time, yet there was no such thing spoken of old, but the
contrary, or at least if it be spoken of old, it is not in their sense; for our
Savior does not say, that it was said of old, but you have heard that it was
said of old. 2. The opinion of those that say, that Christ gave a new Law to
Christians, and that the Law which he gave and gives to Christians, did not
bind the Jews, nor was set down in Old Testament, against which opinion these
things may be said, 1. That the strictest of the precepts that Christ gives
here may be found in the Old Testament, as this 22. verse. Levit. 19.17, 18.
that 28. verse. Job 31.1. Prove. 6 25. 2. The many and great praises of the Laws
perfection and purity, that David in the Psalms in innumerable places sets
down, which could not belong to it except those precepts were expressed or
included in the Law. 3. The coherence of these words with the former, and they
who would have these words not a confutation of the false glosses of the
Scribes, do not acknowledge any coherence of these words with the former, your
righteousness must exceed either what the Pharisees practice, or the Scribes
teach, or else you shall not enter; to prove that he tells them here, and sets
down their doctrine, and then what is the right, first what they teach, and
then how we must exceed. 4. It is said, you have heard, not that you have read
so, for their false glosses have told you this, not the text; if you read you
may read otherwise, he does not say, that they of old time writ so, but that
you have heard that they of old time have said so. 5. If the meaning should be
that they of old time had said so, and that the Old Testament had said so, then
should all those things which our Savior says, That they had heard were said
of them of old times, be found in some place of Scripture, but they are found
in no place of Scripture; for neither are those words, He that kills shall be in
danger of the judgment, nor those words, Thou shall love thy neighbor and
hate thine enemy, found in this sense, though in other words, but the contrary
for sense; Thou shall not kill, is the righteonsnesse of the Pharisees and of
the Scribes, but now our Savior sets down how we ought to exceed them, if ever
we will hope to enter into the kingdom of heaven, for so it follows.

Verse. 22. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without
a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say to his
brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say,
Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire.
But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry] Murder has generally these
things preceding, 1. The inward motion of anger. 2. Contumelious and
approbrious words, and after blows, and so murder: our Savior stops the
spring from whence murder flows, to wit, anger; to show us that as in this, and
so in all other sins the beginnings are to be prevented or resisted, nay not
only the beginnings of sin, which have the nature of sin, and dister but in
degree from the highest act, as anger differs but in degree from murder, it is
of the same kind, but the occasions of sin which are not formally, but only
occasionally sinful, and therefore one is not bound always to avoid the
occasions of sin, but always the beginnings of sin. From this we may
learn, That the very first motions of sin are sin, and deserve eternal
death; for though anger never breaks forth in gestures, words, much less in
actions, it makes one guilty before God, and liable to judgment. Further, that
we ought to look not only to our actions but to our words, nay to our very
gestures, nay further of our thoughts. Further, It is good to take such places
of Scripture as these which are very plain and concern actions of ordinary
occurrence, which children may easily take notice of, and teach them our
children, as for example, teach our children, Whosoever calls his brother fool
is in danger of hell sire. Again, Love your enemies, pray for them that curse
you. All liars shall have their portion in that lake which burns with sire
and brimstone, Revel. 21.8. and otherplaces of the like nature.

If you shall say, 1. But why did not God (since the calling fool; and the
saying Racha, deserved so heavy punishments) appoint such punishments in his
Law to be inflicted by men? The reason doubtless was his mercy, he would not
lay in this world heavy punishments as their sins deserved. 2. Or it was, that
because the punishments had they been as great as the sin deserved, men would
have accounted God cruel. Or, 3. God would have men punish the offenses done
against them, no more then proportionably to the damage they suffer, as for the
offense as it reflects upon him (in which respect only it deserves so heavy a
punishment, as our Savior there mentions) he will reserve the punishment of
that to the last day, and to himself.

2. Thy brother, that is, every one, any one, for as every one is our
neighbor, so every one is our brother, though in the Scripture phrase every
one is not to be called a brother, as you may plainly collect 1 Cor. 5.9. If
any one that is called a brother is so and so, etc. 3. It is said, that we
should not be angry with our brother, not barely whosoever is angry, for his
being our brother should be a motive to raise in us love or pity.

Without a cause] It seems there may be just cause for one to be angry, and to
be angry with ones brother; none so near but upon some cases, we may be angry
with them. 2. Indeed these words are not to be found in some copies.

Is liable to judgement] This translation of ours is not full, for (...) is
more then in danger, for the proper signification is liable, and indeed (...)
with a Genitive case signifies guilty of a fault, with a Dative case it
signifies liable to punishment, or he ^s bound to answer it in such a Court,
for to be punished with the punishment due to it; for the Court is put for the
punishment of the Court, for the judgment is a Court. 2. Three Courts the Jews
had for criminal causes, the first was that for which is here called the
Judgment, which consisted of three men, who judged of the causes brought into
that Court, and they were called by a name which signifies three men, in those
Courts only those matters which were manifest were judged of, and the
punishments were set down by their Law, and not left to their liberty to alter
them any way, yet diverse of the punishments were capital; the second and third
Court were called by the Jews Sanedrim, the lesser of these Sanedrims were in
every City, and it consisted of twenty three, who judged of several causes
which were not so manifest as to be judged of in the Court of the three men,
and the punishments of that Court, as also of the other Sanedrim, were
arbitrary, not determined by the Law, but arbitrary left to them to determine;
the second and greater Sanedrim consisted of seventy two, it was kept at
Jerusalem, and the weightiest matters were there determined of, and of this
Sanedrim our Savior may seem to speak. 3. Raca is a word that signifies
nothing, but is an interjection of scorn and deriding, so that all manner of
carriages and gestures, and pronunciation that show ones scorn or contempt of
him to whom we speak, is included in this word. 3. In words, for Raca is in
gestures, and the manner of pronouncing; but here our Savior comes to words
themselves, and he uses this word, Thou fool; 1. Either because it is, or
happily was the commonest term of disgrace among the Jews. 2. Or because it is
the most opprobrious word that may be, for it unmans one, for it makes him to
be void of the use of reason, which is the essential property and prerogative
of man. 4. The word here to signify hell, literally signifies the valley of
Hinnon, a place which resembled hell, 1. Because of the hideous noise an^
^^cries of those poor children, that were burnt alive there to Moloch, and
afterward for the filthiness of the place and the continual fire that was
kept there, for all the rubbish and noisome things of the City were burnt
there, and for that end there was a continual fire kept there.

Verse. 23. Therefore if thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest
that thy brother has ought against thee.
Therefore if thou] Now lest any one should think, that though he has done an
injury to his brother, that by offering Sacrifice it would be expiated; our
Savior adds, Therefore if thy brother has ought against thee, before he
showed how he to whom the injury is done, ought to carry himself; now he shows
what he that does the injury is to do; But suppose one has been angry with
ones brother, and has fallen out with him, and has done those things which
are here forbidden, the way is then not to delay, but immediately to go and be
reconciled to him, and if thou shall bring any excuse of business, so that
thou can not go for the present, it is no excuse; for put the case as high as
may be, suppose thou art as it were about Gods business thou come to offer
Sacrifice, not only intendest, but have brought thy gift to the very Altar,
thou may not stay while thy gift is offered, but go first and be reconciled.
2. If the gift be brought to thee, that is, if thou art the Priest, whose
office it is to offer the Sacrifices that are brought to the Altar, thou may
not go thy ways, and leave the gift before the Altar, though he that brought
the gift is bound to go and be first reconciled to his brother that has ought
against him. 3. You may learn two excellent and concerning truths, 1. That one,
when he is in danger of hell, ought not to defer one moment before one make
ones peace with God, and get out of danger. 2. That except one is, or strive to
be reconciled to him whom one has wronged, Sacrifice may be offered afterward
and accepted, but not before.

And there remembrest] There one ought to examine ones self, and so it is
likely one shall remember, but this is put as I have said, rather to put the
case more home. 2. If thy brother has ought against thee, and thou do not
know it, nor can remember any such thing, thou art not bound to enquire. 3.
It seems that is one main point of which we ought to remember our selves, what
we have done against our brother.

That thy brother has ought against thee] If thou have ought against thy
brother, thou art not bound to leave thy gift and go and be reconciled to him,
for thou may and ought to forgive him, which thou may do without going
to him. 2. It is not said, If thou have done any thing against him; for if thou
should be angry with thy brother in thy heart, thou were not bound to
confess this fault to him, but if he have ought against thee, thou must go and
be reconciled; for reconciled shows and supposes some former and known
differences. 3. It seems that though thou have not done him any real injury,
though thou have only called him fool, yet that is a sufficient cause to cause
thee to leave thy gift, for so is plainly intimated by the word, [therefore]
which refers to the words before, to wit, thy calling thy brother fool. 4.
Though he had or might have something against thee, is not the thing, but if he
has. 5. I suppose that though thy brother has some thing against thee, for
which thou have oftentimes striven to be reconciled, and he would not, thou art
in that case free, and art not bound at that time to leave thy gift before. 6.
Whether justly or unjustly; for if he have ought against thee justly, then in
justice to him, and charity to thine own soul, thou ought to give
satisfaction: and if unjustly and without a cause, then in charity to him thou
ought to be reconciled, for all the while he is angry with thee without a
cause (and likely to speak evil of thee) he is in danger, nay he is absolutely
bound over to hell, and is in a damnable condition.

Verse. 24. Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
Leave thy gift] For thy deferring thine offering, thy gift, there will not so
much harm come as by the deferring thy reconciliation; for God will not be more
unwilling to accept thine offering afterward, then he was then, but by delaying
thy reconciliation, thy brother will be more hard to be reconciled, for anger
in time grows to hatred. (...). Thou art not to carry it away with thee, and
not offer it at all, for when once thou have vowed or dedicated any thing to
God, thou may not upon any case resume it, though in some cases thou may
not for the present, and here in this verse, and though it may sall ont it may
never be offered.

Go thy wayes] 1. You must not say, Let him come to me, I will not go to him,
for Christ bids thee go; and if thou art under Christ, as the Centurions
servants did, when he bids thee go, thou will go, and by going thou becomest
reconciled to God; and whether thy brothers good will, and love be worth the
having or no, doubtless Gods is.

First] See 1. The goodness of God, he would rather have some part of his
service deferred, then that a sinner should not be converted, nay then that his
conversion should be delayed. 2. Though the duties of the first Table are to be
preferred before those of the second, Caeteris paribas, yet charity to ones
brother is to be preferred before the performance of the ceremonial Law.

Be reconciled] That is, do what in thee lies to be reconciled, for thou
ought to be in charity with him, and take the best ways thou can to be
reconciled to him, and if he will not after thy earnest endeavors, then thou,
as I suppose, art free.

To thy brother] 1. The meaning is not, Be thou friends with him, but get him
to be friends with thee, for thou may be friends with him, and fully forgive
him, without going to him or stirring from the place where thou art; so that
Christ needed not to bid thee go thy ways for that. 2. Before it is said, If
thou remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, not thou against him;
the word Brother is a motive to him to be reconciled to thee, for so Abraham
uses it to Lot, and to thee, to go and use all good means to appease his
anger; for if thou when thou see thy brothers Ox or Ass fallen into a pit,
thou must pull him out, much more when thou see thy brother has done any
thing which makes him in a damnable condition, thou should do what thou
can to deliver him; and if he is angry with thee without a cause, he has
done so; verse. 22. and if he be angry with thee without a cause, thou slandest
most in need of motives to persuade thee to seek reconcillation.

Then come, etc.] 1. For thou art not to be reconciled in stead of offering thy
gift, but before; nor will God have thine offering in this case omitted, but
deferred. 2. You may not omit, no nor for any worldly business defer the
offering, thy gift in thy full strength before thy strength fails thee, for
every holy duty strengthens the grace that is in thee, and inables thee to
perform another better. 4. It is not said upon the Altar, for that belongs to
the Priest, thou may leave thy gift before the Altar, but thou may not
offer it upon the Altar, and the Priest may not offer it before thou come. 6.
By any injury or wrong thou do thy brother thou do offend two, him and God,
and therefore thou have two to be reconciled unto, thy brother, to whom thou
art to go to be reconciled unto him, and God thou art to reconcile by thy
sacrifice, but first thou art to reconcile thy self to thy brother, for he will
not refuse thy reconciliation because thou art not reconciled to God, but God
will refuse thee for thy not endeavoring to be reconciled to thy brother.

Verse. 25. Agree with thine adversary quickly whiles thou art in the way with
him: list at any time the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into prison.
Agree with thine adversary] Concerning our friends, while there is no
difference betwixt us, there needs no instruction, the Publicans not only will
tell you what to do, but by their example they teach you, they do what is to be
done in this case, they love their friends, but that wherein they transgress
both in their life and doctrine, is concerning three sorts of persons, a friend
that is fallen out with thee, an adversary that sues thee, and an enemy that
hates thee; be reconciled to thy brother, lest he become thine adversary, agree
with thine adversary lest he become thine enemy, and love thine enemy, that he
may become thy friend. 2. An adversary is a person of a middle nature between a
friend and an enemy, for an offended friend becomes an adversary, and an
offended adversary becomes thine enemy; and an adversary and an enemy differ.
First, an adversary his end is, 1. To recover his own to do himself good, but
an enemies aim is to do thee hurt. 2. An adversary makes the Law his rule, and
the Law his judge, but thine enemy makes his malice his rule, and himself the
judge. 3. Thine adversary is far easier to be made thy friend, diverse times a
small part of thine estate will serve, but thine enemy will not be satisfied
but with thy ruin; therefore our Savior does not bid thee be reconciled to
thine enemy, for thine enemies are generally implacable, and whosoever is ones
enemy, was first only an offended brother, or an adversary, and thou have or
should have striven to be reconciled before; but all that our Savior
requires in that case, is to pray, bless, love. 3. Agree, that is, endeavor
to agree, for it is not always in our power to agree, as it is not always in
our power to be reconciled. 4. Do not say, He has done me wrong, and sues me
unjustly, let him come and agree with me, but our Savior bids thee agree with
him; for indeed Christ bids thee, and God commands thee, to do no more then he
has done himself, for so says Paul, Rom 5.10. 5. Or at least thou art bound
not to bear any evil will, but to be (...). 6. Not with Gods adversary, thou
art not bound to agree with him, if any one shall persecute thee for
righteousness sake, though thou know he will deliver thee to the Judge, and
the Judge to the Officer, and they cast thee into prison, yet thou art bound to
be (...), to bear him no ill will, but to pray for him, as you have it in this
Chapter. 7. The adversary, as I suppose here meant, is one that sues thee for
debt, for there are but two things for which we sue, injuries, debts; if thou
have injured thy brother, the former advice is proper, If thou remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee, go thy ways, and be reconciled unto him;
if he sues thee for debt, Make an agreement with him, is more proper then Be
reconciled, for often times one may sue thee, who is not at all fallen out with
thee. Again, that here is meant one that sues thee for debt, appears by this,
that it is said, Thou shall not come out thence, before thou have paid the
uttermost farthing. 8. Some will not have this saying to be meant at all
literally, but, That we having by our sins made God our adversary, we ought
quickly, while we live, before death come, to agree with him, lest, etc. the
rest of the allusion is easily made up; they say that it is not convenient that
Christ would descend so low, as to give directions against the remporal damages
which come by Lawsuits: Yet I conceive that it may be meant literally, 1.
Because else the words can have no coherence with the former, or if that were
made by invention of wit and learning, what but may be made to cohere to any
thing? yet surely their reason does not hold, for Christ speaks of lower things
then of the mischiefs that come by going to Law; for where he speaks of upper
rooms, he tells them, and bid^ them take the lowest room; not that Christ
intended to teach man how to be honored by men, which he in other places
blames, but to show them how absurd they are, and how contrary ways they take
for the accomplishing of the ends they aim at, for if the world be honored,
they should do quite contrary to what they did; so here he shows, that the vain
hopes of prevailing in the suit should not make us go on in our suit, but
agree, etc. lest, that is, he may prevail so, as to deliver thee to the Judge,
the Judge may, etc. 9. Do not say he will and does demand too much, 1.
Consider, thou may lose the cause, be the cause never so just, for bribes and
other things may carry the cause against justice. 2. The charges of the suit
will happily be more then the terms he proposes for agreement. 3. The vexations
and troubles of the suit are very considerable. 4. The time thou spendest is
very precious, thou may spend it far better. 5. The sins of uncharitableness
of thee toward him, and of him toward thee, are of the greatest moment, which
happily thou do least consider. 10. I shall not exclude the other
interpretation which is made, more likely to be the meaning of the words,
because our Savior says, Verily I say unto thee, thou shall not come out,
etc. for our Savior does not so earnestly affirm any thing, which does not
concern things greater then earthly things are, and indeed that which does make
me incline to that interpretation, not only as one, but as the only
interpretation, is, that whatsoever our Savior so earnestly affirms, is
universally and in every particular true; whereas it is not in every particular
true, that every one who has not agreed with their adversary, but has been
cast into prison, has been made to pay the uttermost farthing; and it holds
true of every one that is cast into hell, therefore now of the words in that
sense. 11. We are wished to agree with him, for there is no question but he
will agree with us, for he wishes us to agree with him, and we do not use to
wish any to agree with us, if we are unwilling to agree with him. 12. No sinner
does agree with God, not in his opinions, for he calls evil good, and good evil,
truth falsehood, and falsehood truth; nor in his actions, for he does that which
is contrary to his law, which is his will, and surely that which agrees not
with that straight rule, must needs be crooked. 13. Thou see thou art to
expect from God a legal proceeding, he is thine adversary, not thine enemy. If
you shall say that it is all one to have an arbitrary government, as for him
that governs to make the laws whereby he governs, I answer, 1. That it is not,
for if there are laws to rule us, and he that rules will observe them, then one
knows what to do to avoid punishment, whereas if the Government were purely
arbitrary, then no man knows what he is to do or suffer, if there are no laws
that set it down. If you shall say that all Gods Laws, as all his Works, are
made for the advancement of his own glory and prerogative, I answer, That God
creating all things so, making all his Laws so, that his great Name, that is,
his Attributes, may be known and magnified, as all his works are created; so
that his goodness to the creature is more apparent then any other of his
Attributes, and as Gods wisdom in the works of the creation is wholly
employed, his power in creating every part of every creature, so that it may be
most for the profit of the creatures, and every creature so, that it may best
serve for the use of the whole creation: so he has made his Laws so, that they
may be for the greatest behoof of man, for God seeks the glory of his
goodness, and would have his goodness magnified as much, if not more then his
power or wisdom; therefore he does not magnify his power only, but to those
that first have despised his goodness. If a King did account the liberty,
welfare and prosperity of his Subjects his greatest honor, if this King were
wiser then all his Subjects, an arbitrary Government were absolutely best for
the people, and that none should make Laws but the King; thus it is with God.

Quickly whiles thou art in the way] 1. We must not delay for these reasons, 1.
Because if thou do not do it now, thou may never do, for it must be done
whiles thou art in the way, and thou do not know how soon thou may be at
thy journeys end, how soon thy life may come to an end. 2. Because it so much
concerns thee, if thou do not agree thou shall be delivered to the Judge, and
the Judge will deliver thee, etc. 2. Observe that thy life is very short or
very uncertain to be long, for else it should not be said, quickly while thou
art in the way, if we were sure to be a long time in the way. 3. It seems that
there is no agreement but while we are in the way, for the reason implied is,
that if we do not quickly, we may be past our being travailers, and if so, then
no agreement will be accepted, and so it follows, he then will deliver thee to
the Judge, etc. Thou shall not come forth till thou have, etc.

Verse. 26. Verily I say unto thee: thou shall by no means come out thence, till
thou have paid the uttermost farthing.
Until thou have paid] The Papists do vainly go about to prove Purgatory by
this place, for until does not always signify that at such a time such a
thing shall come to pass, but it is used only to exclude the time before, not
affirm or deny any thing to come; so 1 Samuel 15. ult. Mat. 1.25.

Verse. 27. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not
commit adultery.
Ye have heard, etc.] See what has been said of these words upon the 21 Verse.

Thou shall not commit adultery] Generally in the Commandments the greatest sin
of the kind is forbidden, as not anger but murder, not defrauding but theft,
not fornication but adultery, which they observing happily in some Commandments,
and in others even the lowest degree of the sin forbidden, as in the third
Commandment and the second, or for some other reasons, thought that no acts of
sin lower then those specified and mentioned in the letter of the Law, were
sins, or at least not included and forbidden by the Law. 2. The words are to be
taken exclusively, as if our Savior should have said, the Scribes teach you
that the meaning of these words, Thou shall not commit adultery, reach no
further then to the forbidding the outward act of adultery, and they taught you
that the words meant no more. 3. Concerning the words themselves, of the
Commandment, I shall not speak any thing more then as it has reference to the
words following, for our Savior does bring it in, only to give a rise to his
ensuing discourse.

Verse. 28. But I say unto you, That whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery already with her in his heart.
But I say unto you] Not in opposition to the Old Testament, but to the false
gloss of Scribes, for in places of the Old Testament, the looking upon a woman
to lust after her is forbidden, if not by precept, by the example of Job 31.16.
and not only example but the express words of Scripture does impute adultery
to the eyes; so Prove. 23.33. Ezekiel. 6.9. and 23.16. for the farther observations
from these words, see v. 22.

Who so looks upon a woman] Two things there were happily that the Scribes and
Pharisees mainly erred in, in their gloss upon these words, 1. They happily
expound the words only of adultery, and excluded fornication from being by
this Law forbidden, for it appears by their writings that for any one to abuse
a captive taken in war was accounted lawful. Or, 2. They thought that only
the outward act of adultery was adultery; if you shall say, How could they not
condemn the desire of another wife, since the very Law condemns it in the
tenth Commandment? I answer, that you must understand that their desiring their
neighbors wife was, when any one desired that his neighbors wife should be
their wife, as their desiring their neighbors servant, was to have him to be
their servant, and upon this their desiring the woman, she was willing and
would so carry her self, that her husband should give her a bill of divorce,
and then he that before desired her, married her, and thought it lawful, which
our Savior before he leaves the prosecution of this point condemns for
adultery, for he immediately after this treats of divorce, for by that he
farther explains and confirms this matter. Now happily the Scribes and Pharisees
did only expound the tenth Commandment to be meant of desiring another man's
wife from him. Or, 2. If they did account it a sin, they accounted it not so
great a sin as to judge it adultery, for they happily did not think adultery
could be committed with the heart; our Savior chiefly seems to convince them
of their error in thinking that only the outward act, not the desire of
adultery, is adultery, as may appear by the word lust after. 3. Looks, not
only looking, but all other unchaste carriages, speech or actions are forbidden
much more, for to look upon a woman is the lowest degree or act. 4. A woman it
may be taken two ways, either to show the Sex, and so it is opposed to man,
and the sense then is against the first error condemning only adultery, not
fornication; for if you take the word thus, it runs thus, You think that only
the abusing of another man's wife is forbidden, but I say, that who so looks
upon a woman, let her be married or unmarried, the Sex makes one guilty. Or, 2.
It may be taken for the state or condition of the person so lusted after, and
indeed the Greek word signifies woman, as woman is opposed to maid, and then
the emphasis is to be placed in looks to lust, condemning not only the act
but the desire. 3. Not only one who lives with her husband, but one that is
divorced is meant, for whosoever cannot lawfully be married, cannot lawfully be
desired, but a woman that is divorced cannot lawfully be married, v. 33.

To lust after her] 1. Else to look upon her is no sin. 2. To look upon a
woman to lust after her, may be taken in a double sense, 1. He that looks and
his looking ends in lusting, or he looks whiles at last he lusts. Or, 2. When
the end or intent of his looking is to inflame his lust, the former way, his
looking is not sinful, or at least not at first, until it has produced that
evil effect, but the second way, the very looking it self is sinful, at first,
since it is done to so wicked an end.

Has committed adultery with her already in his heart.] 1. It is not said he
will commit, for his looking on her, and the lusting after her, may and is
likely to be the occasion of the commission of corporal adultery, but it is the
very commission of adultery before God, and this adultery of the heart differs
from corporal adultery, 1. It may be committed the woman being unwilling. 2. It
may be committed alone. 3. It brings no guilt upon the woman with whom one
commits it. 4. It is not so bad, for though it be the same kind of sin, to
wit, adultery, yet it is not the same degree of sin. 2. So you see the answer
to an Objection, to wit, If to desire a woman be adultery, then as good commit
corporal adultery; no, for corporal adultery, though it be the same kind, yet
not the same but an higher adultery. 2. Though corporal adultery were a less
sin, yet since it is impossible to commit corporal; but he must commit mental
too, but not contrary, doubtless to commit corporal is worse to commit mental:
though four be more then two, yet four and two be more then four alone, he that
should say, Since he that breaks one Commandment is guilty of all, therefore I
had as good break all, single, one by one, as one only: No, for he that breaks
one Commandment singly, breaks all the Commandments but once; but he that
breaks all the Commandments singly one by one, breaks all ten times. 3. He that
commits corporal adultery makes himself guilty of her sin with whom he
commits adultery. 3. It is not said, they have committed adultery, or that she
has committed adultery with him, but he with her; for though in some cases, as
if a woman by her apparel or gesture carries and dresseth her self so loosly
and lasciviously, as may give just cause of such unlawful desires, she is
guilty of his sin, and if she does it to that end she commits adultery with
him in her heart, but if he lust after her he always commits adultery with
her. 4. Before the Scribes did err in the punishment due to sins, here in the
very nature of the sin: there they thought the punishment due to sins less
then indeed it was, here they think the sin less. 5. You will say, Why did
not the Law forbid looking upon a woman to lust after her, but forbids
committing adultery? 1. Might it not be because that would be too strict for
them to bear away at that time, therefore he puts a word that might and would
very well include, but did not plainly express so much: and if you shall say,
Why did he give the Commandments of the first Table in such high and strict
terms, forbidding the lowest, or very near the lowest sins of the several
kinds, as in the second and third Commandments? Was it not because they could
better bear strict Commandments in the worship of God, because they were used
to a kind of niceness or extremity (if I may so call it) in religion or
piety, for they were very superstitious, and superstition is to piety, as
fondness is to love, though irregular, yet somewhat extreme. Our Savior
therefore instanceth there in the punishment, not in the sin. 6. If you shall
farther ask, Why our Savior instanceth here in the sin, and does not here
set down the punishment? I answer, that our Savior does set down the
punishment, it is fully intimated in those words following, It is better that
one member should perish, then that thy whole body should be cast into hell; as
if he should say, If thou committest adultery, thy whole body must be cast into
hell.

Verse. 29. And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from
thee: For it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
And] 1. It is not said only, If, but And if, to give the more strength to
these words, for saying thus, it is as if he should say, And I say unto you, if
thy right eye, etc. 2. Happily the Scribes and Pharisees were not strict enough
in preaching against the avoiding the occasions and temptations to sin, and
therefore he says, And if thy, etc.

If thy right eye] 1. Every man happily is not guilty of looking upon a woman to
lust after her, therefore it may be our Savior says, If] not when thy right
eye, etc. 2. This is brought to answer a tacit Objection or Question that might
be made, What shall I do if a woman come by, must I wink? Wink! I, not only
close thine eyes, but pull them out; if thou can not otherwise be free from
adultery, therefore he adds these words here, If thy right eye, etc. 3. The
reason why our Savior instanceth in the eye and the hand, and no more, it may
be, because it seems sufficient to instance in one organ of sense, and in one
of action, for of those do all the outward and not vital parts of the body
consist. 4. The reason why he instanceth in that sense, and in the hand rather
then the foot, may be, 1. Because that is the sense, and the other the member
of the body, which are instruments and occasions of making us guilty of the
sin above specified, such ways, that the Scribes did not teach. 2. Because
the eye and the hand are the dearest, and chiefest of all the members of the
body, the one for knowledge, and the other for action, the eye the chiefest of
all the senses, for the absence of the object of sight, of light breeds terror
in us, for darkness breeds a kind of horror, but silence the absence of
sound is not at all dreadful. 2. The eye is the beautifullest part of the body,
nay the very seat of beauty. Other excellencies might be given, but these
belong to the business in hand, the hand also is of great excellency and great
use, for it is proper only to man; and the reason why for a man to be born
without any offensive or defensive weapons and naked without clothes, is better
then to have both, as diverse beasts have, is because God has given man hands,
whereby he may make use of what kind of each he please, and as long as he
please, so that neither may be when he has no use of them a trouble to him,
all kind of handycraft trades, which are of all the most necessary for the
world, were not possible to be performed without the hand, the hand therefore
and the eyes are named, to show that nothing ought to be so delightful, or so
useful, but we ought to part with it for heaven, and the service of God. 5. But
why should not the heart which is the part that commits adultery to be pulled
out, and cast from a man, but the eye which is the window that lets in the
object that enticeth? I answer, 1. May it not be to show that if occasions and
temptations ceased, sin would also cease, the fire will go out if you add no
more fuel to it? 2. To show that we are not to lay violent hands upon our
selves, and kill our selves, one may live without the eye and hand. Those
things that are absolutely necessary unto life, must not be left, though there
be occasions of sinning, though food and raiment should occasion us to sin,
we are not therefore to leave them off, for by hand and eye are meant such
things as a man may live without, for neither of those two are vital parts,
such as if we are deprived of we die. Or, 6 The Question may be, Whether a man
may mutilate or dismember himself, pull out his eye, etc? I answer, 1. That if
you take the words thus, they do not argue for mutilation, to wit, if thine eye
or hand offend thee, and there be no other way, then pull the one out, and cut
the other off, but no man but may by Gods help so govern the eye and hand that
they may not cause him to sin, if it should be so that he could not, then cut
it off, etc. 2. But for the Question farther, That our Savior does not mean it
here, seems by this apparent, because the pulling out the right eye, etc. would
do no good, for the left eye will see as much as the right, nay as much as
both, and that which further seems against it, is that we have not the example
of any Christian, who did pull out their eyes, or cut off their hand. 7. Thou
may not if another right eye offend thee pull it out; if any woman's beauty
do entice thee to lust after her, thou may not deface her beauty, what is
thine own thou may dispose of, to thine own best spiritual advantage, but
not that which is another man's. 8. You may not wonder that thy servants, thy
children rebel against thee, for the parts of thine own body rebel against
thee, thy very eyes may be casements, and thine ears doors to let in thine
enemies unto thy soul. 9. But why thy right eye? we see as much with one eye as
with the other; nay indeed with one as with both? I answer, The right eye of
the two is the most useful, and that apparently in war, for most men being
right-handed, impossible it is to take aim with ones left eye, shooting with
the right hand, drawing the bow with the right hand, therefore 1 Samuel 11.2.
Nahash would thrust out all the right eyes of the Gileadites, that they might
be made unfit for ever fighting against him; for when the right eye is out, one
can only shoot at a venture; of the usefulness of the right hand above the
left, nothing need be said, it is so apparent. 10. But why does our Savior
instance but in one eye, and in one hand; for, 1. Since he speaks but of one,
as good speak of none, for one eye if not one hand will do as much harm as
both. 2. It seems that if both should offend, one should pull out both, 1.
Might it not be because it could not be said, cut them off (and from that
expression there is a very good lesson to be learned, as shall be observed) for
when one hand is off, one cannot ones self cut off the other? 2. Or was it for
the same reason that Deuteronomy 13.6. it is not said Whosoever, but if thy
brother the son of thy mother; for if one should reveal them and bring them
to punishment, a fortiori, one should bring any one else to punishment; so if
thou should cut off thy right hand, no question thy left, if that shall before
or after offend thee. 3. It includes it in this case also, if thou have but one
eye, and that be thy right eye, and so but one hand, thou art to pull it out,
and cut it off. 4. Or if thou art a fortiori, to cut off thy left hand, after
that be cut off, and thine other hand offend thee, and so it is all and in some
respects better then if he had said both. 5. Or is it not to show that for
those things without, which we could not be without almost, an insupportable
inconvenience would come on us, we are not bound to deprive our selves of them,
but some way to take the best order to keep them from offending, but though the
inconvenience be much that we suffer, we are to abide it rather then to keep
what causes us to offend, for to be deprived of both eyes or both hands, the
mischief is almost insupportable, but to have but one of either is not nigh so
much, for one eye will see as much almost as both, except in some cases, and
the left hand will come to be as useful as the right, and one may
indifferently well shift with one hand. 11. If you shall say, How shall one
know that ones right eye offends one? Does not one look on a woman with both
eyes and equally? The answer appears in the tenth observation.

Offend thee, or cause thee to offend] Scandal signifies the piece of wood on
which the fowl or beast treads, the trap falls down, and so one falls into the
snare: Hence whatsoever occasions one to do that by the doing of which we fall
into sin, is called a scandal, and it may be said to scandalize. 2. The
translation is more proper thus, If thy right eye cause thee to offend, and so
the same word is translated, 1 Cor. 8.13. 3. If any thing thou have or do
does offend thy brother, thou art bound very far to take it away, but surely
not so far, as when it offends thee thy self: generally what one has,
offends ones self, and what one does ones brother. 4. It is not meant if thy
eye should ache, or if thou should have any great pain in thine eyes, that one
should pull it out, which the words seem more to import, being translated
offend thee, then if it were cause thee to offend. 5. Not if it has caused
thee to offend, but if it still continues to cause thee to offend. 6. Nor are
we bound, because we fear that our right eye may hereafter offend us to pull it
out.

Pull it out] 1. It is not said, suffer it to be pulled out, but thou thy self
must have an hand against any thing be it never so dear or near, if it cause
thee to offend God, so you see Deuteronomy 13.9. Thine hand shall first be upon
him. 2. To show thee, that those things which cause thee to offend must be
abolished, for it is not Take care that thine eye offend thee no more: but 1.
It is presently to be pulled out. 2. Utterly and wholly pulled quite out,
abolished, for so you may see Hezekias did with the brazen Serpent, he did not
place it in some secret place for a while, and say, Though for the present it
is idolized, hereafter it may be of good use, nor did he teach nor wish the
Priests to teach the people the right use of the brazen Serpent, but he utterly
destroyed it.

And cast it from thee] 1. The word signifies to cast away a thing with scorn.
2. It is not enough to abstain or leave ones sin for the present, but one
must renounce it for ever, one must so renounce it as never again to reassume
it.

For it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not
that, etc.] 1. A less evil has the nature of good in it. 2. That which is
translated and not, should be lest, for it is an hebraism, and then the
observation may be, That the very danger of hell is to be prevented with the
real inconvenience of the loss of the eye or the hand.

Verse. 30. And if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee: For it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and
not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.
And if thy right hand] What has been said of the right eye, may be said of
the hand.

Verse. 31. It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his Wife, let him give
her a writing of divorcement.
It has been said] There are three several expressions our Savior uses in
this Chapter, to wit, You have heard that it has been said of them of old
time, as before, and it has been said as here, and you have heard that it has
been said, verse. 38. and surely there is a reason of our Saviors varying the
phrase; now I shall set down the reasons, You have heard that it has been said
of those of old time: When our Savior says so, he instanceth in murder,
adultery, perjury, all breaches of the Moral Law, which the Patriarchs before
and after the flood observed, and they are said to be of old time which were
before Moses, wherein divorce and the positive Law for the punishment of
injuries, were not in force before the judicial Law was given. It has been
said, and ye have heard that it has been said; the reason of that may be this;
the matter of divorce in this verse concerning it, is that which our Savior
grants was said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, but the doctrine that the
Scribes preached concerning divorce was far more large, so that the practice
of the Jews was far more corrupt in the matter of marriage, then in any other
thing, appears by the Polygamy of the Patriarchs, and the holiest men in the
Old Testament, and by Gods indulging to them a sin, to wit, divorce, for
other causes besides adultery, and doubtless their doctrine was not less
corrupt, so that in this point, they did not hear the Law in its true sense nor
word, but far more liberty was given, and the Septuagint indeed is not, If he
shall put her away, but he shall put her away, So it has been said, Whosoever
shall, etc. but you have not heard that it was so said, but he shall, not you
have been taught that he shall put her away, as if he must put her away,
whereas it is said indeed, If he shall put her away, and upon that supposition
gives directions what to do, viz. to give her a bill of divorce, the Law
commands to give her a bill of divorce, if he puts her away, it does not
command him to put her away. In this verse, It has been said, not you heard it
has been said, in verse. 30. It is said, and you have heard it has been said;
in the instance, verse. 43. You have heard it was said, but it was not so said.

Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a bill of divorce] 1. As I
have said, It is not a man shall put away, etc. but Whosoever shall put away,
or if one shall, etc. 2. The reason why he was to give here a bill of divorce,
was that she might not be punished as an adulteress, if she married another
man; for by the bill of divorce the husband gave free power to the woman to
marry whom she would; This was the form, I have determined freely, uncompelled
by any, to dismiss, divorce and forsake thee, who hitherto have been my wife,
therefore I do dismiss, forsake, divorce and put thee away from me, that you
may be at your own power, and that you may go whither soever you please;
neither has any one at any time forbidden me thus to do, and be thou therefore
so dismissed, that it shall be lawful for thee to marry whom thou please.
The reason why God permitted the Jews to be thus divorced from their wives, was
for the hardness of their hearts, as Chap. 19. for else they would some way or
other have made them away: to avoid murder, God permitted divorce: If you shall
ask, Why might not a man put away his wife by word of mouth as well as by
writing? I answer, 1. A writing was a more continuing and ready proof of her
divorce then words, for they must be proved by witness, who also might in a
short time die, and so the woman might come to be accused and put to death for
adultery, for knowing another man. 2. To take away as much as might be the
frequency and number of divorces, for writing is a more delibarate act, and
requires more time to consider before he did it, in which time he might happily
change his mind, and his anger might be appeased, for if the Heathens advise
to say over the Alphabet, before one did any thing in ones anger, surely to
write over more then so many letters as are in the Alphabet might be thought a
more likely time for ones displeasure to be laid, especially this was a better
way for the composing strifes, if they did not write their bills of divorce
themselves, but had them written by the Scribes, and so required longer time,
and the Scribes did, or might often mediate for reconciliation; moreover it
being a public act, one would be ashamed to divorce.

Verse. 32. But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away his wife, saving
for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: and whosoever
shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery.
But I say unto you] 1. Before our blessed Savior showed in one case, to wit,
of adulterous desires, one might be guilty of adultery; now he shows how that
the very act of adultery was by them accounted lawful, which was an adulterous
marriage. 2. Christ does here take away the wicked use of the permission of
divorce, and that which fomented those unlawful desires he spoke against
before, for the great abuse they made of that Law was this, If a man desired
another man's wife, because it was a sin punished with death, he would take a
way as he thought to avoid both sin and punishment, and would if he could
obtain her consent, persuade her to carry her self so to her husband as might
occasion him to divorce her, and then he would marry her, and enjoy his
unlawful desires; our Savior to stop the current of this wickedness, lays
the sin of adultery upon all three, upon the husband that divorceth, for
causing, upon the woman and the man that marry for committing of adultery, and
so that if the conscience of the sin do touch any of the three, that wicked
plot of getting another man's wife, might be frustrated. In the 19th Chapter
also he takes order for those who would that they might be free to marry
another upon slight occasions, divorcee their wives, by showing that he that
did so committed adultery.

Whosoever shall put away his wife except for fornication] It cannot happily be
proved by this verse that one may put away ones wife for fornication or
adultery, for all that can be proved, is, that he that does, does not cause her
to commit adultery. 2. See how mild our Savior is for fornication, before
Deuteronomy. 22.21. she was to be put to death, for adultery after marriage our
Savior does intimate, that she should only be put away. 3. Fornication is here
named not adultery, for that may be concluded a fortiori; if one may put away
ones wife for being false before, much more for being so after marriage. 4. If
you shall say, Why not for blasphemy, heresy, or some other notorious sin,
which are worse then adultery? I answer, It is not the heinousness of
adultery, but the nature of the sin that makes that a just cause of divorce,
and not the other, for that sin unties the very knot of Matrimony, and the
other does not.

Causes her to commit adultery] She commits adultery not fornication, because
she, notwithstanding such divorce remains married. 2. To cause any one to
commit adultery, or any other sin, is evil, for else our Savior would not
have brought it as an argument against the Pharisees.

Verse. 33. Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time,
Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths.
Again, ye have heard that it was said of those of old time] 1. Now he comes to
the instances of the first kind, to wit, of the Moral Law, for the instance of
divorce was spoken of by the way, because it belonged to the case of adultery.
2. This instance being of a matter which concerned neither the judicial nor the
ceremonial Law, which were not from the beginning, but from Moses time; our
Savor says that the very Scribes and Pharisees told them that this of perjury
was a Law in the time of the Fathers.

Thou shall not forswear thy self, but thou shalt] 1. There is no one place of
Scripture that has these very words, the nearest Levit. 19.3. Numb. 30.2. nor
does our Savior say, that it is thus written. 2. Two kinds of oaths there
are, Assertory and Promissory; in the first, one then forswears ones self, when
one swears a thing that is false, though one think it to be true, if one swears
positively, that it is so, for one ought not to swear, but what one knows to be
true. 2. One forswears ones self, where one swears that which one thinks to be
false, though it be true. 3. Therefore he does in the highest degree and manner
forswear himself, that swears that which he knows to be false. 2. There are
Promissory Oaths, and then a man forswears himself, when he swears to do that
which he knows he cannot, or that which he will not do, which he does not
intend to do when he swears, or what afterward he will not do when he comes to
perform what he promised with an Oath; this is one difference that in the
Assertory oath, if he be not forsworn when he takes the Oath, he cannot be
afterward forsworn, but in a Promistory Oath, if when he swears, he knows he
can, and intends to perform, he at that time forswears not himself, yet if
afterward when he comes to perform his promise, and does not, he then become
perjured. 3. But thou shall, etc. by this second clause it seems to restrain
the words to be meant of a promissory Oath, for assertory Oaths are not to be
performed. 4. It does not necessarily restrain it to vows, though it be said
that one ought to perform ones Oath to God, as if the former words were to be
meant only of such Oaths that one made to God, for even those promises that we
make to men, if we bind them with an Oath, one may be said to perform them to
God, for by an Oath one binds ones self to God to perform what one promises
to men, and therefore it is not said, Perform thy promise but thine Oath to
God; for the promise binds one, and one performs those to men, but the Oath
binds one, and one performs that to God, as if one be bound to any Court to
pay money to Orphans when they come of age, though then one pays the moneys to
the Orphans not the Court, yet one may be said to perform ones Bond to the
Court; by thine oath thou art bound to God to perform thy promise to men. 4.
This may be a restraint to the former words, as thus, Thou shall not, etc. If
thou make a promise, and take an oath to perform it, thou must perform it,
if it be such an oath as is not contrary to Gods Law; but such as may be
performed to God as well as to men. 5. The largest sense of these words, is as
if the Scribes and Pharisees only thought that perjury, and that in ones vows
one made to God (for so the place in Numb. 30.2. speaks only of such) was
forbidden, but for assertory and promistory oaths to man, the matter was not
great, whether one forswear ones self, though this seems to be too large a
sense, and larger then the Scribes ever taught; the next is that to forswear
was forbidden, but not to swear: Or lastly, that forswearing and swearing were
forbidden, but neither, especially this later, except one did swear by God,
indeed one does not read expressly, that swearing by any but God, or false god
is forbibben in the Old Testament; that place that does forbid it most clearly
is Deuteronomy. 6.43. and 10.20. and indeed it does fully prove, that one should not
swear by the creature; for the reason brought is, because he is thy praise and
thy God: so then one ought not to swear by that which is not ones praise, and
ones God, that they held it unlawful to swear by the gold of the Temple, and
the gift upon the Altar, Matthew. 23.18. was for a particular reason, as may
appear in his proper place; as if they should say, when you swear by God, then
you are bound to perform your oaths, for the oaths that are not by God, that is
in which the name of God is not mentioned, or some way included, doubtless by
virtue of that oath one is not bound to God to perform ones promises or ones
oath (for one is bound by ones oath to him by whom one swears) and so by
consequence one could not perform ones oath to God, except one swear by his
name, and profaned not that, though one swore by the creature, by heaven or
earth, or the Temple, or the Altar, it was nothing, for they did not hold that
by swearing by heaven one swear by him that sits thereon, Matthew. 23.22.

Verse. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by heaven, for it is
Gods throne:

Verse. 35. Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for
it is the City of the great King.

Verse. 36. Neither shall thou swear by the head, because thou can not make
one hair, white or black.


But I say unto you] 1. These words do not forbid one at all to swear, appears
by this, 1. That St Paul in Romans 1.9. 2 Cor. 1.23. and 11.31. Phil. 1.8. 1 Thessalonians. 2.5, 10. the Angels in heaven swear, Revel. 10.5, 6. nay Amen, which our
Savior uses so often, seems to be a form of an oath, Heb. 6.14. nay God
himself swear, Heb. 6.13, 16. 2. That it is said not at all: 1. Such universals
do not always universally deny, but only is to be restrained to the things
formerly or after mentioned, so St Paul, 1 Cor. 10.23. 1 Cor. 9.22. Or, 2.
Should it not go thus, Swear not at all either by heaven or by earth? As if he
should be said, you may not swear by these at all, it is unlawful to swear by
the creature in any case, and neither happily should be translated either, for
the second negative in Greek should be an affirmative in English, for else it
will alter the sense of the words, since two negatives make an affirmative in
English, but in Greek do more strongly deny. 3. At all therefore is to have a
restriction. 2. From these instances which are all instances of oaths by the
creature, the third limitation of at all is from the 39th verse in your common
discourse, in your communication.

Neither by Heaven] 1. These four forms of oaths are instanced in, because they
were the commonest oaths then among the Jews and Romans, for by the head was of
the Romans, though by their Jupiter was more common; but our Savior did not
speak against that, for the Law was so plain in that, that the Scribes
themselves taught, that to swear by false gods was a sin, and our Saviors
intent is here to show how that the righteousness which the Scribes taught,
nor the Pharisees practiced, would bring one to heaven, as you have it ver. 20.
this not to have place in promissory oaths, for neither are we sure that we
shall perform them, or we may otherwise oblige our selves by bond or Covenant,
and oaths are not to be used but when no other way will serve; but in assertory
oaths there is no other ways diverse times to evidence a thing, for assertory
oaths attest something we know, that we know it to be true, and none knows the
things of the spirit of a man, but the spirit of man, and he to whom he will
reveal it; but promissory oaths being of matter of fact, that considering it is
of a future thing, to be done for the good of another, will certainly be known
whether we do it or no. 2. In the Greek it is in heaven, and it is an Hebraism,
for they when they swear use in, the Latin and our English by; the Greek a
particle proper to that, as (...) or (...). 3. For the order of the instances
they are happily according to the order of the excellency of the things that are
sworn by, heaven, better and more excellent then earth, and so of the rest. You
will say, since we allow to swear by God is lawful, and our Savior says that
whosoever swears by heaven, swears by God, Mat. 23.22. therefore it is
lawful to swear by heaven. I answer, If to swear by heaven be a sin, then to
swear by heaven, though in swearing by it one swears by God, is a sin; which
appears thus, our Savior says, Mat. 23.22. so then, he swears both by heaven
and by God. It being supposed therefore that to swear by heaven is a sin, he
that swears by heaven (though he intends by that oath to swear by God) sins,
since he swears by heaven, and by God; and doubtless the joining of a good or
lawful with an unlawful, takes not away the obliquity of the unlawful
action. 2. Since to swear by God, is a part of Divine Worship, to swear by a
creature terminative, or to swear by God in a creature, are both idolatrous; by
this you may take one observation by the way, that as whosoever swears by God
in a creature, swears by both, so whosoever worships God in a creature,
worships both; so then to bow to a Crucifix in reference to Christ, is to bow
to the Crucifix and Christ.

For it is the throne of God] 1. For the words taken in themselves without
relation to the former words, take them as a truth not as a reason, then they
show the excellency of heaven, that the Majesty and Glory of God is seen there
fully. 2. That it is higher, and larger, and richer then the earth, for so is
the Throne in respect of the footstool. 2. The glory and immensity of God, who
has so large and so rich a Throne. 3. Consider that our Savior in the three
first instances uses the expressions of Scripture concerning them, to show us
that in all our words concerning Divine matters, the best way is to speak the
language of the Scripture. 2. As a reason it thus concludes, first, That what
shall be said may more clearly appear, you are to know, that whenever one
swears by any thing, it is by way of attestation, or by way of oppignoration;
the first way we call that to witness by which we swear, and do imprecate his
punishment if we swear falsely: in the other we do as it were lay the thing to
pawn by which we swear, and it differs from the other chiefly in this, that we
limit Gods punishment, and do as it were give such a thing to be done with as
he shall think fit, if we speak not true; we do as it were wish that such a
thing may be destroyed, if what we say be not true; and the saying of S. Jerome
seems true in this, that id per quod home jurat, vol veneratur, vel diligit,
either something that is sacred or dear to us. Three reasons there are why one
should not swear neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by Jerusalem, 1. Since
whosoever swears by heaven, swears by the Throne of God, and by him that sits
thereon, as you may see Matthew. 23.22. and so since your Law says, that to
swear by God falsely or vainly, is a sin, therefore to swear by heaven is a sin;
he that swears by the earth, swears by him that treads thereon; and if by
Jerusalem, by him that dwells therein, and so by God, and so unlawful in
ordinary communication, and without urgent necessity, for then it is in vain.
2. Or if you say you do not bring nor call God, that sits, or treads, or dwells
in those places, but heaven, or earth, or Jerusalem, to witness and revenge,
then you make them to be able to know the thoughts of your hearts, and to
punish, and so you make them which are creatures, God. 3. If you do swear by
these by way of oppignoration, then the reason stands firm, neither the
heavens, nor the earth, nor Jerusalem, are yours to pawn, for they all are
God's, the one is his Throne, the other his Footstool, and the other his City,
and none ought to pawn what is not his own; so also of your head, it may be
said of swearing by your head, for if you bring it by way of attestation, to
testify and revenge, though it may know the truth, yet it will not revenge,
for it cannot, for it cannot do things far less, not make one hair white or
black; and if you pawn it, then (in which sense I suppose here it is meant, for
when we swear by ones head, I suppose it is only by way of oppignoration, for
sometimes we in express terms say, I Will pawn my life on it) then the reason
of our Savior stands exceeding firm, for it is as if he should say, you swear
by your head, and you will lay that to pawn, as if you had plenum dominium over
that, to do with, or dispose of it as you please; yours, your head is none of
yours, for you cannot alter the property, no not the color of one hair, you
have not power over one poor hair, not only not to make it grow, but not of
altering the color of it; therefore if you cannot dispose of one hair, much
less of the whole head: Or thus, if you cannot make one hair grow black or
white, therefore much less an hair to grow, much less all the hairs, much
less the head, and all the integral parts of it; therefore if your head be the
workmanship of another, then you are not the Lord of that which you call your
head, for every one is the Lord of his own workmanship, and as before I said,
it is an unjust thing to wish a curse upon that which is another, if we say
false, for then another should be punished for our fault, and for our perjury;
that we are punished too, takes not off the injustice; or as some would have
it, though I allow not of it, this is to be referred to all as a general
reason, why one should not swear by any thing at all, either God or the
creatures, that we will do such or such a thing, for of promissory oaths
apparently here it is to be taken, and the reason stands thus, If you have not
so much power as to make one hair white or black, then thou have power to do
little or nothing, why therefore should thou swear to do what thou can not
do?

Verse. 37. But let your communication be, Yea, yea: Nay, nay: for whatsoever is
more then these comes of evil.
But let your communication] There is the third limitation wherein oaths are
not lawful, in common and ordinary communication or discourse oaths are not
lawful. 2. There may be something in that word, your, that a Christian ought
to be of such veracity, that their yea or nay ought to be as strong an
affirmation as others oaths, and they ought as much to abhor a lie as others do
perjury.

Yea, yea: nay, nay] 1. To give a reason why yea, yea, in the order should be
before nay, nay, I suppose 1. Would rather be curious then edifying, as to say,
that affirmation in nature is before negation, or that one should if one could,
rather geant what is requested, then deny; but it could hardly be thought the
intention of our Savior in these words, to intimate that duty to us in the
order of the words. 2. But for the iteration of both words there may be said
something more pertinent. 1. It may be to show that we may use strong
asseverations, though we may not swear, for by doubling of it, ones
asseveration grows stronger. 2. To show that he that requires a promise, or
ones witness in any thing, should propose it without an oath, as well as the
other that promises or testifies should not do either by way of an oath; for
as among the Romaus their way of stipulation was not by way of an oath, but by
repeating the same word that was proposed to them, to wit, facies, faciam,
dabis, dabo, so these in all their bargains and promises should be, yea, yea:
nay, nay. 3. That their yea in word should be yea in deed, they should speak
what was true, and the yea of their mouth should be yea of their heart, they
should speak what they think, and the yea of their mouth should be the yea of
their work, that they should perform what they promise, in one or all which
senses St James 5.12. may be taken, and thought to intend, when he says, Let
your yea be yea, and your nay nay. 3. Or may the meaning be, that Christians
ought not to be crafty and doubledealing, nor cunning, but speak openly and
plainly, and not to use equivocations?

For whatsoever is more then these comes of evil] 1. Not whatsoever is more,
that is, whatsoever words we use more in our communication, as if we ought to
speak no more then may serve to answer the Questions which are asked us, but
our asseverations ought not to be expressed with oaths, but only in these
words, or some equivalent to them. 2. Is more then these, the word properly
signifies excellent; so then since all protestations, oaths, execrations, etc.
do exceed or excel a bare asseveration, they are here forbidden. 3. Comes,
the Greek is, Is of evil, but the sense is well expressed by comes, for the
sense is, that it proceeds from evil that we use more words, whether they be
oaths, or stronger asseverations then yea or nay. 4. The words are not, that to
use more as in any case to swear is evil, but comes of evil. 5. It may be said
to come of evil two ways, 1. From the evil one, from the devil, for so he is
often called in the Scripture, and it may be said to come from him, because he
tempts one to the sin of swearing, or because he it was that tempted Adam,
and so being the cause of his sin, and his sin being the cause of ours. 2.
Or the sense may be, that all oaths, and vehement protestations either proceed
from our rashness, if we may be believed without them, for then they are vain;
or they are caused by the incredulity of those to whom we make them, and their
want of charity, if they suspect our veracity unjustly; or from evil in us if
we have given them just cause to distrust us, or from evil, that is, it comes
from the general falsehood of men; for as he that is a liar is not believed when
he tells the truth, so there being so many deceitful men, makes that honest men
are not believed. 6. It is not said, that whatsoever other expression, but
whatsoever stronger asseveration, for so the words as I have showed signifies,
for we may use any other word that is not a stronger asseveration, as the
Romans in their stipulations might use their dabo, or faciam, as innocently as
to say yea.

Verse. 38. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth
for a tooth.
You have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye] 1. It is not said, that it
was said of old, for this being part of the judicial Law, and not of the moral
Law, it was not said of old, for that an offense should be punished is not
moral, for then one should sin, if one should forgive it, much less is it
moral, that such a kind, or so much punishment should be inflicted, for some
Nations a less punishment will deter, and some a punishment in their fame,
some a graceful punishment, some others mulcts and fines, and punishments
generally are either for the satisfaction of the party offended, or for the
amendment of the party offending, which alters according to the several
conditions of men. 2. If any one should ask, whether we are bound to have that
Law in force, that before would satisfy? 3. The reason why the Law instanceth
in an eye and a tooth, is because those are the parts of the body which are
most commonly lost in quarrelling. 4. This Law had not hold if a master should
strike out the eye or tooth of his servant, but in stead of it he was to be set
free. 5. The false glosses that are supposed, that the Scribes by their
doctrine, and the Pharisees by their practice did put upon the Law, were,
either that they thought that if they did take revenge themselves, so it did
not exceed that which the Law set down, An eye for an eye, it was lawful,
which seems to be the meaning of our Saviors words following, Resist not evil,
Do not you your selves take vengeance; and indeed the reason of Gods enjoining
and appointing Magistrates to punish, and not giving every man leave to revenge
his own quarrel, are very profitable, for the hindering injustice yea and
revenge also; for first if one should have power to be judge in ones own cause,
one should be partial and revenge too much. 2. The revenge one has legally,
one has time to deliberate, for it cannot be so speedily had, as if one should
do ones self justice upon the receiving of the injury. 2. And it is some
trouble and charges to prosecute, and then it is a question, Whether one shall
have justice, so that either when one has time for ones anger to cool, one
shall not desire, or if one does desire, either the trouble or charges, or
uncertainty of prevailing, or all may deter one from seeking revenge, none of
which, or not all, or in not so high a degree, do happen in private revenge. 2.
Or that if the Magistrate would, or did not do them justice, that then they
might take it themselves. 3. Or which seems the main error of theirs, that our
Savior here speaks against, they thought it no sin at all in them, to urge
and take the full penalty of the Law for any injury that was offered them.

Verse. 39. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall
smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.
But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil] 1. Our Savior does not abolish
the judicial Law, but rather shows that some part of it did not oblige private
men, for he does not forbid the Magistrate to punish evil, but private men not
to resist it, and to be so far from seeking private revenge, that even in
ones own defense one might not do any violence to others. 2. Though doubtless
one may flee from, and defend ones self from evil, so one does not offend
others; for our Savior bids us, and he himself and the Apostles did flee from
one City to another when they were persecuted. 3. Nor as far as I can
understand does this prove war to be unlawful; for St John Baptist when the
soldiers came to him, did not forbid them their profession, nor any of the
Centurions that were converted left their callings, and diverse Christians in
the primitive Church were soldiers; and Moses, though he was the meekest man
in suffering any injury, yet for the defense of another he slew the Egyptian,
Heb. 11.34. Thus far I do not know how any reasonably can deny a Christian
may go, he may flee or defend himself, or by holding his hands, or any such way
deprive him of power to do him harm; so that by doing so he does him no other
harm, then to take away his power to do him a mischief, supposing him to whom
he does thus to be a private man. 4. Evil may be taken two ways, either really
or personally, and if one should take it here personally, the words following,
and the word in the original translated resist, do seem to approve it.

But whosoever shall smite thee on the right cheek] This may be said by our
Savior to answer an objection, or at least it may answer an objection, which
generally people make against suffering injuries and not revenging, that the
suffering of one injury is but to invite another; well, though by taking one
blow on the cheek, and to make no resistance were upon the point all one, as if
one should offer the other cheek, yet you must rather, if one must be done,
turn the other cheek, then to strike again, for that the meaning is, that one
should be willing rather to suffer two injuries then do one, or once to
revenge, or at least that the words are not to be understood literally, is
apparent by the carriage of our Savior and St Paul, who when they were
stricken on the cheek did not offer the other, but complained of the injury,
though neither of them did revenge, though our Savior could, and so have
stopped the following injuries that were done him. 2. You are to suffer
injuries patiently, and not revenge them, though never so vile a fellow shall
offer them, and the quality of the person should not cause thee to revenge, for
it is, Whosoever shall smite, though for those that are under ones government,
as children, servants, one may punish, but not by way of revenge to strike them
again.

On the right check] Some have made the observation of that, that though one
knows that if one does not strike again, one shall not only suffer a second but
a worse injury, yet one must not revenge, for he that strikes thee on the right
cheek must strike thee with his left hand, and so not with so much strength, as
as when he shall strike thee upon the other with his right hand.

Verse. 40. And if any will sue thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him
have thy Cloak also.
And if any will sue thee at the Law, etc.] Now our Savior comes to speak of
those injuries that were done under pretense of Law: For, 2. There is some
difference between Luke 6.29. Luke speaks of an outward violence, and Matthew
of a legal violence, therefore the words (...) and (...) are transposed in
Luke, because in outward violence the first thing that we are spoiled off is
our garment. 3. The words that we translate Coat, is in the original (...), and
signifies that inner linen garment which we wear next our flesh. This is also,
as I suppose, that which our Apostle Jude speaks of, ver. 8. and 23. being
compared (...) is taken for any upper garment. So that two things may be
intimated, 1. Which is the main, That it is better to suffer a second greater
injury then to revenge a small one, which arises from this consideration, that
the inward generally is of far less value then the outward garment. 2. That
though suits of Law diverse times begin upon small matters, yet they seldom end
there. 3. It is not said, that we should give our other garment to him that
takes away one, neither in Luke nor in Matthew; may it not be to show, that in
such kind of injuries we are only to be passive? 4. For the Socinians making
these advices of our Savior to be the highest pieces of prudence. And upon
that account our Savior does advise them; certainly though in most cases it is
the greatest part of prudence to suffer much loss rather then go to Law; yet
whosoever shall obey this command upon account of prudence, only there being so
much of self in so doing, that we cannot honor it with the name of Christian
obedience, as also because in so doing he honors Christ no more then any one
would honor Mahomet, since whosoever shall give us such counsel as we do judge
the most advantageous, we follow the counsel, though the person be never so
wicked. 5. It may not be from hence proved that it is unlawful in all respects
to go to Law: For, 1. When the Apostle blames the Corinthians for going to Law,
he does not blame them simply for going to Law, but for going to Law before the
Heathens, and gives them leave to do the same thing amongst themselves, if not
by legal establishing of Judges to hear and determine causes amongst
Christians, yet by a mutual and voluntary choice of persons to whom they would
refer the matter in difference, and there is no difference between a
constituted Judge and an Arbitrator, save only this, that an Arbitrator is a
Judge of our own choice, and a Judge is an Arbitrator chosen without our
consent by another, and therefore as one may lawfully put things to
arbitration; so one may also when he is not able to determine to whom the right
of such lands or goods belong, put it to the Judge to tell us who has right in
Law to them; and indeed all going to Law is unlawful on one side or other,
except it be in case of ignorance to whom the thing sued for belongs; for if
the Plaintiff knows that that is not his right he sues for or the Defendant
that it is the Plaintiffs right, the one sins in commencing, the other in
standing out the suit. The next argument to prove that going to Law is lawful,
is the practice of the Apostle, Acts 24.10. and 25.8. But if you shall object
and say, If one be accused of sedition, or any criminal cause, it is lawful to
defend ones self, which may be one of the senses of that of the Apostle, That
we should not suffer as evil doers, for a good name is as precious ointment,
and we ought in reference to religion, and our brethren in meekness clear our
selves from any crime that we are charged withal, and these were the suits
that the Apostle Paul stood out in. Resp. Whenever we are sued for money or
any thing of that nature which is not criminal; May we not say that in some
sense our good name lies at the stake, since the very suing of us does suppose
that we keep something which is not our own? nay his very demanding though we
stand out the suit lays the same aspersion in some measure upon us. 1. The
rules for going to Law are these, 1. That it must be our last refuge after all
other means have been tried and avail not. 2. We should not sue for any thing
which we in our conscience think not to be ours. 3. We should not go to Law for
trivial matters. 4. We should not use any unjust ways, as of bribery, false
witnesses, etc. that we might prevail in our suits. 5. We must bear no malice
to him whom we sue for, in so doing while we demand of him what is ours we take
from him that which is his, viz. love, which we owe unto all men. 6. We ought
not to be impatient though never so unjustly sued, for in this case we must do
as Job did, though all his goods were taken from him, yet he held his
integrity, so it is cursorily better, that if one be sued at Law for his Coat
he give his Cloak also, then to part with his patience; in being out of
patience, one is out of possession of his own soul, for in patience it is that
we possess our soul, as we ought not to use any unnecessary delays to
increase the charge, and trouble the suit.

Verse. 41. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.
And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, etc.] It was a custom among the
Persians, and at that time it seems among the Jews, to take up both men and
horses to carry burdens, as we do at this day, take up Posthorses; the word in
the Greek which we translate Compel is a Persian word, and signifies, that
among them which taking up Posthorses does among us; thus they compelled Simon
of Cyrene, Mat. 27.32. to carry the Cross of our Savior.

Verse. 42. Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of
thee, turn not thou away.
Give to him that asketh] First, There is a difference betwixt this and the
other instances of our Savior; in the other, our Savior commands us to be
ready to suffer twice as much as injuriously is laid upon us, but here he sets
down, not what we must give, but that we must give, much less does he require
that we should give twice as much as is asked, for it is not said to him that
asks a penny give two.

Secondly, It is not said, what we must give, 1. Because there can be no
general rule given for any particular sum or thing, since the necessities of
them that ask, and the abilities of him that gives are various. Or, 2. May it
not be because the meaning of the Text may be this, that we should give as well
that which is asked, as to him that asks? 3. Or is it not because though we are
not bound to give what he asks, if we are not able, yet we are bound to give
what we can, and all may give something, at least speeches of compassion and
comfort? Or, 4. Because sometimes we are bound to give more then he asks, for
if his wants appear to be very great, the modesty of his requests should not
hinder the liberality of our beneficence. 5. Nor is it said, that we should
give him what he asks, but that we must give, for one may ask as well what we
may not, as what we cannot give, yet then we must give him counsel and
instruction.

Thirdly, I suppose it is not meant that one should not give except they be
asked, yet this happily may be said, that if through pride and stoutnesse one
scorns to ask, one though he know he needs, yet is not bound to give; for if
one that through idleness, will not labor, should not eat, there is as much
equity, that he that through pride will not ask, should not eat.

Fourthly, To him that asks, that is, to all that asks, for so Luke 6.30. it
is; it is not meant that we should give to all without distinction, but without
partiality, for there are rules set down by the holy Ghost, for our not giving
to some, 1. We are not give entertainment to heretics, 2 epist. John v. 10. 2.
Nor holy things unto dogs, Mat. 7.6. 3. Nor food to them that will not work, 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.

2. He sets down rules to whom we should especially give, 1. We are to give to
those of the same Nation, before to strangers, Deuteronomy. 15.7. and 1. v. 2. And of
those especially to them that are of thine own household, 1 Timothy 5.8. 3. To
those that are Saints, Gal. 6.10.

Verse. 43. Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor,
and hate thine enemy.
Ye have heard that it has been said] 1. He does not say that ever it was said
so, for there is not any place in Scripture where we are commanded to hate our
enemies, and there are three things wherein their gloss is faulty, 1. Is, that
they restrain the word neighbor to one of their own kindred or Nation, which
our Savior fully confutes in Luke 10. in the Parable of the good Samaritan. 2.
They leave out, As thy self. 3. They put in, Thou shall hate thine enemy,
whereas there is nothing in the Scripture for it, but many places against it,
Exodus 23.4, 5. and whereas some say it was to be meant of an Israelite, if he
be an enemy, but not of those of other Nations, but that they might hate them,
the contrary is evident, Deuteronomy. 10.19.

The use of this is, that every one himself should read the word of God, for
if he only hears the word and searches not the Scripture, he shall hear that
many things are said in the word of God, which are no where there to be found,
but diverse times the clean contrary.

Verse. 44. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you,
and persecute you.
But I say unto you, love your enemies, etc.] 1. These words Bless them that
curse you, are left out in the vulgar Latin, though it be both in the Greek
and in the Syriack.

2. It is not to be understood thus, that we should love our enemies, but not
bless them; and do good to them, and pray for them, or bless them that curse
us, but not love them, etc. but we are to do all these to every one, whether it
be our secret enemy, or by his cursing and persecuting declares himself so to
be.

3. Love your enemies is put first, because all the rest, our blessing, doing
good and praying, should not be done feignedly, but with the sincerity of our
heart.

4. We are commanded to pray for our persecutors, because by their persecution
we are dis-inabled to do any other good unto them, and generally they scorn to
receive them.

5. Christ does not only command us to love them that love us, or those that
are neither oul friends nor enemies, but to love our enemies; and again we are
not permitted to curse them that curse us, or to be silent, and neither bless
nor curse, but we are commanded to bless, the reason may be, We must overcome
evil with good, therefore our good should be stronger then their evil, which
could not be if we should neither bless nor curse him that curses, for not
cursing is not so good as cursing is evil.

6. We are commanded to love, bless, etc. their persons but not their vices.

Object. But David says, Do not I hate them that hate thee? Therefore those
that persecure us for the true religion being Gods enemies, we should hate.

Sol. We are not in this place to hate any one that is Gods enemy, or that
blasphemes God, but we are forbid to hate any one, because he is an enemy, or
because he curses us, as he is your enemy you are to love him, as Gods enemy to
hate him.

7. It is in the Original, Do well to him that hates you, to show that if we do
our enemy good, yet if we do it in a chutlish and scornful manner, we do not
observe this Commandment.

8. That we are not only to love personal enemies, but those that are enemies
to the Nation.

Verse. 45. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for
he makes the Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just, and on the unjust.
That ye may be the children of your Father] 1. It is not meant, as if we could
love our enemies before we were Gods children, or that this is the way to get
adoption or regeneration, for he calls God their Father, when he wishes them to
do thus, that they may be his children, therefore the meaning may be thus: 1.
That you may be, i.e. that you may be known to be both to your selves and to
others, as it is said, We are justified by works, i. e. our justification is
known to our selves and others by works. Or, 2. That you may be the children,
is meant, that since two ways we are the children of God by regeneration and
sanctisication, in respect of sanctification we may have the image of God
renewed more and more in us, and so in a qualified sense may be said to be more
Gods children, and in that sense we may attain to be more the children of God,
i.e. more like him.

2. None can be the children of God unless they love their enemies.

3. That every one should strive both to be and to know himself to be the
child of God.

4. That no man by nature is the child of God, since no man by nature can or
does love his enemy, etc.

Which is in heaven] 1. We can never love our enemies, etc. so long as we are
no more then the children of our earthly father.

2. That it is a heavenly thing to love ones enemies, and therefore ex
diametro, it is an hellish thing to hate ones friends, and therefore to hate
Gods people, 1. Because they are our friends: And, 2. They are heavenly: 3.
This is the first motive to persuade to love, etc.

For he makes his Sun to arise] 1. This is the second motive to the duty,
i.e. Gods example, and it stands thus, If God who is greater then you does
bestow greater blessings upon those that are greater enemies, and between whom
and him there is a greater distance, how much more should you love, etc.

2. The Sun does not arise of it self, that knows not what it does, nor is it
of necessity that the Sun should arise on the wicked, but it is by Gods
providence; for it is he that makes it to arise; or if there be a necessity, it
is in respect of the Sun, not in respect of God, for he makes it to arise, so
the Sun cannot choose but rise, but God might choose whether he would make it
rise.

3. These common blessings come not by chance as well as not by necessity, it
is by Gods providence that we enjoy them.

4. It shows the continual concurrence and power of God with natural causes, it
is not like a clock, which when it is once wound up will go it self by the
weight of the plummers, but like a pen which writes not a letter nor a tittle,
without the continual guidance of the writer. So God did not at first create
the world, Sun, etc. and so without his actual concurrence to every
particular, and enable them to do it; So that the Sun did not arise at the
first moment of its Creation, more immediately by the power and providence of
God, then it does now. This advances Gods goodness, for as one that has
settled maintenance upon an Hospital for the poor there, it argues not so much
patience in him, to suffer the men there, if they abuse him, to receive their
settled stipend, as it does for him daily to feed them with his own hand, and to
put money into one of their hands while the other is lifted up against him.

5. Or may not, he makes, be taken in this sense, that all the creatures of God
are enemies to the wicked, the earth will not bear him, but open her mouth and
swallow him; the fire would not warm him but consume him, the Sun would not
rise upon him, as it did not once in Egypt, while they had light in Goshen, but
God as it were renuente sole, does make it arise upon the good and the bad.

6. It shows the great power of God, that not only the things on earth but all
the creatures in heaven and earth obey him, he that can make the Sun arise,
what can he not do? Nehem. 9.6.

His Sun to arise] 1. A fortiori is a motive to us to do good to our enemies,
1. Because that which we give or bestow on them, in respect of God, we have no
right to; we are but his stewards, and what have we that we have not received?
we have the possession of all those things we have, but not the disposing, for
that God who is the Lord of them has given us rules for the disposing of them;
in respect of the poor to give them alms is charity, but in respect of God it
is justice; but you see here the Sun is called his Sun, he has a full title to
it, if he therefore gives that which is his own, he is Lord of, much more
should we give that of which we are only stewards, when he that is the Lord
commands us. 2. Consider what he gives, it is his Sun, the greatest of all
temporal blessings in the world, for we might longer live without food or
raiment, then without the benefit of the Sun, for without his heat all things
that are would immediately freeze; nay not only by giving the wicked the
benefit of the Sun they enjoy that heat which is necessary for life, but they
enjoy the light of the Sun, which is a thing of ornament and pleasure to make
their life comfortable, Eccles. 11.7. therefore if God gives the wicked, things
of ornament, much more give your enemy bread, etc. Romans 12.20. 2. No man not
only cannot, but does not offer to lay claim to the Sun.

Upon the good and the bad] 1. Some may say, How can it be otherwise, for if
the Sun shines upon the good, how can it but shine upon the bad also, since
they are in one Kingdom, in one Town, in one house? But God is not necessitated
to bestow this mercy upon the bad, though he bestows it upon the good, for de
facto, God did make it dark in Egypt, when it was light for three days in
Goshen, though they were of the same Kingdom, and so the cloud gave light to
the Israelites in their march, and at the same time was darkness to the
Egyptians, Exodus 14.19, 20. Besides God can strike all wicked men with
blindness, so that the Sun shall be in respect of its light, as if it was
not to them, and he might strike them with such a burning fever, as he
threatens Deuteronomy. 28.22. that for its heat the Sun should be worse to them,
then if it was not, and thousand other ways known to the Lord.

2. We see that by common and temporal blessings the good are not distinguished
from the bad.

3. It follows that wicked and unjust men are Gods enemies, and curse God, and
hate God, and persecute God, and despitefully use him, or else it would not
follow from this example of Gods dealing with wicked men, that we should love
our enemies, etc. for one might say, it is true, God makes his Sun to shine
upon the bad and unjust, but they though they are Gods enemies, do not hate
him, curse, etc. as mine do me.

4. That God may be said to bless, and do good to those that are bad and
unjust, Deuteronomy. 10.17. Act. 14.17.

And he sends rain] 1. God bestows not only one but many blessings upon the
wicked, he does not only make the Sun to arise, but sends also the rain upon
them, nay by bestowing this second blessing, he takes off that inconvenience
that otherwise would follow upon the enjoyment of the first, nay they do help
mutually one another, for the rain cools the heat of the Sun, and the Sun
warms the coolness of the rain, and both together make the earth fruitful;
from hence we may learn, 1. To do great and many benefits to our enemies. 2.
Not to do them such courtesies that we know will bring mischiefs on them, and
to do them good in one thing, on purpose to do them hurt in another. 3. We
should do good to those that do not only not thank us for courtesies, but
attribute it to others, for God does so, He makes his Sun to shine and his
rain to fall, not only upon those that are so bad as not to be thankful for
them, but are so exceeding unjust as not to account God the author of them.
The observations concerning Gods making the Sun to arise, etc. mutatis
mutandis, may agree to this latter part of the verse.

Upon the just and unjust] 1. It is not set down here as contradistinguished,
as if there were some bad that were not unjust, and so unjust that were not
bad, nor is it to be meant, God makes his Sun to arise on the bad, and sends
his rain upon the unjust, bestows some kind of these blessings upon some
wicked, and the other kind upon other wicked men, but he bestows both upon
all, as before it is not meant, We should love our enemies, but not love those
that cursed us, or bless those that cursed us, but not bless those that hate
us; but as when God commands us to bless them that curse us, and does not say,
Do good to them that curse you; it is because blessing is directly opposed to
cursing, and so it is more likely to make him that curses see his error,
because contraries being placed one by another, make each other more apparent.

2. As it is a more direct way, so it is a more mild sweet way; for as when
one pronounces a word of Latin wrong, it is a better way to take some way
immediately to pronounce it right, and so show him his error, then to call him
an ignorant man, and so show it him: So it is a sweeter way when a man does as
it were pronounce his words falsely by railing against one, by blessing of him,
to show him how to pronounce them right, then by bitter invectives to tell him
of his wickedness: So God is said to rain upon the unjust rather then upon the
bad, because that the unjust by racking of rents, withholding of corn and
other such like oppressions of the poor, do abuse the fruits of the earth, so
that God by blessing of him in those very things wherein he does as it were
curse God, and by being bountiful to him in those things wherein he is so
niggardly to the poor does show him his error, by doing that very thing right
which he did wrong.

Verse. 46. For if ye love them, which love you, what reward have ye? Do not
even the Publicans the same?
For if ye love them that love you] The former argument was from the example of
Almighty God, whom all confess in all things to do well, there he brings an
argument from him whom all approve, and here he brings an argument from them
whom all condemn: and the Argument stands thus: You all desire and expect to be
rewarded for your works, But none of you think that the Publicans shall have
any reward, Therefore neither you, if you love them only that love you, for so
do they.

1. It is good to press difficult duties by many arguments.

2. That it is good to make use of the evil opinion we have of others, as a
motive to our selves to be better.

3. That the wickedest men may have something good in them, but nothing perfect.

What reward have ye?] Christ does not set it down positively, that they have
no reward, but by way of Question, to show them that it is not only his
opinion, but their own, for he appeals to their own conscience, and it shows
the manifestnesse of the truth, since self-love does cast such a mist before
our eyes, when we are to judge of things concerning our selves, that except the
truth do shine very bright we cannot behold it.

2. It is not said, what great reward, but what reward, to show them that they
should be so far from expecting everlasting life, that they cannot expect any
reward at all.

3. It is not said, what reward shall ye have, but what have ye, to show that
they are not to expect so much as a temporal reward for loving their friends.

4. They may have temporal blessings as motives to obedience, but none by way
of reward for obedience; for it is not said, what blessings, but what reward
have you? for if one may say of your righteousness you do, Do not the
Publicans the same? One may say of your blessings, Have not the Publicans the
same?

Do not even the Publicans the same?] The Publicans were such as used to
receive Custom, Tribute-money, and other Taxes, and were men very odious to
the Jews, both for their injustice and oppression of them, and they were
generally Heathens, because the Jews did abhor to have any hand in the
oppressing of their own Nation; nay our Savior joins them with harlots,
sinners, Heathens.

Verse. 47. And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more then others?
Do not even the Publicans so?
And if you salute your brethren only] The word translated salute, signifies to
kiss and embrace, and our Savior does signify by it it all outward
expressions of love.

2. By brethren is meant our near kindred and acquaintance.

3. This word only is to be referred as well to the former verse, as to this,
and the observations upon that mutatis mutandis may be applied to this.

Verse. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect.
Beye therefore perfect, etc.] 1. It is not meant as if it was possible to be
as perfect as God is, and therefore it is not said, Be as perfect as your
Father which is in heaven, but be ye perfect as your Father which is in heaven
is perfect; noting to us, that we must have the kinds not the same degrees of
perfection, yet there is one exception to be made, viz. that we must strive for
all those kinds of perfection that are communicable to the creature; for when
a Father bids his child be like him, he does not mean, that his child should
be his Father, so when we are commanded to be like God, it is meant in such
properties that we may have and still continue creatures; and such perfections
though we strove to attain, yet God was in no wise hindered from having them
also: as for example, if we should endeavor to have our own wills done in all
things, Gods will could not be done in all things, except our will was so
sanctified, that our will was to do Gods will in all things, and then we did it
not as our own will, but as his; so if we should do all things for our own
glory, without reference to Gods glory, we should do some things wherein God
should be dishonored, but in other attributes, as in this which is spoken of
in the Text, our loving our enemies, our doing good to all, forgiving of
injuries, etc. does not hinder God from doing good to his enemies, etc. but it
is rather one act of his love toward them, that he would have us to love them
also, for we ought to love their persons though not their vices, and we ought
to love them though they be Gods enemies, though we ought not to love them as
they are, that is, because they are Gods enemies: so our being holy hinders not
Gods being holy, nor e contra in these communicable attributes did the
likeness of Adam to God consist, which he lost by desiring to be like unto God
in his incommunicable attributes, which desire we are to mortify.

2. To be perfect as God is perfect, is to instance in this particular, 1. To
come as near to that degree of love that God bears to his enemies, as we can.
2. To have our love as extensive as Gods love is, and that in two respects: 1.
In respect of the object, and that in respect either of the kind, or of the
particular, i. e. Whether they be never so much, or never so many ways, or
never so long our enemies, that for the kind, and we are to love not only some
of every kind, but every particular person of every kind, Singula generum,
and genera singulorum. 2. Extensive in respect of the act, and that three
ways, 1. You must do much good to your enemies. 2. You must do many good turns
to your enemies. 3. You must do many kinds of good to your enemies: As 1. God
makes his Sun to shine upon his enemies. 2. He makes it daily to arise upon
his enemies. 3. He makes his rain to fall as well as the Sun to arise, that
is, God bestows many kinds of blessings. 3. Extensive, in respect of duration
we ought not to be weary of well-doing unto them; as God not only made the Sun
to arise in our Saviors time upon his enemies, but also still continues to do
so, etc.

3. Whereas it is said, Luke 6.36 Be you merciful as your Father, and here, Be
ye perfect as, etc. that shows that mercy is one of the great divine
perfections which we ought to imitate.

As your heavenly Father is perfect] 1. It is to show, that we ought not to
make our earthly Father, the pattern of our imitation.

1. We ought not to imitate them in all things, since they do many things
amiss, and then it is a curse to follow them, Jer. 6.21.

2. We ought to endeavor to go beyond our Fathers, so that it is not true to
say, Be ye perfect as your earthly Father is, for they are not perfect; nor is
it full to say, Be as perfect as your earthly Father, for we must strive to
excel them in perfection.

Secondly, Here are arguments why we should imitate God.

1. Because he is our Father, and children are very subject to imitate their
Fathers, and this argument the Apostle uses Ephesians. 5.1.

2. Because he is perfect, for if we imitate those that are not perfect, we our
selves shall never come to be perfect. See the further exposition of this verse
in the Treatise of Christian perfection.

Thirdly, Hence we learn the extensivenesse of Gods presence, for in the
Original it is, Who is in the Heavens.

MATTHEW VI. Verse. 1. Take heed that you do not your alms before men to be seen
of them: otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in Heaven.
TAke heed] In the 5.th Chapter at the 20th verse, our Savior said, Except
your righteousness, etc. Hitherto our Savior has vindicated the Law, and
shows us how our lives should exceed the righteousness of the Scribes, that
is, the righteousness that they taught; now in this Chapter he teaches how
far our righteousness should exceed the righteousness of the Pharisees: Or
thus, Before he vindicated the Law from the error of the doctrines of the
Scribes and Pharisees, here from the errors of their practice, and that in
four things, three in respect of God, and one in respect of the world; the
religious duties are three, Alms, Fasting, Prayer; concerning the things of the
world there are two faults they are guilty of, either they did insatiably
desire abundance, or with too much distraction, anxiety and diffidence, seek
things necessary.

Take heed that ye] 1. We ought not only to take heed what we do, Do not your
alms, but how we do that which is commanded.

2. It shows that we are very subject to err in the manner and end of our
works, be our works never so good, or else we need not be advised to take such
great heed, and indeed the people of God do generally abstain from those
actions that are materially evil, but there is not one action whatsoever
through their whole life, but either in respect of the ground, manner or end,
they more or less offend. It shows also to whom we are to give our alms, viz.
to those that are the true objects of pity and compassion.

3. The word translated Alms signifies pity and compassion, which shows that
all our alms that we give to the poor should proceed from our pity and
compassion we bear to them, not out of expectation of praise that we desire to
our selves.

4. If one is entrusted to bestow the alms of another, one has more liberty to
do it before men, that is openly, I, and that it may be seen of men, then in
the bestowing of our own, because there is little danger of vainglory.

5. It is not said, Your alms, as if we were not bound by Gods Law to give
them, or as if the poor had not a religious title to them, but it is happily to
show that we should give alms of such things that none had any civil right to,
but our selves.

6. It is said Your alms, to show that we do not lose those goods that we give
to the poor, but that they still are as much, nay more ours, then if we kept
them in our own possession, therefore it is said, They are but lent to the
Lord, though they are given to the poor, and he that lends loses not his title
to that that he lends.

7. We are to do our alms: to say as St James speaks, Be ye clothed, and be ye
fed, is wishing not doing of alms; therefore it is not here said, Have ye
compassion, as the word we translate Alms signifies, but the inward pity must
show it self in outward actions if we be able.

8. It is not said, Take heed ye give not your alms to be seen of men, but, Do
not your alms to be seen of men, for indeed though the alms be done, yet if
they be done for that end the alms are not given, but they are sold for the
vain applause of men.

Before men, to be seen of them] 1. It is said before men, it is not said
before a man, because those that do their works before men, desire multitudes
of beholders.

2. The word translated to be seen, signifies to be beheld with admiration and
applause, as those that act upon a Theater or Stage are beheld, and both the
words a Theater, and that we translate to be seen, have the same primitive, and
in Matthew. 5.16. where Christ wishes us to do our works that men may see them,
he uses not this word here, but a word that signifies a bare seeing a thing, to
show that those that see an excellent example, are not to content themselves
with admiring it, but are to practice it, and they that do the good work should
not desire that their works should be gazed on, much less that their persons
should be admired or glorified, but their Father which is in heaven, as it
follows in that verse. We may therefore do our works that men may see them, but
not that men may gaze on them or us for them; how in other respects this does
not contradict that, see in that which is spoken upon that verse.

Otherwise y^e have no reward] 1. We may learn, That a wicked end depraves a
good action so fully, that it makes it not only less good but evil.

2. It is not said, Ye shall have no reward, but ye have none, to show that the
rewards that are laid up for the righteous, are as certain as if they had them
already.

3. If ye shall say, We have no reward of our Father now indeed, but shall have
hereafter: To that may be answered, That all the rewards that any of Gods
people shall have for any good work, though it be not presently bestowed upon
them, and in their possession, yet they are prepared for them, and in Gods
possession; the rewards you shall have are with your Father already, if
therefore you have no reward with your Father now, you shall never have any
reward with your Father hereafter, for the word that we translate of, is
evidently in the Greek with, as ye may see in our margent.

4. It is not said, Ye have no great reward, but no reward at all, for such a
by-end, as I said, does not make an end less good, but wholly evil.

5. Though it be said only, Ye have no reward, yet it is meant, Ye shall be
punished, it being a frequent Hebraism by a milder expression to set down the
justice of God; and the reason why our Savior does not here set it down in
those terms, Ye shall be cast into hell fire, may be, 1. This being one of his
first Sermons, and as is supposed the first that he preached to any so great a
Congregation, it is to show that we ought to try whether people will be won
with milder before we use harsher expressions. 2. Or is it not to show to
abstain from sin for fear of the loss of heaven, is a perfecter motive, then
to abstain from sin for fear of the punishments of hell. Or, 3. Does it not
show that in hell the sense of the pains we feel shall not so torment us as the
loss of heavenly joys, and it is as if he should say, I rather tell you of
the rewards you shall lose, then of the pains of hell, because howsoever for
the present you stand affected, yet you ought to be more affected, and shall
certainly hereafter be move afflicted with the loss of the joys of heaven if
you lose them, then with the torments of hell, though you feel them.

With your Father which is in heaven] 1. It shows the excellency of the rewards
of the righteous above the rewards of the world. 1. They are safer, for those
of the world are with us, and those things that are now in our possession when
a stronger then we are shall come, may be taken from us by violence, and when a
subtler shall come, may be taken from us by deceit, or when the good man of the
house shall sleep, a thief may break through and steal them; or be he never so
strong, wise and watchful, yet the moth and rust may consume, but the rewards
of the righteous are in the possession of God, who is Almighty and All-wise,
and so able; and he is your father, and so willing to keep them for you; and
they are in heaven, and so in such a place where neither moth nor rust does
corrupt, and where thief cannot break through and steal. 2. Or is it not to show
so much what rewards we shall have, as with whom we shall have, for if we had
never so great rewards, and yet at that time be deprived of the presence of
God, they could be nothing to us. 1. In truth they could be nothing, for in thy
presence, no full joy out of his presence. 2. If we love God above all things,
they could be nothing to us without we had them with him; that which Absalom in
hypocrisy said to David, every poor soul does truly and feelingly say to God,
Wherefore am I come from Geshur? it had been good for me to have been there
still, now therefore let me see the Kings face, 2 Samuel 14.32. 2. With your
Father, does not imply that God is rewarded when we are rewarded, but it
implies these two things, 1. That for the present it is in his possession, and
he keeps it for us. And 2. That hereafter it shall be in his presence that we
shall enjoy it. 3. We have no reward of the Father, that implies two things,
that those good things that hypocrites enjoy in this world, God does or may
give them by way of common providence, but not by way of reward. And 2. That
those things that they have by way of reward for such actions, as praise, etc.
they have it from men, and not from God. 4. It shows that the reward which we
have from God is far greater then that which we have from men, and that all the
rewards that we have from men, if we have none with God, can bring us no
comfort.

Verse. 2. Therefore when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before
thee, as the hypocrites do in the Synagogue, and in the streets, that they may
have glory of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
Therefore when] 1. That it is a profitable way of teaching, after a Minister
has spoken against a vice in general, but also to give particular instances;
so Isa. 3.16. and here our Savior first speaks against giving alms to be seen
of men, and now comes to speak against the particular, viz. Sounding a trumpet.
2. When he does suppose that thou should give alms, for it is not if, for
that is a word of doubt, but when takes it for granted that we must do the
thing to which when is annexed. 3. When does relate to the duty, not to the
time of doing it, for it is not meant, that at that time when we give alms we
should not seek the glory of men, but afterward we might, for we are not to
seek praise for any holy duty, be it never so long after, for he that should
say a year after, he gave an alms a year since, but he never spoke of it to
this day, if he say so to get the praise of men, he is the greatest hypocrite
of all, for he has deferred his praise so long, that he might have the praise
both of his giving and of his secrecy.

Thou do thine alms] 1. In the Original it is not thine alms, but alms, thine
is left out, to teach us to consider that when we do any good action, it cannot
be properly said to be ours, and so holy men have acknowledged, Isa. 26.12. 1
Cor. 15.10. For the further exposition of these words look in verse. 1. Words of
fact in Scripture are often taken for words of command, and we are said to do
that our selves which others do by our command, Josh. 5.3. Joh. 3.22. compared
with John 4.2.

Sound not a trumpet before thee] 1. The word in the Syriack seems to signify
to cause to sound, and the word in the Greek here used is to be taken as the
words in the first conjugation in the Hebrew, and the Seventy in their
Translation use this word in Hebrew that signifies to cause to sound, and so it
is in the Margent of our Bibles; and it is very probable that every one of
those hypocrites were able themselves to sound a trumpet, but the word in our
English that we use, is taken in both senses. 2. It seems it was not the
custom among the Jews, that poor people should come from door to door a
begging, but that at certain places and times a public signal being given, the
poor were gathered together, and then what well-disposed people would, or what
otherwise they had to bestow, was distributed among them, and this was done in
the times of public Assemblies in the Synagogues, and at other times in the
streets, and this custom had these conveniences with it, 1. That upon the
days of public assemblies, the Synagogue being the place of the relief of the
poor, it caused them to come to the public ordinance. And, 2. It being
howsoever in a public place where many were gathered together, such poor as
were vagrant, lazy or wicked might the easier be discovered, but in tract of
time it came to pass that whosoever desired public applause of men, when he
had any alms to give to the poor, he would make use of this public signal, on
purpose that they might take notice of his alms. 3. Christ by forbidding us to
sound a trumpet before us, forbids all other ways of publishing alms for the
applause of men. 4. The use of the trumpet among the Jews was threefold,
either, 1. Civil, as for the gathering together the Princes of the people. 2.
Military. 3. Religious, as you may see it more largely set down in Numb. 10.
Chrysologus observes that the hypocrites using the trumpet in this, their use
of it being neither civil nor religious, it was martial, and that they came
rather to give God battle then to give the poor an alms. 5. There was these
notorious signs of their hypocrisy, 1. That they would have men take notice of
their liberality to the poor. 2. That they used such a public way to make them
known, as by blowing of a trumpet. 3. That they themselves would be present
when their liberality was thus made known. 4. That notwithstanding they did all
this for the praise of men, yet they would use such ways to get it, that had
not a manifest appearance of their seeking vainglory, because the calling
together of the poor by the trumpet, was primarily intended for other ends, as
has been said. 6. This shows that those things that have been notoriously
abused by hypocrites and idolaters, etc. except in case of necessity; or that
they are commanded by the Word, though we suffer some small inconveniences, we
ought to forbear the use of them, as in this case.

As the hypocrites do] 1. All hypocrites do sound before them when they give
alms, i.e. they either literally do so, or by way of analogy, they do their
alms after such a manner, or at least to that end that they may be praised of
men, for the Trinity of the world being profit, pleasure, and honor, there
being no carnal pleasure, much less temporal profit in giving alms, they must
needs do it for to be seen of men.

2. The works that the hypocrites do we are not forbidden, but to do them after
that manner, for it is not, which the hypocrites do, but as the hypocrites do;
insomuch in this particular it is not lawful in all cases to blow a trumpet
when one gives alms, but always unlawful to do after that manner, and to that
end as hypocrites do.

3. Hypocrites, the word properly signifies Stage Players, who personate those
men, and act those parts of grief, joy, etc. and in gestures, clothes and
speech do seem to be others, diverse times contrary to what they are, men women,
and beggars kings.

4. Our Savior does not say, Do as the Scribes and Pharisees do, but Do not as
the hypocrites do: might it not be, 1. To show us, that we should not speak
against the persons, but against the vices of men. 2. Or, because it may be
there were some of the Scribes and Pharisees that were not hypocrites.

In the Synagogues, and in the streets] 1. Their Synagogues were built after
the manner of their Temple for situation, being generally built upon a hill,
and for position being built East and West, and for distribution having a place
answerable to that where they kept the Ark, and also a partition in the
Synagogue that divided betwixt the place where the men, and where the women
sat: and for officers, as there was the ruler of the High Priest answering to
the High Priest in the Temple, and answerable to the Highpriests associate and
assistant, there were officers in the Synagogue; the differences betwixt the
Synagogue and the Temple were these, 1. In respect of number, for there was but
one Temple and many Synagogues. 2. In respect of Ordinances, they might preach
and pray, but they might not sacrifice save only in the Temple.

2. They sounded the Trumpet in the Synagogue and streets, that so they might
be observed by more.

That they may have glory of men] 1. Or, That they may be glorified by men,
when they should give alms, that they themselves, and that others might
glorify God, so the poor should have the alms, and God should have the glory,
and they might have the comfort of their actions; but here while they give a
penny to the poor they steal that from God, viz. his glory, which they esteem
more of then a thousand worlds.

2. It is lawful to have respect to the recompense of the reward, and to do
good duties partly in relation to the relation which we shall have from God,
but never in reference to the praise and glory we shall have from men; but here
it is not, that they might have glory of God, or that God might have glory of
men, but that they might have glory of men.

3. In respect of men, the main thing that they were to look after, was their
relief, not their praise: but here while they pretend to come to give to the
poor, they do indeed come to receive applause both from poor and rich.

Verily] 1. The word Amen, translated here verily, sometimes is a word of
asseveration, as here and in most places; nay sometimes so strong an
asseveration that it has the nature of an oath, the word in the Greek is Amen,
Heb. 6.14. Sometimes it is used by way of option or wishing, so is the last
word of the. Lords Prayer, and the last word of the whole Bible.

2. It is observable that St John in his Gospel uses three expressions which no
other Evangelist uses, the first is the doubling of this asseveration; the
second that the Virgin Mary is called woman; the third, that John is called the
Disciple whom Jesus loved, and always so in his own, never in any of the rest
of the Gospels.

I. say unto you] Vid. Chap. 5. verse. 18, 22. upon these words.

They have their reward] 1. It is not said, they have the praise of men, for
that they may miss of, but howsoever if they aim at the praise of men, they
have their reward, i.e. all their reward that ever they shall have.

2. Since our Savior brings this as a heavy curse that will light upon them,
it follows, that it is a miserable thing to have no reward, but what we have in
this life.

3. That it is not said, they have a reward, but their reward, that is, that
which they account a reward, not that which is a reward.

Verse. 3. But when thou do alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right
hand does.
But when thou do alms] 1. We not only not keep an account, and exactly
remember what we give to the poor, but at that very time when we give it, we
are not much to make what we give; it is not said, that after thou give thine
alms thy left hand should not know, but when thou give, at that very time.

2. The proverbial sense is this, that none, though they were as near to us as
our left hand is to our right, should be acquainted with what we give to the
poor, but that our alms should be carried with the greatest secrecy that might
be; so that if it were possible, but one part of our selves should know it: Or,
2. Thus it is in another respect to show how private our alms should be, when
one gives a thing with both hands it cannot be carried so secret as when one
gives with one, therefore when we would convey a piece of money into the hand
of another so, that no one should see us, we do it with one of our hands not
with both, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, that is, do not
give alms with both hands, since you may give them more privately with one.

3. It is not said, Let not thy left hand know to whom thy right hand gives,
but what thy right hand gives; for it is lawful, nay we ought to consider
whether the persons to whom we give want or no, and we ought rather to some
kind of persons, then to others, as the Scripture has commanded us, Deuteronomy.
17.7. and 11. 1 Timothy 5.8. Gal. 6.10. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10. The first use of blowing
the Trumpet, as has been said, was that the poor being called together, they
might know who most wanted, but afterward in stead of calling the poor
together, that they might know to whom they gave, they called the people
together that they might see who gave.

4. Yet it is not unlawful to take some notice of what one gives to the poor,
because according to the several necessities of those to whom we give, we ought
to be more or less liberal: So that we may take notice of what we give, that
we may give prudently, but we must not take notice of what we give, to applaud
our selves, and to give vain-gloriously.

Verse. 4. That thine alms may be in secret: And thy Father which sees in
secret, himself shall reward the openly.
That thy alms may be in secret] 1. If one renders the Greek word for word, it
goes thus, That by this means thine alms in secret, and the meaning this, that
by not letting thy left hand know what thy right hand does, we shall cause our
alms to be in secret, the observation is this, That except we be exceeding
careful even to keep our alms if it be possible even from our own knowledge,
we shall be subject to tell them unto others, we are so prone to vainglory,
for Christ says, by this means your alms may be in secret, but scarce by any
other means.

2. We must not so, not let our left hand know what our right hand does, that
we should be careless what, or how, or to whom we give, but for this end we
ought to take so little notice of our alms, that our alms may be secretly not
carelessly bestowed.

3. Thine alms, as if Christ should say, though no others, nor thou thy self
do know the number, or value of that thou give to the poor, yet thou have
not lost the property in thine alms by the secret bestowing of them, thou have
only lost the knowledge of them for the present.

4. Thine alms; as if Christ should say, Let the hypocrites do what they
will, make their alms never so public, yet for thy part take order that thy
alms may be in secret.

And thy Father] 1. It is very evident that our Savior generally in all this
Sermon names God by a sweeter relation then the Old Testament generally does,
there it is the Lord of hosts, or the Lord generally, but here it is Father,
which is a sweeter name then Lord, and thy which by reason of its appropriating
of Father unto us, is more sweet then the.

2. Thy may be put by way of distinction, as if it should be said, He is not
their Father, to wit, the hypocrites, that blow a trumpet that their alms may
be seen, but thou that give thine alms in secret to avoid vainglory, he is
thy Father.

Which sees in secret] 1. But if thou shall say, If neither I, nor other men
take notice of what I give, how shall it come to be known? and if it be not
known, how shall I ever be rewarded for it? Our Savior does here seem to
answer; Yes, there is one that sees though thy alms be so secret that neither
thy self nor others see them, and he that thus sees is one that will not keep
any thing secret that may be for thy good to be published, for it is thy Father
that thus sees in secret.

2. This word Col. 4.17. is translated, take heed, and Matthew. 7.3. is
translated behold, and it is as if Christ should say, God does not only see,
but exactly and earnestly beholds and takes notice of all thine alms, though he
forbids thee so to do.

3. That which is the Saints comfort is the hypocrites fear and condemnation,
viz. That God sees in secret. It is a sad thing when all our comforts depend
upon this impossibility, viz. That God knows nor our thoughts.

4. That which makes every action acceptable to God is in secret, viz. The
sincere desire of honoring and serving of God in that which we do.

Himself shall reward thee only] 1. That which they seek, to wit, the public
knowledge and glory of men, thou shall have in a far greater measure: For, 1.
Thy reward shall be before, not some few men of one City, or of one Synagogue,
but in the presence of all men and Angels at the last day, thine alms shall not
only be known but rewarded. 2. That which will make thy glory and thy honor to
be wonderfully resplendent, is that God himself shall reward thee openly, the
Archangel shall blow the trumpet of God to call all the world together, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. and Christ shall proclaim all thine alms, yea diverse of thine alms
which thou thy self did not know, Matthew. 25.34, etc. for since it was not the
least part of the honor of him, whom the King delighted to honor, that he
should be arraied and crowned, and his horse led, and proclamation made, and
all this by one of the Kings most noble Princes: So doubtless it will be the
greatest part of the glory of those that are charitable, that the Lord himself
shall crown them with a crown of glory, and array them with the robes of his
own righteousness, and proclaim and say in the presence of the whole world,
Comeye blessed, etc.

2. All that you have by your blowing the trumpet, is, that men know that you
give to the poor, and that men honor you for so doing, but here the Lord shall
not only make it known, and you shall be honored before men and Angels by God
himself for giving alms; but besides his honoring he shall reward you; as when
the King shall give some great gift in the presence of all his Nobles to some
poor man for some small service he has done him, the man is honored by having
the gift given openly before Nobles, but the gift it self is a great part of
the reward.

3. The reward that God shall give is certain, if thou give thy alms
secretly, but the praise thou expectest from men is uncertain, if thou give
them openly: it may be those poor that come and receive nothing will rail at
thee, those that thou give unto may murmur at thee that thou give them no
more, and they that stand by and behold, may more blame thee for thy hypocrisy
then praise thee for thine alms; thou blowest the trumpet that men may come to
see thee, but it may be their business or wisdom is such that they neither can
nor will come out to see thee, but when the trumpet shall be blown at the last
day, then the Sea and the grave, and hell it self shall send forth all their
prisoners, and they and all the world shall behold thee openly rewarded that
gave thine alms in secret.

4. The word that we translate reward, properly signifies to render or return
what we formerly received, and this is the same that Pro. 19.17. there it is,
He that pities the poor leuds to the Lord, not he that gives to the poor, for a
man may give out of vainglory, as here, and not out of pity; so here our
Savior bids us do our alms, but the word signifies pity, the word pity rather
then relieve is used in both these places, to show that all are bound to pity,
though every one is not bound to relieve them; the reason is, because all are
able to pity, though all are not able to relieve the poor, the poor themselves
are able to pity; nay in respect of the experience they have of the smart of
poverty, they can easilier pity then the rich, that which you give out of pity
to the poor, and love to the Lord, is lent unto the Lord; but what you give for
to be seen of men, is lent to men, and they are to repay you, God will not.

Verse. 5. And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for
they love to pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corners of the
streets, that they may be seen of men. Verily I say unto you, they have their
reward.
And when thou prayest] 1. It is not sufficient to be careful to avoid
hypocrisy in one holy duty, but in all; for Satan is like a fly, for the
prince of devils is called the prince of flies, drive away a fly from one
place it will light upon another: So though Satan be driven away from thine
alms, he will light upon thy prayers.

2, As in respect of Satan, so also in respect of God it is not sufficient to
be right in one duty, for one duty zealously and religiously performed, will
not excuse or stand by way of composition for ill performance of another, he
that keeps one day to the Lord, it is more inexcusable if he keeps the next day
to the devil.

3. If when be taken for whenever, or as often as thou prayest, then the
observation is, That as in different duties the performance of one with care
makes it not needless how we perform another, as above is observed; so in the
several acts or performances of the same duty, the performing of it often well
should not make us secure, nor can infallibly assure us that afterward we may
not perform it ill; he that rows thirty strokes and prevails against the
stream, if he omits the 31th stroke he will surely be carried back again.

4. If you take when, as if our Savior had said not only before, but at the
very instant of prayer You shall not be, etc. then the observation is, That our
preparation to holy duties cannot be so great, as to put our hearts into such a
spiritual frame before, that we need not at the very instant of performance of
the duty observe what we do; for our hearts are not like a well-made watch,
which being wound up once or twice a day, and being set right, will go so for
many hours, though you neither observe nor direct the wheels in their course;
but like a ship which except your eye be on the compass, and your hand on the
helm, will be driven out of the way and split upon rocks; or like a writers
pen, which be it never so well made and prepared for writing, yet writes not
one letter or tittle more then the hand makes it. When does not here properly
command, but takes it for granted, that we will pray, for it is not If, but
when thou prayest.

Thou] 1. It may be the meaning is, that in private prayer we should not stand,
nor love to stand in the Synagogues, but when ye pray, that is, when there are
public Assemblies met together to pray, then we may join with them wheresoever
they meet.

2. Thou, that is, though all else should do so, yet do not thou, for we must
not follow a multitude to do evil.

Prayest] 1. As the holiness of thy person cannot privilege thee from
temptation, for Satan strove with Michael, and tempted Christ, so neither can
there be any duty so holy wherein thou can have so near a communion with God,
but Satan can come between to tempt thee, for prayer of all duties brings us
nearest unto God.

2. To do any thing for the applause of men, is at the best but vanity, but to
do works of religion for the praise of men, is to make God our footstool.

3. Though our actions must be the same in many particulars with hypocrites,
yet the frame of our spirits must always be different: we must do what they
do, but never be what they are.

When thou prayest, etc.] 1. Thou, is as if Christ should say, Let the
hypocrites do what they will, but when thou, etc. And as Joshua did say, Do you
what you will, but I and my house will serve the Lord.

2. It is not when ye pray, to show that this direction is not for public, or
to condemn public prayer, but a Directory only for private devotions.

3. Nor is this a direction for ejaculatory prayers.

4. Or if we do as they do, i.e. if we do pray in Synagogues as they do, yet we
must do it with another frame of spirit, for it is not said, Do not as they do,
but be not as they are.

3. Their fault was not praying in the Synagogue, but their affecting it, to
sit in the uppermost room, is not a sin, but the love of sitting there is.

6. Standing was the usual posture in prayer amongst the Jews, Jer. 15.1. Job
30.20. except in days of humiliation, Dan. 9.20.

7. Love is to be joined to both the words, and they loved to pray standing for
two reasons, 1. Because they might the better be seen. 2. Because they did not
like those kinds of prayer to which prostration was proper, for their prayers
were generally Thanksigivings rather then confessions; Luke 18. Lord, I thank,
etc.

8. Standing may be taken for continuance, for our Savior condemns them for
their long prayers.

9. They did not only frequent their own Synagogue, but went to diverse others
to be taken notice of.

10. The corners of the street may be taken two ways, either as if they went
into some corner of the street, pretending to avoid the sight of men, that they
might have not only the praise of their praying, but their humility, and did
seem to cast away praise, but so that they might take it at the rebound: Or
else it may be taken for that place where two streets meet, because that place
was most public.

11. It shows they did not pray in highways nor in villages, but in Cities or
great Towns, for the others have no streets, all to show that the publicknesse
of the place was the cause of their choice of it.

12. This does not contradict Matthew. 5.16. for they are faulted here, not
because they desired their works, but themselves should be seen.

13. It is extremely against the very end of prayer to desire that we may be
seen, for the reason why we pray, is, that our prayers may be heard, and not
that our persons may be seen, for the rest, vid. ver. 2.

Verse. 6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have
shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.
But thou when, etc. 1. That this precept cannot be universal in respect of
prayers, is evident, both by the practice of holy men, who prayed in public as
well as in private, Psalm. 42.4. and by the promises of God made to such
prayers, Mat. 18.19. as also by express precept, nor in respect of persons,
for it is certain diverse have no private chambers, no nor any houses to pray in.

2. We must shut the door for more privacy, for the advantages of private
prayer are many, 1. Many gestures which are not fit in public. 2. Many
expressions. 3. It avoids distractions. 4. It avoids vainglory.

3. In secret, may be taken two ways, 1. That God is in that private place
where thou praiest. Or, 2. That God sees the secrets of our hearts.

4. God does not only grant us what we ask, but rewards us also for asking.

For the rest, Vide verse. 4.

Verse. 7. But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for
they think that they shall be heard for their much speaking.
But when ye, etc.] 1. This direction is universal for all kinds of prayer,
public as well as private, the person therefore is here changed.

2. All repetitions in praying are not forbidden, for Christ used the same
prayer thrice, and the Angels pray day and night, Holy, holy, etc. therefore it
is said vain repetitious: and they are then vain, when they neither come from
the heart, nor go to the heart; or are used as if God could not understand our
wants, or would not relieve them without them.

3. In all things Christians must do more then Heathens do, for though they do
the same actions, they must do them for higher ends: but generally in the
worship of God we must not do what they do, for in such matters reason is
erroneous.

4. Many words in prayer is not unlawful, but to think that therefore we shall
be heard, or that God cannot understand our wants, unless we use many
expressions to signify them: for it argues that we should think God to be
ignorant or unwilling to relieve.

5. (...) signifies also eloquence, which we are to avoid in prayer, for the
words of our prayers signify no more with God then our desires come to: what
is more is not prayer but babbling.

Verse. 8. Be not therefore like unto them: For your Father knows what things
ye have need of, before ye ask him.
Be not therefore like, etc.] Our Savior sets down convincing reasons, to show
the vanity of using many words and vain repetitions in our prayers.

1. If we use them to that end, as to persuade God to be willing: for he is
your Father. 2. If you intend by many words to make him know what your wants
are: for he knows what you stand in need of before you ask: nay he knows your
wants not only better then you are able to express them, but better then you
are able to understand them: for first you do not know all the things you stand
in need of; but God all our wants, and therefore it is in the plural number
(...).

2. Diverse things you think you stand in need of, which you do not, etc. You
think riches is needful for you, but God knows poverty to be needful.

3. It is a great comfort to us that God knows what we stand in need of: For,
1. It would be exceeding hurtful to us, for us to have all things that we pray
for. And, 2. No less damageable to have no more then we pray for; for God does
give us above all we are able to ask or think, Isa. 64.4.

4. It shows us what should be the limits of our prayers, viz. things needful,
and not to satisfy our pride and luxury, for such things are superfluous.

Verse. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye. etc.
After this manner, etc.] Luke says, When ye pray, Say, Matthew, After this
manner: therefore, 1. It is lawful to pray the very words, but not necessary,
it may be used as a form, it must be used as a rule.

First, That we are not bound to use the very words, when we pray, it is
manifest,

1. Because we do not read of any of the Apostles who used the very words of
the Lords prayer in their prayers mentioned in the Acts of the Apostles and
Epistles.

2. Because Luke and Matthew differ; yet it is a rule of prayer in many
respects:

1. In respect of the person to whom we pray, which is to God, neither to
Saints nor Angels, nor other creatures.

2. In respect of the things we pray for, for we ought not to pray for any
thing which is not expressly or virtually included in the Lords prayer.

3. For the order of our prayers, we must pray first for things spiritual, and
then temporal.

4. For the manner of our prayers, we must pray fervently, faithfully, etc.

5. In respect of the end, which must be the glory of God, as the Doxology
shows.

6. In respect of persons for whom, viz. for all, for it is not said, Give me,
but us, etc.

The Prayer it self is divided into three parts:

1. Introduction, Our Father, etc.

2. Petitions, which are divided into supplications, Hallowed be thy Name, etc.
and deprecations, Forgive us, etc.

3. The Conclusion or Doxology, For thine is the Kingdom, etc.

In the Introduction.

1. There is the Person prayed to, viz. God.

2. The relation he has to us, Our Father.

3. The place where he in a more especial manner is present, viz. Heaven.

That we are to pray to none but God, is apparent:

1. Because none else knows our wants, Isa. 63.16.

2. None can know our prayers:

1. Because at the same time there are an hundred thousand praying.

2. Because he that knows our prayers must know our hearts, because it is the
heart that prays and not the tongue, otherwise, though the desires were never
so fervent, if the words were not so significant, the prayers would be less
regarded.

3. Because none else can grant our prayers.

4. Because there are none so willing: for he is our Father, the Saints but our
brethren: 2. The Parent loves his children better then they one the other.

The LORDS PRAYER.

Our Father which art in heaven: Hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our dasly bread.
And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory, for ever, Amen.

THe prayer is divided into four parts:

1. The Preparatory part, or Introduction, Our Father which art in heaven.

2. The body of the Prayer, which is divided into two parts, Supplications,
which are four, and Deprecations.

3. The Doxology, For thine is the kingdom, etc. Or it may be brought, as
hereafter shall be showed, as a reason why we beg these things of God.

4. The Conclusion of all, viz. Amen; or if you will, the praying over the
whole prayer again in one word.

There are some small differences between our Translation and the Original.

The first is this, Oh Our Father, not Our Father.

The second, the word art is not in the Original.

The third, that which we translate Heaven, is Heavens in the plural number.

For the expository part there is little difficulty, I am only in this, that it
is said, that God is in heaven,

1. We must take heed that we do not understand it exclusively, as if God were
no where else, as in Job 22.15. that God walked in the circuits of the heaven
For God is as truly and as essentially in earth as in heaven; and Solomon
says, That the heaven of heavens is not able to contain him.

2. We must take heed of thinking that God is so in heaven as a place which
makes him happy, for if so, he should neither be infinitely nor eternally
happy, for heaven is not the happiness of God, but God the happiness of
heaven, the heaven of heavens. God is said to be in heaven,

1. In respect of manifestation, here we see him but darkly, there face to face.

2. In respect of union.

3. In respect of fruition all these shall be abundantly greater, for their own
faith shall be turned into vision, our hope into fruition, our love into union.

Or else this may be added, not only not as a limitation of Gods presence, but
to distinguish him from our earthly fathers; there are two words that
distinguish God from our natural fathers, 1. That he is in heaven. 2. The word
Our, since there is none that is the Father of all the elect, save one God. We
may consider these words either in themselves, or as a preface or introduction
to the prayer.

1. In themselves, the first truth therefore in the words is this, that God is
the Father of all his people. Now God does not take empty titles upon himself,
but fills up whatsoever relation he takes upon himself to the utmost, therefore
whatsoever the tenderest, lovingest parents in the world are to their children,
God is much more:

First, We have our beings under God from our parents, but we have our beings
more from God then from them.

1. Because we have it originally from God, but from them instrumentally.

2. We have our bodies from our parents, but our souls from God, Eccles. 12.7.
Heb. 12.10.

3. We have our being but our depraved being from our parents, but our
well-being from God. By generation we have it from our parenrt, by regeneration
from God.

4. Though we have our bodies in some sense from our parents, yet we have them
much more from God, for a mother knows not her child before it be born,
whether it be beautiful or deformed, knows not what parts it has, and what it
wants, but Psalm. 139. in his book are all our members written.

Secondly, Parents know their children, there are many Kings and Monarchs that
know not their servants, but none but knows their children. Can you go to any
mother that cannot tell you how many children she has, and their names? but God
knows his children far better then any parent, and to help our faith God does
use many rare expressions, and to signify what special notice he takes of his
children, Exodus 28. to write down their names is not so much as to engrave
them, and God thinks no matter good enough to engrave his peoples name in; the
preciousest stones in the world he must have for them to be engraven in; nay he
will have their names engraven twice, as you may see Exodus 28. and Aaron is not
to appear before him, but with the names of his people upon his heart; nay to
show that there is no precious stone or any thing under heaven that is good
enough to engrave his peoples names on, he engraves them in the palms of his
own hands, Isa. 49.16. that is the first thing God knows his people by name,
and that is a wonderful honor. 2. A wonderful comfort, Isa. 43.1. Exodus
33.12.

2. God knows the dispositions of his children, Psalm. 103.13.

3. He does more then any father, for he numbers the very hairs of their heads.
Mat. 10.30. Nay, as God knows his people, so he never forgets them, a father
may, nay a mother which is fullest of affections; nay a mother may forget her
sucking child, who as yet has not by any disobedience provoked her to forsake
him, for she is not only the nurse of it, but the mother of it, the son of her
womb. Nay a mother may forget though she has but one, the son of her womb,
Isa. 49.15. Nay all women may forget, for it is said, though they should, for a
woman to forget one child if she has many; but for all the women in the world
to forget their child whiles it sucks, though they have no more, is a kind of
an impossibility, yet it is more impossible for God to forget his people. Nay,
but God sets down the reasons also why he cannot forget his people, in verse.
16. Nay, there is none of his people can be so disguised by sin, but he knows
them, scarce any one would have taken David committing adultery and murder for
a child of God: and Peter denying and forswearing Christ; by the Parable of
the Prodigal this is made clear unto us, for it is said that the Father of the
Prodigal knew him afar off, though he must needs be exceedingly altered in so
long a time, and by his keeping Swine and being almost starved, and by his
strange apparel, yet his father knew him afar off, this is but to show us that
God knows his people in their greatest disguises of sin. We may take a child
of God for an hypocrite and an hypocrite for a child of God, but this is our
comfort, God knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

2. The care of God toward his children is far greater then that of Parents,
we read not only of one but of both the Parents forsaking their children,
Psalm. 27.10. and Ezekiel. 16. where is there a parent in the world that takes care
that his child loses not a hair without his knowledge? but concerning God it
is said, that he numbers the hairs of our heads, and it is brought in upon that
account, to show the special providence that God has of his people.

3. The word Father does not only show the love of God, but what kind of love
that he bears unto us, for the love of a parent differs and exceeds other loves
thus,

1. It is the freest love in the world, for though a child be never so great a
charge, yet a tender mother had rather work night and day then her child
should want, much less should die, though it be never so great a trouble when
the child is sick, so that it breaks her sleep, when her breasts are so sore
that the child sucks almost as much blood as milk. Nor is it beauty in the
child that makes her love him, for it is said, the mother forgets her pains as
soon as she knows a child is born into the world, before she knows whether it
be beautiful or deformed. Where is there a loving mother in the world that
will change her sickly and deformed child for the beautifullest and
healthfullest in the world. Nor is the mothers love caused by the childs love,
for she loves the child, and the child knows not how to love, nor what it is
to be beloved. The love of a friend to a friend, or a wise to her husband is
begun and continued by some or all these grounds, either by profit, pleasure,
beauty, love or all. That Gods love is such to us, so free, grounded upon
nothing in us, he has mercy, because he will have mercy, and loves us because
he loves us.

2. It is the lastingest love. Nothing can take it off, Luke 15. the Prodigal
son showed no love to his father, he could not endure to dwell with him nor
near him, but went into a far country, spent all amongst harlots, if he had
lost by trading it had been something; to be poor and wicked, nay but to be
impoverished by wickedness, etc. So for David's love to Absalom, Absalom had
done much one would think to take off the love of the tenderest father in the
world, he had murdered Amnon, and sought his fathers kingdom, and his life, and
had abused his fathers concubine before the Sun and all Israel, a fact of
that nature that it made him irreconcilable; one would think Achitophel was a
wise man, the wisest in that matter in the world, and he thought so, and
counsels to that purpose, that he might put him out of any hopes of
reconciliation, yet David forgets not his fatherly affections, and does as much
as he can to excuse Absalom, charges his Army to deal gently with the young man
Absalom, in which he does seem to say thus, Those his crimes must be imputed
much to his youth, he was a young man, and David also in another case shows,
the wonderful love of Parents to their children, that nothing can take it off:
the little child in 2 Samuel 12. being unlawfully begotten was a living monument
of David's sin and shame, yet when it was sick he prayed and fasted, etc. and
David was a man after Gods own heart, and nothing more then in his tender
affection to his children. A wife may cease to be a wife, she may justly upon
some occasion be divorced; a friend may cease to be a friend, nay we ought to
cease our friendship and familiarity with him, when he grows scandalous and
wicked, 1 Cor. 5. but a child can never cease to be a child: it is lastinger
also a part ante, one loves ones child as soon as it is born, but ones friend
a long after.

3. It is the greatest love, especially if we compare the love of Parents to
their children, and that of children to their Parents, that is, Parents love
their children far more then children their Parents. Now this is a wonderful
comfort for any one that loves God, and it is most comfort to them that love
God most, to think with themselves, Well, I love God much, but this is my
comfort, I am sure he loves me more, for God is and will be a conqueror over
all people; for as he conquers the wicked, if they are proud he is above them,
if they are subtle he goes beyond them, so he conquers his people also; his
excellencies are above their praises, his mercies beyond their thanks, and his
thoughts of love toward them, are as far above their thoughts of love
toward him, Isa. 55.8, 9. Psalm. 103.11. And as the word Father is a wonderful
comfort, so it is an engaging word, it engages us to several duties.

1. To honor God, which is so proper a duty to a child as a child, that God
says, If I am a Father, etc. and the second Commandment does not say, Thou
shall obey thy Father, but thou shall honor thy Father; not but that they
ought to obey them too, but because honor is the principle from which all
other of their actions should flow: but of that more in the first Petition.

2. Obedience, which must nor be slavish and mercenary, as if it were forced.
It is the voice of a slave to say, What must I do? The voice of a son to say,
What may I do to please my Father?

3. Imitation, Ephesians. 5.1. Imitation is so proper to children that a child
scarce does any thing which it sees not, and scarce sees any thing which it
does not.

4. Considence, upon this account our Savior bids us not to take thought what
we should eat, or what we should drink, or wherewithal we shall be clothed,
and he lays the stresse of all our confidence upon this very word Father, and
indeed this very word Father has more in it to support considence, then
promises have, and indeed a child does not so properly rely upon promises as
upon relation: if so be one should come to a child and ask him, why he is so
confident that his father will provide for him, and say to him, Did your father
ever promise you that he would never see you want? he might very well say,
whether my father promised me so or no, I cannot well tell, nor much regard,
this is my support, I know he is my father; So that the voice of a child,
saying, Father, give me such a thing, to plead work is like a servant, to plead
promises has too much of the stranger in it, for a stranger will trust an able
man if he has bonds and engagements; but to plead the name of Father is like a
child; for when does a child ever press his father, and bring witness that
he said that he would not let him starve? he thinks it enough to call him
father, and indeed in that word is vertually contained all promises that is for
the good of the child.

And as this relation engages us to ^hese and many other duties in reference
to God; so it obliges us to many duties in reference especially to the Saints:

1. It teaches us not to exalt our selves above our brethren: suppose we have a
little more wealth or honors then they, one is but like a golden letter which
makes a finer show, but signifies no more then another: so riches makes one
signify no more as to God, it is grace only that makes one truly useful.
Suppose there were two men of which one had ten thousand a year, and the other
ten thousand and a penny a year, were it not a vain thing for him that had the
overplus of a penny to magnify himself above, and despise the other, because of
that inconsiderable sum of addition: that penny a year carries a far greater
proportion to a thousand pound then all the riches in the world does to grace,
for a penny may be multiplied to reach and out go that sum, but by multiplying
riches never so much, you can never make them amount to be worth the least
spark of grace. Rich Abraham lays poor Lazarus in his bosom, Luke 16.23. for
as those that sat at meat did usually express their intimacy by laying those
whom they would show most love unto in their bosom, so, etc. for to make
Abraham's bosom as a place distinct from heaven from this place, as the Papists
do, is a gross vanity.

The second duty (from this, that God is our Father) toward the Saints, is
love, there should be no strife and dissension amongst them; this was the
argument that Abraham used to Lot, Joseph to his brethren, and Moses to the
Israelites that strove together.

2. From the words, Which art in heaven, considered in themselves, and not as
an introduction to the prayer, observe

1. The Dignity of the Saints, the Lord of heaven and earth is their Father.

2. That the Saints are strangers here on earth, for ubi pater ibipatria, and
indeed the world uses them as strangers. Nay, it uses God and Christ so, it
hated me says Christ, before it hated you. God and Saints are both strangers
upon earth, Psalm. 39.12. David does not say, that he is a stranger to God, but
a stranger with God.

3. It teaches the people of God, that they should not wonder at the carriage
of the world toward them; dogs will snarl and bark at strangers, but not at
those of the same family.

4. It shows us thus much, that if heaven be our country we must be making
homeward; as we are strangers, so we must be pilgrims too. If a poor child
should have been brought up as an outcast in a very mean way, and cast into
prison, and should after understand that some great Monarch was his father, and
should to assure him of his love and relation to him, send letters and rich
jewels, such as those that delivered them to him he knew was not able to
purchase, and should send him word that shortly he would send his Nobles for
him, and break the prison door; would he be sad when he heard that his father
would send for him and receive him, that the prison doors were breaking open
that he might come forth? God has told the Saints in his Word, that they are
his children, and has conveyed the rich jewels of his graces to them by the
hands of his Ministers, etc.

2. Consider the words as they are an introduction to prayer, then observe,

1. In general, that we ought not to be rash when we enter into the house of
God, but to use some preparation before we perform so holy a duty; for we are
like viols hung by, they must be tuned before they can make music, and though
we find our selves in tune and sit for worldly employments, yet we must have a
higher preparation or tuning for religious duties, to be tuned the plain way
will serve well enough for worldly employments, but we must be tuned like
David's harp, to fit us to sound out the praises of God. Indeed we should
perform temporal things with spiritual hearts, but there must be a more
spiritual frame and preparation of heart in holy duties; Christ superadded a
second blessing to the bread and wine, when he set them apart as sacramental
elements of the Lords Supper.

2. If you take these words as an introduction to prayer, observe,

1. That we ought to have high and good thoughts of God when we pray unto him,
or else we shall never perform the duty with that confidence and reverence that
we should do. Neither of these alone will serve to affect us with that
spiritual frame of heart as is required, and therefore the Heathens with all
their philosophical notions of the greatness of God, could not raise up their
hearts to a true confidence for those notions, did at best but amaze and
astonish them, it could not breed in them confidence; nay further we must not
only have an apprehension of the greatness and goodness of God in general,
and rest there, but we must get and endeavor to know our interest in God, for
gracious God is a word which signifies the goodness of God in general, but Our
Father signifies relation and interest.

3. Hence we learn, That we are not to pray to any but to God, not to Angels,
for God by the Apostle forbids us to worship them, Col. 2. and the Angels
themselves forbid us to worship them, Revel. 19.10. and 21.9. Nay the words are
spoke as it were in passion; for when a man is in passion and would have a
thing hastily done or left undone, his expressions are very abrupt and broken,
he is so earnest that he cannot stay whilst his tongue do speak so many words
as will signify what he would have, but by his pronunciation and gesture at
the same time signifies the rest of that which he is unwilling to stay from
signifying until his tongue can speak the whole: Nay, in passion the tongue
speaks otherwise then by words, viz. by pronunciation only, and the words in
the original are only (...), that is, see not in worshipping Angels we make God
angry, and Angels angry; and prayer is such an act of worship that adoratie
which signifies worship is properly praying too, nor may we pray to Saints, for
Elias wishes Elisha, that if he had any thing that he would have him to prevail
in with God for him, he bid him ask him before he went to heaven, for
afterward it was in vain to desire any thing from him, 2 Kings 2.9. by the
zeal of the Saints on earth we may guess at the zeal of the Saints in heaven.
If the Apostles were enraged as to their outward carriage seemingly as most to
madness when the Lystrians would have worshipped them, surely if the Saints
did but know of the abominable Idolatry that is committed toward them, it
would certainly, if it were possible, interrupt their very happiness.

4. From the word Our, we learn, That we must pray for others as well as for
our selves.

5. It is of great comfort, that wheresoever God has a people to call upon his
name, Every one of Gods children has a stock of prayers going for him, and
though thou can not pray for thy self, yet others pray for thee.

6. That God is in Heaven, it shows, That our thoughts should be heavenly in
the duty of prayer, though it is not necessary to lift up our eyes to heaven,
as our Savior did, John 17. for the Publican durst not lift up his eyes
thither, and yet was accepted.

Two things there are in this and all prayers:

1. What are the things we desire. And

2. What are the things we are engaged to do, for every prayer is an engagement
to do what in us lies to obtain the things we prayed for.

1. We must take the words of this prayer in the largest sense, in respect of
the acception of the word, except some words of the prayer, or some other parts
of Scripture puts a limitation to them; and therefore Kingdom being differenced
from other Kingdoms, by the word thy, is not to be taken for the powers and
Kingdoms of this world, and therefore the word Our cannot be taken, as if we
prayed for every particular man in the world, since we only pray for those
whose Father God is or may be hereafter for ought we know, hence will it follow
that we must extend the Kingdom of heaven to the Kingdom of grace and glory.

2. They must be extended to the utmost sense of words, in respect of the
persons or things prayed for; so when we pray for the forgiveness of our
trespasses, we do intend both all kinds and all numbers of sins, as sins of
ignorance, infirmity, etc. and every particular sin of those kinds.

3. It is to be extended universally in respect of places; so when we desire
that Gods name should be hallowed, we do not desire that it should be hallowed
in this or that place, but in the whole world.

4. In respect of time, it is to be extended to all time, but that time, which
is not compatible with the nature of prayer, viz. the time past, or that which
is not compatible with the nature of the thing we prayed for, as if we take thy
Kingdom come for the day of judgment, it is not proper to say that we should
pray that should come now and again a thousand years hence.

5. In respect of degrees in all those Petitions to which there is no
limitation given. When we desire that Gods name should be hallowed, we desire
that it should be hallowed to the utmost, and so that his will should be done,
and that our trespasses should be fully forgiven.

6. If there be several ways that the Petition may be accomplished, we include
them all, as the name of God may be hallowed in our thoughts, words, lives.

7. In every Petition we pray for all the means that are conducible for the
obtaining of that thing included in that Petition.

8. We do pray for the preventing if absent, or removing if present all that
may hinder the mercy we pray for, in whole or in part.

9. In the four first Petitions are included Deprecations, and in the
Deprecations are included the contrary Petitions. When we pray for holiness
vertually, we pray against sin, as in the affirmative Commandments the negative
are included, in the negative the affirmative.

10. Though all things that we are to pray for may be reduced to some of these
Petitions, yet many things may be reduced to more then one, but more
immediately to one, and more remotely in other respects to other Petitions.

11. That in every Petition is vertually included. 1. Our want of the thing we
pray for. 2. Our necessity of having of it. 3. Our acknowledgement of our
inability to obtain the thing we pray for, or to avoid the evil we pray
against, without Gods special assistance and mercy.

2. Every Petition includes an engagement to use the means, and to avoid and
remove all impediments that might hinder us from obtaining the thing we prayed
for.

Hallowed be thy Name] 1. By the name of God is meant his Titles, Attributes,
Ordinances.

2. To hallow or sanctify is a very high expression: it is more then praise or
honor, for these we may give to men, we must honor our Parents. It is more
then wonder and admiration, for we may wonder at things that are evil, as
Christ did at the unbelief and hardness of heart of the Jews. To sanctify or
hallow the name of God is the highest expression that can be; what we account
sacred we may not put to any common use, but for things that we account never
so excellent, if not sacred, we may use in the meanest offices, as we may cut
glass with a diamond.

2. Though we sell a diamond of never so great value for a farthing, it may be
folly, it is not profaneness for Esau to have sold his birthright if it had
consisted only in temporals, and had had no spiritual privileges annexed to
it.

We are to sanctify God in our thoughts, words and deeds.

In our thoughts we sanctify God two ways:

1. Deus est super omne verbum, and super omne filentium omnem scientiam, and
omnem admiratione, omnem amorem and omnem extasin, super omne quod est, and
super omne quod non est, super omne quod potest esse, and super omne quod non
potest esse.
Thus, raise thy thoughts as high as possibly as thou can, and when thy
thoughts are highest, purest, holiest, that thou can possibly frame, then
know that God is infinitely more above them then the heavens are above the
earth, and know that thou do not considerably honor God in thy thoughts till
all the actings of thy understanding be lost in admirings; nor do thou
considerably honor God by the actings of thy love, till they be lost in
extacies and ravishments of spirit, and both understanding and will yield
themselves up, as overwhelmed and conquered by the glorious excellencies of
God, for God is not only above our words, but above our silence, not only above
our understanding, but admiration: But take heed that in the actings of your
understanding you do not offer to make a thought of the essence of God, for we
cannot know him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Joh. 2.18. Exodus 33.20.

2. You must take heed of under pretense of honoring God in one Attribute to
dishonor him in another; the high thoughts that you have of his excellencies
must not lessen the thoughts that you have of his goodness, knowing that the
Majesty of God does not put bounds to his goodness; be sure that his goodness
is as incomprehensible as any of the rest of his Attributes.

Secondly, Thou honor God in thy thoughts when there is such an holy dread
of the Majesty, presence and holiness of God, that thy thoughts are kept in
one, so that thou dare no more think an impure thought, then do an impure
action in the open street.

2. In respect of words, thou do hallow the name of God,

1. In respect of thy words themselves.

2. In respect of thy pronunciation also, when both thy words and pronunciation
are such as are suitable to those high, good and holy thoughts thou have or
ought to have of God, and fit to raise the same thoughts in others; when
thou speak of God, speak with as much reverence and feeling, as if thou
spokest to God, and when thou speak to God, let the awe and dread of his
Majesty be as much upon thy spirit as thou verily believe would be if God
immediately spoke to thee from heaven.

3. By thy life and conversation thou do hallow the name of God, when thou
do live sutably to the truths, promises, mercies, and the rest of the
attributes of God; so that it may be said of thee, that thou art a living
Bible, as Paul said of the Corinthians, You are the epistle of Christ not writ
with ink, but with the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.3.

2. From the order of the Petition, observe, The glory of God being the first
and chiefest thing that we are to desire, it follows,

1. That the glory of God is to be preferred before all things, even our own,
and the salvation of all men, etc. For certainly if any thing were to be
preferred above it, it ought to be desired before it.

2. Because God has made all things for his own glory, Pro. 6.16. Now the
means are servants to the end, and the Servant is not above his master.

3. God has taken away all that glory, happiness and excellencies which he
had bestowed upon the fallen angels, because they dishonored him. Now if their
excellencies were better then the glory of God, God should take more for his
glory, then it is worth.

2. From the order observe, That we ought to desire all other things, not only
lesser, but in reference to the glory of God.

3. That since the glory of God is better then all the world, it is a greater
sin to rob God of his glory, then if it were possible to rob the whole world:
so much for the order, for the Petition it self,

1. We do tacitly acknowledge that we are not able sufficiently to glorify
God: for first by reason of our ignorance we cannot tell what are the best
means, and by reason of our impotence we cannot put in execution those means we
do know: we know that the way to glorify God, is to have the Gospel of Christ
preached in power and purity thorowout the whole world. 3. By reason of our
wickedness we will not use the means that we can, but are very prone to
dishonor God.

2. Not only not we, but not all the creatures in heaven and earth are able
sufficiently to glorify God. So that not only David, Psalm. 148. and 150, etc.
but even the Angels, Revel. 5. call for help. Nay, even Christ himself as man
finds it too hard a task sufficiently to glorify his Father, John 12.28.

2. We desire in this Petition, that God would bestow upon us all means
whatsoever, whether outward or inward, temporal or spiritual, whereby we and
others are made able and willing to glorify him, as that he would enlighten
our understanding, affect our hearts by manifesting himself and his truths in
his works, Word, Ordinances, etc. and that he would do this at all times and in
all places, and that he would prevent or remove all things that might either in
whole or in part hinder his glory, whether it be ignorance, atheism, idolatry,
superstition, etc. and that he would enable and incline us and others to the
utmost to glorify his name in our thoughts, affections, words and deeds.

Verse. 10. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
Thy kingdom come.] 1. Three things are presupposed.

1. That every man by nature is under the dominion of sin and Satan.

2. That it is not in the power of any creature, or of all to govern the world,
or to cause the kingdom of grace to come, where it is not, or increase where it
is, or to be the cause of the coming of the kingdom of glory^.

Secondly, The kingdom of God is threefold. The kingdom,

1. Of power and providence, whereby he rules over all creatures, even
reprobates, senseless and irrational creatures, yea even devils themselves.

2. The kingdom of grace, whereby he rules in the hearts of his people here in
this world.

3. The kingdom of glory is the reigning of his people with him after the
dissolution of soul from body, and at the reunition.

Thirdly, In the Petition, the things we pray for, are

1. That the Gospel might be propagated through the world, and by consequence
that the Jews may be called, and the fullness of the Gentiles may be brought in,
and that the kingdom of grace may be set up in the hearts of men uncoverted,
and that it may be established and increased where it is.

2. That he would hasten the coming of his kingdom of glory, and our reigning
with him for ever.

Now the means for this end.

First, The removing of those things that hinder, and therefore we desire,

1. The destroying of the kingdom of sin and Satan.

2. The downfall of Antichrist, and the frustrating of the power and plots of
all other enemies of the Church of God.

Secondly, The positive means are,

1. Outward, as

1. That the Church may be furnished with all Gospel-officers and Ordinances,
and they furnished with gifts, and both purged from corruption, and
countenanced and maintained by the civil Magistrate.

2. That the Ordinances may be purely dispensed.

2. The positive inward means, is

The powerful and effectual cooperation of his Spirit with the outward means.

Lastly, That God would be pleased so to exercise his kingdom of power in the
world, as may best conduce to these ends.

Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven.] Three things are presupposed.

1. We are unable of our selves to do the will of God, although we desire it,
for whosoever prays this Petition right, does certainly desire to do the will
of God, but finding a disability in himself, he desires God to enable him.

2. There is none save only God that can enable us to do it.

3. We are prone to rebel against the will of God, and to do the will of the
flesh, the world, and of the devil.

4. We are not only willing to do the will of God our selves, but also that God
and men should do it.

Secondly, There are three things in the Petition.

1. What we desire, that his will may be done. 2. Who are to do this will, men
on earth. 3. How it is to be done, As it is done in heaven.
The will of God is twofold: 1. Secret. 2. Revealed: here it must be meant of
this latter.


1. Because we cannot know the secret will.

2. Because otherwise we cannot do the will of God on earth, as the Angels do
in heaven for they do it knowingly.

3. Because the secret will of God, even reprobates and devils are and shall be
subject to, for who has resisted his will?

As to his revealed will we pray,

1. For active obedience to his commands.

2. For passive obedience, or patience in bearing afflictions.

Now the difference is,

1. Our active obeddience must be without even a conditional desire that the
commands of God should be repealed. But as to our passive obedience we may
desire the contrary to what God reveals (viz.) with submission still to his
secret will.

2. All afflictions are even grievous to the people of God themselves, Heb. 12.
but his commands are not grievous, 2 John 5.

3. We are not only to obey but love the commands of God, and that not only
because they are Gods commands, but because they are pure, Psalm. 1^9. Thy
commands are pure, therefore does my soul love them, but we cannot love them.

4. We are to hearken what the Lord will say unto us, and to desire an increase
of our knowledge of Gods commands, but we are not to desire a fuller
experimental knowledge of afflictions, as to desire sufferings, etc. Affliction
is not the object of our desire, as the commands are, we desire to know more of
Gods commands, that we may do them, not more afflictions to suffer them.

Corollaries.

1. It is not contrary to this Petition to pray against affliction before they
come, although God send us word that we will punish us with such an affliction,
as we see in Hezekiah, who prayed and prevailed, and in David, whose prayer, 2
Samuel 12. though not literally granted, yet was he heard.

2. Neither is it against this command to pray for removal of afflictions
already fallen upon us.

3. Although we are to bear afflictions patiently when we see the hand of God
plainly in it, yet are we not to run into afflictions, for so it is not thy
will, but my will be done.

Who are to do this will? It is men on earth; we only pray for those that live
on earth, and therefore neither for Angels, souls departed, nor devils, for some
are below, others above our prayers.

3. How it is to be done.

Quest. Why is it not said, Thy will be done on earth which is done in heaven,
but as it is done in heaven?

Answ. 1. Because there is some will of God that we here pray for obedience to,
which is not in heaven (viz.) passive obedience.

2. To show, that in our obedience we are not only to look at the quid but
quomodo of our obedience; for although we do all that is in Gods heart, as in
Jehu, yet being it is not in a right manner, God may visit such obedience not
only on us, but on our posterities.

Quest. 2. Wherein we are to imitate the Angels in our obedience?

Answ. 1. As the Angels, so we are to obey knowingly; it is said of the Angels,
they are full of eyes behind and before, to show the clearness of their
knowledge; our Savior blames the Samaritans for worshipping they knew not
what, and Paul the Athenians for worshipping the true God, yet without
knowledge.

2. As the Angels, so we are to obey God cheerfully, Psalm. 19. Revel. 15.3.

3. As the Angels, so we must obey speedily.

4. Constantly, without intermission or remission.

5. Universally.

6. Obedientially, because it is his will.

7. Humbly.

8. Faithfully without partiality.

9. Diligently.

10. For right ends, 1 Cor. 10.31. Rev. 4.11. Dan. 9.1. Isa. 6.2. Revel. 15.6.

Verse. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.
Give us this day, etc.] 1. From the order, we learn

1. That the glory of God, the kingdom of heaven, and spiritual things should
be first in our desires, for this is the last of supplications.

2. We should not so often pray for temporals as spirituals, for here are three
Petitions of spirituals, and but one for temporals.

Our desires for spiritual things should be without limitation, but not so for
temporals.

Give] This shows, That

1. All things are Gods, for we desire not any man to give us that which is our
own or none of his.

2. It is give, not lend, to show that we cannot restore to God any thing after
to recompense God.

3. Give, not pay, to show that we do not deserve any thing, because of any
precedent act.

4. Give, not sell, to show that as for present we have nothing worth, even our
very bread.

Corollary.

All is of free grace, if every crumme of temporal bread must be freely given
us, then surely that bread which came down from heaven, if we cannot merit one
crum of bread much less heaven.

5. The richest men in the world are but beggars.

6. That we have forfeited our right to all the outward blessings of this life,
and deserve to be wholly deprived of them by God, and to have them cursed to us
in the use of them.

7. Neither the creatures of themselves are able to sustain us, nor we to
merit, or by our own industry to procure them, but prone to get and use them
unlawfully.

Vs] This shows,

1. The great liberality of God who feeds every man.

2. It is an expression of Charity.

3. It is a direction of Charity.

1. Because it shows how the poorest may be charitable, by praying for, if they
cannot give bread to others.

2. Because by this means we may exercise charity to Christians never so far
off.

3. By this way we are charitable even to the richest as well as the poorest.

4. Though we do give bread, yet we must give our prayers too.

4. This is likewise an engagement to charity.

1. Because we being beggars our selves we may justly suppose a denial of Gods
hands when we ask bread of him, if we deny others when they ask bread of us.

2. Because we pray that God would give others bread, now Jam. 2.16. for us to
pray for them and not relieve them, is condemned by the Apostle, for we must
use the means that God affords for the obtaining of whatsoever we pray for.

3. Because they pray for us, and it may be we enjoy our bread by their
prayers, good reason therefore, etc.

5. This word us is a great motive to confidence, for us is us children, and
much confidence there is in this relation, for the very dogs feed of the crumbs,
much more children.

This day] It is not for a month or a year, but this day, which shows,

1. The uncertainty of our life, for we pray not for the bread of to morrow,
but to day.

2. Our continual dependence upon God.

3. It shows the goodness of God.

1. Who first because he would have us constantly come to him, give us for no
longer but from day to day.

2. Who notwithstanding every day we forfeit our food, yet will not deny to
hear us and grant us supplies still.

4. That by having daily experience of his love we may go to him with more
confidence.

5. Hereby we may see this prayer is to be used as a rule for prayer, not a
form in the same words, for Luke differs here.

Quest. 2. How can a rich man pray for that bread which he has already?

Answ. Although he has it in possession, yet he has it not as to propriety,
he is but as a steward whose those things are not which he has, because he
has them in possession, but he must ask his Lord leave.

2. Although he possesses them, yet not as a blessing till they be sanctified
by the Word and prayer.

3. Although he have enough, yet many there are that want, and he must pray for
others.

4. Although he have enough for the morning, yet he may not have enough for the
whole day, how common to be rich at the morning and poor at night!

5. Though he has abundance, yet he knows not how to use it; as if an
Apothecaries whole shop be given to a man ignorant both of the virtue of each
drug, both of the medicine and the dose, would be little available; nay he
might even take poison in stead of a right potion; so in a rich man, he knows
not what is convenient, and hence Hagar desires not only food, but food
convenient for him.

Quest. 2. Whether is it not a crossing of this Petition, for parents to lay up
for their children, since we do not only provide for the day, etc?

Answ. No, because

1. By this day (as some interpret) may be meant the day of our lives, and so
those that are part of us.

2. Although we lay up for the future, yet so as every day to desire a blessing
upon it, and depend upon God as much as if we had nothing at all. We provide
not abstracting it from the blessing of God.

Our.

Quest. 1. How we may call Bread, Our Bread, since we are but stewards at the
best, and have nothing of our own?

1. In respect of God they are not ours.

2. In respect of his Church they are not ours.

3. In respect of the poor they are not ours.

4. In respect of our children they are not ours.

Answ. Bread may be called Ours,

1. In respect of God they are ours, by way of possession and use.

2. In respect of men, they are ours by way of propriety.

3. In respect of the poor, although they have Jus charitativum, yet not Jus
civils, so that though we ought to give bread, yet they may not take it.

I say although we ought to give them yet ought not they to take without gift,
if otherwise, they are thieves in taking without gift, as we are thieves in
keeping what we ought to give.

Yea wicked men have a civil right to that which they possess legally,
although the righteous are heirs of all things, yet they are not to take
possession till they come at age.

2. By this word Our we intend to desire so much of God, that may satisfy our
necessity, that we may have a sail fit for our vessel.

3. It is a Petition of justice: we desire a blessing,

1. From God, upon those things only that are our own.

2. We desire that every one may enjoy what is their own, and so pray away all
injustice.

And consequently we pray away all that we unjustly possess. And consequently
we ought to restore what we unjustly possess, for we ought to use all lawful
means for the obtaining of what we pray for.
Daily] The word in the original is (...), for the diverse exposition and
acception of which, vid. Grit. Sac. and Grot. in loc.

The reasons why (...) should rather be taken for substantial then daily bread.

1. Because otherwise there would seem to be a Tautology in so short a prayer,
for by this day the same thing may seem to be signified.

2. Because this is very requisite to all temporal blessings, that they should
be profitable to the use for which they desire them.

3. That we may deprecate what the Prophet speaks, Hag. 1.6. That may be
another reason.

Take the word in this sense, and then in it these things are included. We pray

1. That our food may be wholesome, and that our stomachs etc. might be blessed
as to concoction, etc. so that the food may be turned into nourishment, and so
for all other accommodation of our life may be enabled to bring us those
comforts for which we use them.

2. This shows an engagement to a moderate use of the creature, since by an
immoderate and intemperate use of the creature we make them unprofitable,
contrary to which here we pray.

Bread.

Quest. 1. Why bread, and not quails, not dainties?

Answ. It shows how moderate our desires should be as to earthly things.

1. We should not exceed a medium, as to the desiring of outward things, as to
the quantity of them, for it must be but daily bread.

2. We must be moderate as to our requests for the quality; it is daily bread,
not dainties but bread, yea and the coursest too, for it is household bread.
Panis nomine in oratione Dominiea principaliter and praecipue significatur
ordinarius ille cibus corpori nostro alendo destinatus, and quidem non ille
tenerior a similagine, sed Crassior and Domesticus. Scult. Evang. l. 2. c. 33.

Quest. 2. Why bread, and not drink and clothing?

Answ. Although both these be included in bread, yet this is mentioned, because
it is the most necessary for life, one may live without raiment, but not
without food.

2. We do here acknowledge that all our industry and endeavors can do nothing
without the blessing of God upon them, for we take not so much pains, or bestow
so much cost in any thing that belongs to the body, as to obtain bread, for
here manuring, plowing and sowing, etc. and yet it is God that must give every
seed its own body, 1 Cor. 15. That wheat does not grow tares but wheat, is not
from the nature of the soil, no, nor grain, but the goodness of God.

3. It is a rule for charity.

1. When we give we must give that which is suitable to their wants who beg,
that is included in Our hread, when hungry then food, when thirsty then drink.

2. We must give them that ask meat which may nourish, not moldy bread, etc.

3. We must not think it enough that we give to day, and leave off when an
other day comes, but we must daily give as we daily pray.

4. We are not bound to give dainties, but to relieve the necessities of the
poor.

5. Those that have but bread and no superfluity, yet must give. Daily
laborers must give, Ephesians. 4.28.

Verse. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
And] From this conjunction pointing out the coherence, observe,

1. We are not to stand long in our prayers for desiring temporals, but to
pass from them to spirituals.

2. Although we enjoy many things in the world, yet wanting the pardon of
sin, there comes no solid and true comfort from them.

3. In all temporal blessings we are not so much to look to the hand as the
face of God, to see whether he gives us what we receive with a frown or no, for
here pardon of sin is annexed to bread, to make it a blessing.

4. In the receipt of temporal blessing we should consider the sins we are
guilty of in abusing them formerly, for having asked bread, presently we ask
pardon.

5. When we have abundance of outward enjoyments, we are apt to commit and
forget sins.

6. In all our prayers our first and last should be for spirituals, for the
desires of temporals, are but by way of parenthesis, as it were.

Forgive us.

Quest. 1. How can our sins be said to be forgiven, when Christ has fully
satisfied for them?

Answ. They are forgiven as to us, but not as to Christ; nay it is more free
grace then if he had pardoned without satisfaction, for as in this case, There
was a Law that he that committed adultery. should have both his eyes put out,
the Kings son he was found guilty, whereupon he was condemned to lose both
his eyes, but the King his father from love and pity, caused one of his own,
and one of his sons eyes to be put out, which showed far more free grace to
his son, then if he had pardoned him totally without punishment, especially
if he had put out both his own eyes for a common Subject to have saved his
eyes, and yet justice was more satisfied by this fact of the Kings, then if the
other had incurred the total penalty.

Qu. 2. How shall a justified person pray for the pardon of sin, since God is
reconciled already?

Answ. There is a double reconciliation:

1. Of God as an enemy.

2. Of God as an angry Father.

When once God is reconciled, he is an enemy no more; but after reconciliation,
although God may be a Father, yet he may be an angry Father. We need
reconciliation but once as to enmity, but often as to anger.

2. Though a justified person has title to pardon, even whilst he is sinning,
by virtue of Christ's merits and intercession, yet he has not actual possession
of the benefits of pardon before he sues it out by confession and repentance,
and this Petition is the suing out of our pardon, not the meriting of it.

Qu. 3. How can a justified person pray for pardon of one and the same sin any
more then once?

Sol. In such cases he rather prays for sense of pardon then pardon it self.

Quest. 4. How can one that is assured of pardon, pray for pardon?

Sol, 1. He ought to pray this Petition, because that every moment there are
some new sins that he must pray to obtain pardon of.

2. Hereby he desires the continuance or increase of his assurance.

Forgive] There are these things included in the word:

1. That none can forgive but God.

2. That we can never satisfy for sin on our part, there is no hope of
payment, but still we must cry for forgiveness.

Vs] This shows,

1. For whom we do pray, viz.

1. For the pardon of others sins as well as our own.

1. Out of love to them.

2. Out of respect to our selves, because many other men's sins are ours diverse
ways, and therefore even in justice we are bound to pray for the pardon of
them, because they are in some sense our own, and we have been the cause of
their guilt by example, etc.

2. It shows for whom we do not pray (viz.) not for the sins of the devils, but
of men.

Our] 1. It is a free acknowledgement of our guilt, not laying it upon others
but our selves. True repentance is no excusing repentance.

2. This shows that the best of men are debtors, the richest owe much unto the
creditour.

Debts] Our sins are called debts,

1. Because by them we rob God of his honor, etc.

The civil Law divides all obligations in obligationes ex delicto and ex
contractu.

Now we breaking his Laws, and Covenants, and Promises, we come indebted both
ways. Our debts, not debt, as forgive shows the greatness of our sins, that
we are not able to satisfy for them, so debts the number of them.
As the greatest sin ought not to discourage us from asking, so nor ought we to
have such low thoughts of the lest sin, as to think it not worth the whiles to
beg pardon for it, for we are here to pray for all sins pardon.

As we forgive our debtors] As here, is a note of similitude not of equality.

Quest. 1. Whether are we bound to forgive every one that owes us any thing?

Answ. We are certainly bound to pardon them if they owe us as we owe God, that
is, so as they are not able to pay.

2. We are to forgive all men their injuries, not their debts.

Quest. 2. Whether we are bound to forgive men that do not ^sk pardon out of
scorn or malice?

Answ. We ought, Mat. 5.44.

Again, it is not said, either so many, or so great debts, but indefinitely,
therefore neither the number of wrongs, nor the greatness of injuries can
excuse a man for revenge.

In the Petition we have these engagements to forgive others,

1. Because we pray that God would forgive them, as in this case, suppose a man
that ows me one farthing, and owes another a thousand pound, how think you
should I be real if I went to the other to beg pardon for this debtor for a
thousand pound, when as I in the mean time was suing him for my farthing?

2. Because we desire God who is so much above, to forgive us, Matthew. 18. for
how can we expect that God should forgive us a thousand talents, and we will
not forgive our brother a thousand pence?

3. Or else we lie to God in our prayers, for, As we forgive, implies that we
do forgive.

This last clause may be for comfort, to pray for pardon with comfort when we
are convinced that we forgive others.

Verse. 13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil: For
thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever. Amen.
And] Hence from coherence observe,

1. That no sooner is pardon of sin obtained, but Satan will be busy in
temptation.

2. We are not only to desire pardoning but purging mercies.

3. Since these two Petitions are joined by And, we cannot sincerely hope for,
and beg pardon of sin, that are negligent in avoiding temptations.

Lead us not, etc.] Quest. How can we pray not to be lead into temptation,
since none have been without them, and they are likewise very profitable for us?

Sol, The word rather signifies, Do not bring us into temptation, but the
meaning is, that God should not lead us into temptation, and there leave us.

2. The other clause clears this, because we desire not so much to be delivered
from evil temptations, as from the evil of temptation.

Object. We should not run into temptations, and by the same reason that we
should not tempt others, for we pray for others as well as our selves.

2. None can tempt us without Gods leave, and if he hinder we shall be free
from temptations.

But deliver us from evil] Here we desire, 1. That we may be supported in
temptation. 2. Delivered at all times from temptation. 3. Or if conquered to
restore us after temptation.


Moreover observe from the general.

1. That God may justly give power to Satan to tempt us.

For thine is the kingdom, etc.] 1. We may lawfully enforce our desires by
arguments.

2. Those must not be drawn from our selves.

3. We are to join praises with prayer.

4. We are not to pray to any one but to such as we may add this clause to the
end of the prayer, and by consequence not to Angels nor Saints.

5. The Latin copies had none of this clause, wherefore the Latin Fathers
make no mention of it in their Comments, but it is in all Greek copies, and in
the Syriack.

6. The meaning of the words may be this; Thou may lawfully, having the
authority to grant us, for thine is the kingdom, and thou can, for thine is
the power, and thou shall have the glory of all thy mercies.

Amen] 1. Amen, the word is an Hebrew word, and signifies truth, wherefore God
is called Amen, Isa. 65.16. and Christ Rev. 3.14.

2. It is the same in all languages, to show that as it signifies in the
beginning of any sentence assent, and in the end consent, so all are to give
assent to the truths, and to give consent to the Petitions in the word of God.

3. It shows that we ought to ask in faith.

4. It is the duty of all that are in the Congregation to say Amen to the
Minister, which appears plainly by these two places, 1 Cor. 14.16. Numb. 5.22.
Deuteronomy. 27.15. It is reported of the Arians in the primitive Church, that their
Amen was like a clap of thunder.

5. We are to say Amen in three respects concerning this prayer:

1. To all the Petitions, not to any one only. Diverse will ^ay Amen to the
fourth and fifth Petition, though to none of the former. Diverse desire
forgiveness of their sins, and to be delivered from evil, but care not to be
delivered from temptations.

2. We must as well say Amen to the pattern annexed to the third, and to the
condition annexed to the fourth, as to the Petitions themselves; for though we
cannot do Gods will as they do it in heaven, we must desire to do it, and mourn
as well for our failings in the manner as the matter of our obedience; and as
willingly forgive injuries as we are that God should forgive us our sins.

3. We must say Amen as well to the Doxology as to the Petitions.

6. Our Hallelujahs should be as loud and frequent as our Hosannahs, in our
praises as our prayers, it shows that we ought to pray with the understanding.

Verse. 14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you.
For if ye forgive, etc.] It is not said, if ye will forgive, but if ye do
forgive, lest men should flatter themselves with an intention to forgive
hereafter. Chrysostom. observe.

2. (...), the Greek signifies generally lighter offenses, of purpose to meet
with that disposition that generally is in revengefull people, who use to
aggravate injuries that are done them, and make mountains of mole-hils; Christ
calls them but mistakes, and though the same word be used in the next verse
concerning our offenses against God, it makes the sense the fuller, for it is
as if I should say, You must not expect that God will forgive you the least
offenses if you do not forgive your brethren; but if you will say it signifies
greater sins also, Ephesians. 2.5.

Then since the word signifies both, it shows, that we are not to forgive
lesser but greater injuries.

3. It is not said, if you forgive not your brethren, but men, we are not only
to forgive them that are Saints and brethren, but all men good and bad.

4. It is not said, if you forgive men their trespass but trespasses, to show,
be they never so many, as seventy times seven, Mat. 18. though there a certain
number be put for an uncertain, and such a number, it will somewhat pose a man
to know what the product is, so that if a man's heart were not corrupt, it were
easier to forgive then to cast that number up.

5. Our forgiving men their trespasses is not the cause, but the necessary
antecedent to our assurance of Gods forgiving us ours. Or

1. A certainsign, as our love to the brethren is not the cause of our passing
from death to life, 1 John 3.14. of Gods forgiving us, is a motive of our
forgiving others, Ephesians. 4. ult.

6. See that God will not be behind hand with us, for if we forgive never so
freely, he will as freely forgive; if we forgive many injuries he will forgive
us as many. Nay we may not amiss put the emphasis upon those two words Theirs
and Yours, for certainly both in number and greatness Ours exceed, men's
offenses are an hundred, ours ten thousand, theirs as pence, ours as talents.

7. Heavenly Father may be added here, to show the aggravations of our sins,
all our sins are against a Father, and a heavenly Father, the greatness and
goodness of God does much aggravate our sins; it is as if Christ should say,
He that injures you, it may be you are not his father, or tam pater nemo, not
such a father, or certainly not his heavenly Father, his injuries are not
against so much greatness, nor so much love as thine.

8. Or else Father is added to teach us our duty by that relation which we have
to God, for children ought to be like their father, and the Apostle argues from
this relation to the duty, Ephesians. 5.1. from our relation to God, and verse. 2.
from our relation to Christ, for if we forgive not we are neither like a father
nor yet like our brother.

Verse. 15. But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trepasses.
But if ye forgive not, etc.] 1. It is worth enquiry why Christ does return to
speak to the fifth Petition rather then any of the rest.

1. It may be to discover unto us the backwardness of our hearts to this duty,
and indeed our Saviors earnestness in pressing of it appears many ways:

1. In that our Savior in so short a form of prayer as this is, should put in
a clause concerning this matter.

2. That he should put this clause in such a way, that whenever we pray our
prayers should be so far from doing of us good, that in stead of being
supplications or deprecations, they should be imprecations if we neglect this
duty.

3. That after Christ has done this prayer he should speak to this clause
rather then any other.

4. That he should add such a grievous punishment for neglecting of this duty
which virtually includes all other punishment, for if our sins be not forgiven
we are liable to all evil temporal, spiritual and eternal. So that this is such
a sin that does not only bring upon us some peculiar punishment, as other
sins do, but the punishment of all our other sins.

3. See the wonderful goodness of God even to the very wicked in this
particular, or else why should God be so earnest that his children should not
revenge in private injuries on his enemies, no not so much as to hate them?

4. Christ does not speak any thing to the clause before the prayer be fully
ended, to show, that we ought during the time of our prayer to keep close to
the work, and not to give way to deviating and distracting thoughts.

5. A revengefull Christian,

1. Because diametrally opposite to the express and frequent command of Christ.

2. All his prayers are but virtually imprecations upon himself.

3. All the guilt and punishment of his sins lies to the utmost upon him.

Verse. 16. Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad
countenance, for they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to
fast: Verily I say unto you, they have their reward.
Moreover, when ye fast be not as the hypocrites] First, It shows, that fasting
is a duty in the time of the Gospel; For

1. It is not If you fast, but when ye fast, Christ supposes that Christians
should fast.

2. It is not said, Do not what hypocrites do, but Be not as the hypocrites,
not blaming their fasting but their manner of fasting.

3. Christ setting down the manner of performing this duty, shows, that it is a
duty not a sin, for Christ would never take so much care to direct us how to
sin, since that which in it self is a sin can never be well done.

4. Generally hypocrites do not use to do works publicly for acceptance of
men, which materially are sin. Many other arguments may be produced to prove
it, but that I intend not in these Annotations for the future to use any
argument, but what are in the Word.

Secondly, Our Savior here speaks of private not public fasts, as before he
did of private and closet prayer; for as for public prayers, we may love to
pray in the Synagogues, to join with the Assemblies of the Saints, for it is
lawful for us to wear sackcloth, nay it is unlawful for us to come with jewels
and ornaments in public fasts, nor indeed at all times in private fasts, as we
see in David and Ahab, whom God did commend as to that particular.

Thirdly, He does not say, Do not what hypocrites do, but be not what
hypocrites are, we may, we must do many things which they do; but though our
outward actions should be, yet our inward frame of hearts should never be the
same with theirs, for profane men generally err in the matter, but hypocrites
in the manner of performance.

Fourthly, He may not be said to fast, that is forced to it for want of food,
for the Apostle uses one word to express hunger, and another voluntary fast,
2 Cor. 11.27. (...) is quasi (...), such fasting may be an affliction, but it
is no religious duty.

Fifthly, The word translated sad countenance signifies fiercely, ghostly, as
that of a wild beast, as of a Bear robbed of her whelps, but our translation
is very full, for it is not always taken in a bad sense, for it is used of the
Apostles, Luke 20.17.

All that was sad in the Pharisees was their countenance, whereas in private
fasts before men, all that should be sad in us is our hearts.

Sixthly, The word translated Disfiguring their faces, signifies to corrupt,
macerate, to destroy the very countenance, as if they were not the same men,
whether it was by their often fasting they grew lean and meager, or else by
dirting of their faces, the word is used, verse. 19. and as rust takes away the
beauty of those metals that are rusty; and as moths do eat holes in garments,
so their countenance by often fasting, and not washing, lost their color and
figure.

Verse. 17. But thou when thou fastest, anoint thy head and wash thy face.

Verse. 18. That thou appear not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is
in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.


But thou when thou fastest, etc.] 1. That is in thy private fast, vid. v. 16.

2. Nor is it to be taken as if we were bound to wash our face and anoint our
head, but the scope of our Savior is, that none by our countenance or
otherwise, should know when we fast.

Verse. 19. Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
does corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.
Lay not up treasure] First, Our Savior having said, Chap. 5.20. That our
righteousness must exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, i.e.
the doctrinals of the Scribes, and practicals of the Pharisees, and having
showed the errors of the Scribes in the 5th Chapter, he comes in the 6th
Chapter to show the wickedness of the Pharisees, and how our righteousness
must exceed theirs.

Three special sins he reproves, of which the Pharisees were eminently guilty,
Hypocrisy, Covetousness and Pride, which they showed in censuring of others;
in this verse and the rest of this Chapter, our Savior comes to speak against
covetousness, which consists in two things; Either in desire of abundance, or
in the anxious desire of things necessary; against the first he speaks in this
verse. The word translated Lay up, signifies not only to lay up, but to gather
together: and in the word there are two things:

1. The prohibition, then

2. The reason: and one may paraphrase the words thus: Do not gather abundance
and lay them up for your selves, for though you lay them up for your selves,
you are likely to have the least share of them, for either the moth, the rust,
or the thief will destroy that which you have taken so much care to gather up.

Secondly, The reason why [for your selves] is put in, may be,

1. Because that generally those that have none but themselves to provide for
are most covetous, Eccles. 4.8. where it is not said children but child, yet
not so much as one to provide for.

2. Because that a covetous man of all men himself enjoyes least of his riches,
for a covetous man wants all things, but most of all what he has, Proverbs
13.7. and 28.8. What thou layest up while thou live, thou enjoyest not when
thou die, so that what you lay up you lay it not up for your self.

3. Because it is lawful to lay up for our children, but not for our selves, 2
Cor. 12.14. yet even then also we must not (...), Lay up abundance: That saying
of the Father in this case is worth the observation, Si multos habueris filios,
sed Christus unus, si nullo^ unicus; the way to make thy children poor, is, not
to make the poor thy children.

4. Because it is impossible by laying treasure on earth to make that part of
thy self which is not thy self rich, viz. thy soul; for the soul of Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, are called Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

Thirdly, Treasures, to show, that those which hoard up wealth are immoderate
in their desires and layings up; for a little money may not be called a
treasure, and it is here, Lay not for your self a treasure, but treasures.

Fourthly, The corruptiblenesse of earthly treasures is manifested in this,
that there is no kind of creature, whether animate or inanimate, but has
power to destroy them. Nay, some of them may be destroyed by that creature
which of all is easiest destroyed, viz. a moth, which is but a flying worm, nay
of all the weakest, for tinea dum tangitur frangitur; nay they are destroyed
from themselves, from that corruption which themselves breed, as the garment
does the moth, and metals rust.

Fifthly, The judgment of God is seen in this, That he has appointed means
for those riches that are laid up to be destroyed; for the moth nor the rust do
consume those things we use; nay the rust does not only destroy thy riches, but
brings destruction on thee, Jam. 1.3.

Sixthly, There are many ways to destroy our treasures, sometimes our estates
do moulder away insensibly and by degrees, so to be as a moth is taken Hos.
5.12. sometimes by open violence, and all at once, when thieves break through
and steal.

Seventhly, This shows the extraordinary care that rich men have to secure
them, for breaking through shows that they are put up in strongholds; indeed
some kind of riches the moth and rust cannot destroy, as gold and precious
stones, but those cannot be secured from thieves; nor can all the strength thou
can make keep off their violence, for it is not said a thief breaks through,
but thieves, if thou can secure them against private robberies, thou can
not against public invasion, and indeed a covetous man little differs from a
thief himself; thieves steal from the rich and covetous men from the poor, thou
art a thief in keeping from the poor, and he is a thief in taking from the rich.

Verse. 20. But lay up for your selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.
But lay up for your selves] It answers an objection, What must we do with the
overplus of our estates? Diverse there are if they spend all their incomes and
gains must either live luxuriously, as the rich man, Luke 16.19. or else lay
up, etc. our Savior does as it were say, You need not do either; for God has
provided a place larger and safer for you to lay up your abundance in.

2. No other treasures are laid up for our selves, but what we bestow upon the
poor, those we lay up in heaven we enjoy, those in earth we lose.

3. A covetous worldly man lays up abundance for his children, but if we ask
him what he has laid up for himself, he must answer Nothing.

4. It teaches us to be liberal to the poor; a man is not said to have laid up
a treasure that has laid up some few shillings; so if thy gifts to the poor be
but few and small thou have not laid up a treasure.

5. The reason why we should lay up our treasure in heaven is, because that
that is a safe place, no thieves come to heaven to steal it, etc.

6. It shows, that the riches of the Saints are unseen, they are treasures laid
up, and all such are kept in secret.

7. That as covetous men do not only lay up of their abundance, but also
deprive themselves of most necessaries to increase their treasures; so it
shows, that we should not out of our abundance give to the poor, but out of our
wants, out of our mouth, and from our backs to relieve them that are in extreme
wants.

Verse. 21. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
For where your treasure is] This is the second reason why we should lay up our
treasure in heaven. For

1. As in verse. 19. our treasures will be lost if we lay them on earth; so
here, our hearts will be like our treasures, if they will be heavenly our
hearts will be heavenly, as Aramundus Visabunda says, a man has seven
daughters, his daughters in respect of their parents are equal, but if one man
is a Husbandman, another a Merchant, another a Knight, another a Lord, etc.
according to their husbands so are they dignified; so the hearts of men all
equal by nature, but their love is such as the thing on which they bestow it,
earthly if to the earth, heavenly if to heaven.

2. We may evidently know from this what that is which we love most, our fears,
desires, hopes, joys, love, are placed in our summum bonum.

Verse. 22. The light of the body is the eye: If therefore thine eye be single,
thy whole body shall be full of light.

Verse. 23. But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of darkness.
If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!


The light of the body is the eye, etc.] This is a third reason or confirmation
of the second, why we should not lay up our treasures, etc. and it stands thus,
As the eye is to the body, so the aim and intention of the soul is to the
faculties thereof: for as if the dark eye lets not in light, the whole body is
dark, though the Sun shine never so bright upon it; so if that which we
mainly look after, and aim at, viz. the end and scope of our actions, be
earthly, be our actions never so glorious they are earthly also; for prayer,
etc. though in it self it be spiritual it becomes carnal if the end be carnal.

Here our Savior shows the great mischief that comes from the former, viz.
that our religious actions become carnal, and it stands thus, If so be that thy
most religious and holiest performances, which in respect of the matter of the
duty are good, it they become carnal because you do them for a carnal end; what
are your other actions, which in respect of matter, manner, end, and all are
carnal? And how great must thy darkness needs be if thy light be darkness?
For if the prayers and sacrifices of the wicked be an abomination, what are
their blasphemies?

Verse. 24. No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one and
love the other, or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon.
No man can serve two masters, etc.] Our Savior puts this to answer a tacit
Objection of such as will say, That the laying up treasures on earth hinders
not the laying up treasures in heaven, and that they can serve both God and
Mammon, which our Savior utterly denies in this verse, and it is impossible
for one to have two last ends at once, and there be many truths and reasons
included in this verse,

1. That whatsoever is our last end is our master, for both we and all our
actions are subservient to that which we make our summum bonum, and a covetous
man is not so properly said to have his riches, as his riches him, as one that
has a violent fever, though he be said to have a fever, yet properly the
fever has him.

2. That we may love other things subordinately and relatively to God; for it
is not having but serving riches that undoeth us.

3. That one cannot both love and hate God, and so of despising and cleaving,
and by consequence whosoever loves not God, and trust not in God, hates God and
despises God.

4. Let us do never so many actions which God has commanded, if we do them not
out of love it is no obedience.

Verse. 25. Therefore, I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what you
shall eat, or what ye shall drink, nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on:
Is not the life more then meat? and the body then raiment?
Take no thought for your] 1. Now our Savior shows many reasons why we should
not be over-carefull for things necessary, as before concerning superfluities.

Those things that are necessary to keep body and soul together, and so
reduces the necessaries of this life to food and raiment.

2. All care is not here forbid; but distracting care, as the word signifies
(...).

We may have a diligent care of providing for our families, but we must not
have a care of diffidence, while we provide we must not deny or doubt of Gods
providence.

3. The words are not to be taken, as if we should not take thought as gluttons
do what curious dish they may eat of, but it is the want of a poor man that
knows not what to do, not as if out of abundance of choice, knew not what to
take, but out of extreme want knew not how to get any thing to eat or drink.

4. The word Mirimua does include a reason to dehort us from this care; for as
we should take care that our bodies be not torn in pieces, so should we take
care that our mind be not distracted, for a sedated and quiet mind is a
greater comfort then all those things that our care can procure us, aeque miser
qui omnia concupiscit, ac qui nihil possidet.

The first reason why we should not be solicitous about such things, but rely
upon Gods goodness, stand thus, He that will give a jewel will not deny a
farthing, he gave you life without your caring or desiring of it, and framed
your body without your care; will he not much more give you that which is
less? Or thus, Since your life is such a jewel, and your body such a stately
structure, sure he will not let the one fall to the ground, nor the other fall
to decay for want of repairs, and lose a thing of so great value for want of
that which is of less value, as food and raiment are in comparison of life.

This shows the folly of gluttons, who live that they may eat, as if food were
better then life, as also the pride of some others who use fashions that are
hurtful for their health, as if the raiment were better then the body.

The consideration of former mercies is a strong argument to trust God for the
future, 1 Samuel 17.

Verse. 26. Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly Father feeds them, Are ye not much
better then they?
Behold the fowls of the air, etc.] Arg. 2. Which will appear when we have
explained the terms.

1. Birds are named, because of all creatures they seem to take the less care
for their food, many of them spend their whole life, as it were in singing, you
might be as cheerful as they, and be fed. Or

2. Fowls are named because of the multitude of them, there being vast flocks
of them.

3. Because most of them do eat more proportionable to their bulk then beasts
do, and that is the reason as some say that Luke particularizes in the Raven,
and Psalm. 147.9. and as others, because the old Ravens leave their young in
their nest before they are able to provide for themselves, but a worm breeding
out of their dung creeps to their mouth and feeds them: Or as others, that they
thrust their young out of their nest before they are able to fly up and down,
and so disinabled to provide for themselves, and yet God feeds them.

4. Why that no particular is here named, and named in Luke, to show that God
does not provide for particular fowls, but for all in general.

5. It is not said for fowls, but for fowls of the air, to show, that for
diverse fowls that are domestic we provide for them, but who provides for the
fowls of the air?

6. They use no means to provide for themselves as you do, for they neither
sow, etc.

7. He is not their father, but your father.

8. He is a heavenly father, and if he that is heavenly will provide for fowls,
much more for you that are heavenly in respect of your souls.

9. Here is another argument, viz. that Gods people are better: if we feed our
dogs, will we let our children starve? that in the former: if we take care of
our earthen vessels, will we not take care of our jewels? Every one of you are
better then all they, as one jewel is more worth then the common vessels of our
house.

They have a double excellency over them, they are better, and they are much
better then carrion brought to the nest.

10. Your Father feeds them, that with them he may feed you, so that
terminatively you are the object of his providence to them; so that when you
see them fed you may see God providing them for you.

Verse. 27. Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature?
Which of you by taking thought] Here our Savior adds another Argument, viz.
the unprofitablenesse of our care, as if he should say, As you shall be fed and
nourished without you care, so with your care alone you shall not be nourished;
and it is put by way of question to make the affirmation stronger, and it is
put more emphatically there; as if he should say, Not only every one of you,
but never an one, let his skill be never so great: and there is something more,
for it is as if Christ should say thus, You cannot with all your care get food,
but suppose you could get that, yet when you have it you cannot make your food
nourishing, and make you grow, you must trust God for that when all is done,
you cannot make your stomach digest and turn your food into nourishment, you
cannot only not give your self your whole stature, but you cannot give your
self one cubit.

Verse. 28. And why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the Lilies of the
field, how they grow: they toil not, neither do they spin.

Verse. 29. And yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not
arrayed like one of these.


And why take ye thought for raiment? etc.] 1. Now our Savior comes to the
second thing that is needful for this life, which is raiment, and he puts it
here by way of Question, not positively, as for food, to show, that of the two
there are fewer Why's to be given for taking thought for raiment then for food,
it being less necessary for life, not only because that in diverse Countries a
man may live without raiment always, and in all Countries far longer then we
can without food; and if we are well clothed our garments will last us longer
far, so that there is not cause of renewing of them, as there is of our eating
and drinking.

2. Our Savior does confirm this from Gods providence, which does far more
abound in respect of raiment, both in respect of the excellency of the raiment,
as also in respect of the meannesse of those things which he clothes, for the
grass is not of so much excellency as the fowls of the air, and yet their
raiments are far more excellent in comparison then the food of the fowls, for
it is said, That Solomon in all his glory was not arrared as they.

3. The Lilies, it may be meant specially the Tulip, it being one kind of
Lily, and of all flowers the flower of the greatest beauty and variety and of
the least use, for it is good neither for food nor physic, and therefore it is
said, it is cast into the oven, but especially concerning his color and beauty
is spoken here, for Violets, nor Roses, nor any other flowers differ comparably
from one another in color as this does, and here is added The Lilies of the
field, not of our garden, concerning which we seem to do something for them by
our care, But who cloatheth the Lilies of the fields? Further, they do nothing
toward their clothing, They neither spin nor toil, etc. you do both, yet God
clothes them; nay he clothes them better then any man was clothed. Kings
generally are the richest arrayed, and the magnisicentest of Kings, as we read
of, was Solomon, yet Solomon was not only not ordinarily clothed as well as
they, nay in his interview, nay in the entertainment of Ambassadors, nay in
all his glory he was not arrayed as one of these.

4. But you will say, How is this true? was not all the robes of Solomon so
excellent as the clothing of the Lilies? In this the Lilies did exceed his
clothing, their colors were natural, his artificial, and so it exceeds as
much as a native beauty does paint; a beautiful woman is far more beautiful
then the most excellent of painting; but indeed this cannot easily be made out,
for our Savior bids us consider the Lilies, and there need a great deal of
consideration to discover it; and from it we may learn thus much, In the
meanest of Gods creatures God has shown so much wisdom, that it needs the
wisest man's study to fathour its depth. Nay sometimes God does put abundance of
honor upon those things which seem most mean, in so much that Galen which was
little better then an Atheist, in his consideration of the structure of the
head, and other parts of the body, is silent, as to the knowledgement of God,
yet when he comes to consider the foot stands admiring, and confesses a Deity.

5. You may see how that from every creature of God, if we would but consider
it, we might gain abundance of spiritual advantage; no Chemist in the world can
make such a rare extract of the creature as a Christian, they make medicines
for fevers, gouts, etc. from the creature, but they cannot draw from them an
antidote against infidelity, but a Christian can.

6. It shows, that we should not always go gorgeously arrayed, every day
alike, this was the sin of the glutton, Luke 16.19. but Solomon was not
always in all his glory.

7. Since our Savior sets down our labor, spinning, etc. as a help to our
faith, it tacitly approves of our using means: and though there be some
gallants that neither toil nor spin, and yet Solomon in all his glory is not
arrayed like one of them, yet we are to use some lawful calling, though not to
supply our temporal wants, yet that we may be more able to relieve others, and
to preserve our selves from the temptations of idleness.

8. Solomon is named for two reasons, 1. Because he was the richest. 2. The
wisest: his riches enabled him for the matter of his garments, and his wisdom
for the artifice of them, to have the exactest in the world.

Verse. 30. Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, which to day is,
and to morrow is cast into the oven, Shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of
little faith!

Verse. 31. Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall
we drink? or wherewith shall we be clothed?


Wherefore if God so clothe the grass of the field, etc.] Now our Savior
comes to apply what he said, and it stands thus:

First, Concerning the means of the creature over which the providence of God
thus watches.

1. It is called grass.

2. In respect of its continuance, it lasts but as it were for a day.

3. It is of little use, for it is cast into the oven; then we must consider,
though it be thus mean, how much God does for it, 1. He clothes it. 2. He so
clothes it.

And the Argument stands thus:

1. In respect of you, You are far better then the Lilies. And

2. There is an emphasis in clothe, it is not said, so clothe, partly to
strengthen our faith, viz. If he will give such excellent clothing to Lilies,
will he give no clothing at all to you? and partly to abate our desires of
these earthly things, there is no promise made of rich clothing, only of
clothing.

Secondly, Our Savior does not say, that you have but little faith, O ye of
little faith! but does say that it is so little that it would make man stand
admired.

Verse. 32. (For after all these things do the Gentiles seek) for your heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these things.
For after all these things do the Gentiles seck] Learn

First, That the ends and objects of a Christians thoughts ought to be higher
and more sublime then that of Heathens. Nay even in those things that we do
common with the Heathen, though our actions be the same, yet our ends should be
higher.

Secondly, The Heathen do not sin in seeking for these things, but first in
seeking them so earnestly, as (...) added to the verb denotes.

Thirdly, In considering the providence of God over these earthly things.

Fourthly, It is to be noted, that after our Savior has again repeated the
thing from which he dehorted them against, yet he proceeds to further motives
and reasons; it shows thus much, how hardly we are drawn from these distrustful
cares, we need to have line upon line and motive.

This is another reason why we should not take care for these things, and it
stands thus, If so be that God knows all your wants, and is able to relieve
them, and willing to supply them; you need not take such care, but he knows
that we stand in need of these things, and is willing to relieve us, because he
is our Father, and is able, because he is in heaven.

2. It is enough for a Father that is able to know the wants of his children,
and certainly God knows our wants more then we our selves do.

5. And Gods being our Father differs from our earthly being our father, for we
were the children of the devil, he adopted us to be his sons, and he that will
give us so great a blessing as sonship when we were enemies, much more will he
give us so small a blessing as food when we are sons.

Verse. 33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all
these things shall be added unto you.
But seek ye first] 1. That the word But shows, that we cannot do both, and
indeed our cares for worldly things does both much hinder us from, and
distracts us in holy duties.

2. The word changed from (...) to (...) shows, that that we should not seek
heaven anxiously and distractedly, but our very endeavors after grace should
be like the running of a swift deep river, not like tumultuous waters of a
raging sea; our endeavors should be as fervent as may be, but without
distraction; like as they say of the heavens, though their motions be exceeding
swift, non strepitum edunt sed harmoniam.

3. Not only in this sense our endeavors should be first of heaven, viz. That
our first thoughts when we awake should be heavenly, as also the first part of
our lives should be dedicated to God, Eccles. 12.5. but especially by first is
meant we should chiefly and most earnestly seek after those things.

4. The word in the original added, that they shall be cast into the bargain,
as when one buys wares of any great value, they cast in things of small price
into the bargain. Hence we learn,

1. How inconsiderable these things are in comparison of grace and glory, as
giving grace and heaven are not to be compared with Gods giving us Christ, Romans
8.32.

2. We may learn; that whosoever that seeks for the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, shall surely have it, for how can these be added to them if
they be not given at all?

5. We must as well seek for grace as glory; he that seeks for the kingdom of
heaven without righteousness, has no promise that he shall have either.

6. We must not expect superfluities and abundance, it is not all things, but
all these things.

Verse. 34. Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take
thought for the things of it self; sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
Take no thought then] 1. That as long as we live in this life there is not a
day but we shall meet with evil enough temporal or spiritual.

2. It is great imprudence to multiply our own evils which we do by grieving
for affliction past, and by projecting evils to come, and happily those evils
that will never come, when to morrow comes let it care for it self, happily thou
may not live while to morrow.

3. Voluntary outward mortifications, as those of Capuchins, Hermites, etc. are
abundantly, it is like one that should put more Aloes or Wormwood, or such
bitter ingredients into a potion then the Physician required, and then boast of
or complain that he has drunk a very bitter potion.

4. God does not delight to afflict his people, for he puts no more evil in any
day then what is sufficient, he gives afflictions by measure, Isa. 27.8. but
mercies without measure, but heaped up and running over; but how much it runs
over is not known.

MATTHEW VII.
Verse. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged.

Verse. 2. For with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you again.


JUdge not, etc.] Now our Savior comes to the third fault whereof the
Pharisees were exceeding guilty in their practice, viz. their censoriousnesse
in judging all besides themselves, which is abundantly set down by those that
write of them, that when they came from market or any public meeting they
would wash themselves, etc. because they supposed they touched wicked men,
which the Prophet touches when he says, Stand off, I am more holy then thou.

Public judicature is not here condemned, but private censuring, and that in
two things,

1. In the judging others to be guilty for doing those things which the Law
forbad not, when they judge men to be guilty for omitting their traditions and
ceremonies, which were but inventions of men, which Paul hints, Romans 14.3. So
also Jam. 4.11. the meaning is this, He that judges and condemns his brother
for doing that which the Law forbids not, condemns the Law of imperfection,
as if the Law had not forbidden all that was to be forbidden or commanded. To
break the Law may be an act of impotency, but to judge an act of arrogance, so
that judging here and condemning may thus differ, he may be said sinfully to
judge another who condemns him for doing that which though he did he sins
not in doing, and he may be said to condemn another sinfully whom the Law
condemns for doing, but he has no just grounds to conclude that he did,
especially rash and uncharitable judging of persons is here condemned.

2. All censuring is forbid:

1. In respect of the matter, when we judge things that are doubtful to be
certain, that are small sins to be great sins, that are indifferent to be
sinful, or those that are sinful to lay greater aggravation upon them then in
hypothesi belongs to them, to judge the intentions of others.

Reason 2. The reason is, that howsoever we carry our selves to others, we must
expect the same measure from men, for so Luke, though we may not exclude Gods
judging of us also.

But you will say, Is it measured to every one according as they measured to
others, and those that are most holy should be least censured.

Resp. 1. This has a tendency to it, if wicked men will judge so, they go
diametrically opposite to that which the carriage of the righteous enclines
them unto.

2. Certainly as to God, this will come to pass that God will deal to every
man according as he deals to his brother.

2. In respect of the grounds and rice from whence it proceeds, viz. to Judge
others out of envy, malice, pride, or from vanity of wit, when we are subject
to show our wit in discovering others faults.

3. In respect of the manner, when we do it rashly and uncharitably,
uncompassionately, not out of hatred of the sin, but of the person, and not
that others or he may be edified, but that he may be disgraced.

4. In respect of the end, when it is done not to edification, as brotherly
reproof. Or secondly, to make our selves seem more holy by the detecting the
faults of others, as if we were virtuous, because others are vicious.

Verse. 3. And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brothers eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye?
Why beholdest] 1. We must consider why we behold the more in our brothers eye,
and we shall find a great deal of rottenness at the core; the Why of
hypocrites words and works are abominable, while their outside is specious;
hence that of Luke 16.15. Is it the love of thy brother? Not so, for then thou
would more hate it in thy self then in others, for the love of our selves is
to be the rule of our love of our neighbors. Is it the honor of God that
troubles thee? then thou would be more offended at a beam then a more. Is it
the filthiness of sin? he that hates uncleanness hates it most the nearer it
is to him, he hates uncleanness in his house, more in his chamber, more in his
face, but thou art more troubled at a more in thy brothers eye, then a beam in
thy own.

Behold] 1. There is no such reason thou should wonder that there is a mote
in thy brothers eye. When thou see a wicked man, thou have more reason to
wonder that thou art not worse, then that he is so bad.

2. Thou should rather weep for, and cover thy brothers faults, then stand
gazing on them.

The word does as well signify to take heed to or care of, as to behold, Col.
4.17. the word is (...), and so it may very well signify here, for presently
after our Savior brings him in as taking care to pull out the mote out of thy
brothers eye.

Mote] 1. Hypocrites are curious in discerning the faults of others, though one
has but one fault, it is not motes but more, and that a very small one, for it
is not a beam but more.

2. They behold the faults, never look upon the graces of their brethren, a
mote can scarce cover a considerable part of the eye, but they look upon the
mote and not the eye.

3. They look upon others sins but not upon their repentance, a mote in the eye
will make it weep, but hypocrites take no notice of the tears but of the sin;
thou see thy brothers sin, but thou know nor his sighs and groans, nor
tears in secret. David defiles his bed, but he washes his couch with his tears.

Brothers cye] 1. He being thy brother thy brotherly love should cover a
multitude of sin.

It may be the reason why our Savior names the word Brother, is because that
those that generally speak ill of others, use to pretend a great deal of
friendship and love, and then add their slander, which like an Antidote given
with poison makes it more deadly, and upon the point it shows, that those that
do so, do but dissemble, for if thou love him as a brother, how come thou
to discover one small fault when thou coverst a multitude of sins?

But considerest not] 1. This is one mischief of prying into another fault,
that one discerns not his own; he that is so much abroad must needs be a
stranger at home.

Beam] 1. Thou art worse then he, because his is but a more, thine a beam.

2. He may consider his mote, and bewail it, for ought thou know, but thou
considerest not thy beam.

One special use we should make of another vice, to look unto our selves of
greater, it may be he sins not against so much means, so many mercies, so that
that very sin which is but a mote in his eye, is a beam in thine.

But you will say, Has every one that spies a mote in his brothers eye a beam
in his own?

Yes, since it is a beam to epsy a mote in his brothers eye.

Verse. 4. Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of
thine eye, and behold, a beam is in thine own eye?
How will thou say, etc.] How, that is, How can thou have the face to say
when thou art guilty of the same sin, as Plato said to one who brought him a
book, Nulli est contradicendum, he returned it immediately, saying, Cur
contradicentibus contradicis? Nay when thou art not only guilty of the same,
but far greater, which thy brother cannot choose but see, since one that has
a mote in his eye can see better then one that has a beam.

2. Our Savior gives such an instance that is most proper to this purpose, for
he that is deaf, or almost sick of any other disease, is not so much disenabled
to cure another that is sick of the same, as one that has an infirmity in his
sight, for against him there lies a double objection;

1. If you can cure me, why can you not your self?

2. The eye is a tender place, and needs therefore in all actual operation
concerning it to have a Ladies hand, but a Hawks eye.

Verse 5. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then
shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
Thou hypocrite, etc.] 1. No greater sign of hypocrisy then to be curious in
the espying out of others faults, and yet at the same time to indulge greater
in our selves.

2. No Minister in the world so fit to reprove and cure others, as those that
have experience of the ways of cure of their own sins, and he is fitter,

1. Because he has more skill.

2. He will do it with more tenderness and compassion.

3. We must not despise the counsel and preaching of those that have been
wicked, if now they are converted. We must not say that such an one had a beam
in his own eye, but bless God that it is now out.

Verse. 6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your
pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again
and rent you.
Give not that which is holy, etc.] (...), First, Some make this verse to have
coherence with the former, and then it is a direction of our Savior to us,
whom we are not to reprove, viz. that are not sensible of reproofs, but like
swines, say one, what they will they regard not, such are voluptuous sots.

2. Such as are outrageous under reproofs, and fly in the face of the
reprover, and then it runs parallel with that of Solomon, Reprove not a
scorner. Then the observations are,

1. That reproof is an holy thing, and being so should be for nothing but those
things which are against God.

2. That reproof is to be prized of as a jewel, so David counts it a precious
balm, Prove. 25.12.

3. That whosoever snarls at or is unsenselesse of reproof, puts himself out of
the way of conversion. Pearls are called yours, either because that they belong
not to wicked, or because none else do prize them save Gods people.

Secondly, Others do expound it of all Ordinances, especially of the Sacrament,
then observe

1. Then they are highly to be prized as pearls, and to be prepared for as holy
things.

2. Then this is the same with that advice of our Savior, If you come into a
City and they receive you not, depart out of that City, and shake off the dust;
such sordid and sottish men are meant here by swine; or else that of our
Savior, When they persecute you in one City flee to another; such are dogs
which snarl and fly in the face of such as preach to them the Gospel.

Thirdly, Some will have it meant of those that after conversion return with
the dog to the vomit, and with the sow to the wallowing in the mire, and such
are to be excommunicated, and not suffered to be partakers of holy things.

Verse. 7. Ask, and it shall be given you, seek, and ye shall find: knock, and
it shall be opened unto you.
Ask] To have this cohere with the former is somewhat difficult, but the
coherence may be in a double respect:

1. As an answer to the quarrellings of wicked men, for if at the last day they
shall quarrel with God, and say, You never gave us grace to serve you, but it
may be answered, Why do you complain that you have not that which you never
desired? if you had asked you might have had.

2. Or it may answer an Objection of Gods people, for if they shall say, we
know not how to reprove, or whom to reprove, then this is the same with that of
James Chapter 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask, etc.

3. It may be a Directory to the Apostles, as before our Savior, it is shown
whom they should not preach to; so here, he shows whom they should, whosoever
desires earnestly and importunately, you should not refuse to preach to such
people.

4. But if you consider the words in themselves, the Observations are,

1. That whatsoever mercy we have, it is of free grace, we do nothing for it: a
beggar cannot say that he deserves alms because he asks.

2. See the wonderful goodness of God that will no way be angry for our
importunity; if a beggar knocks and will take no answer, we are angry with him,
but God is most pleased with those that knock oftnest and loudest.

3. God does not therefore not grant our prayers at first, because he will not
give us the things we desire: if when we ask God seems to go away, it is
because we should seek him, and if when we shout and cry he shuts out our
prayers, it is that we should knock, Lam. 9.8.

Christ does diverse times give without asking, and is found of them that seek
him not, etc. but we have no promise to rely upon in such a case.

Verse. 8. For every one that asks, receives: and he that seekth, finds:
and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.
For every one that asks, etc.] Our Savior takes off an objection, if any
one should plead their own unworthiness, he says that Every one, and not some
that asks, receives: But you will say, How can that be true? Are there not
many of Gods people desire health and other temporal blessings, etc?

Our Saviour-answers this verse. 11.

2. It is not said that he shall receive, but does receive, partly because it
is a great gift of God to be able to pray for the Spirit. Or

3. Because he shall as surely receive, as if he had already received.

3. It shows thus much, That whosoever receives any blessing without asking is
a thief, and rather steals the blessing then receives it; receiving does imply
a giver.

4. That our Savior does add this chiefly to increase our confidence; for the
same thing is manifestly included in the former verse, yet because that our
infidelity needs promise upon promise, our Savior does rather indeed repeat
then add this verse to the former.

Verse. 9. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
give him a stone?

Verse. 10. Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent?


What man is there, etc.] 1. Our Savior proves a fortiori, that God will give
good things unto his children, and it stands thus, If you that are evil, that
are creatures, and so infinitely inferior to God, but that are wicked men, and
so inferior to man in his innocence; if you account it motive enough to know
the wants of your children, and what is good for them, much more, etc. there is
some natural good remains in all.

Secondly, Wicked men, Why is it not said, If your son ask bread, will you not
give it him? but in stead of that it is, Will you give him a stone? as if there
were no medium betwixt giving of bread, and giving a stone, etc. The reason may
be first, as if Christ should say, When they ask you bread, you will give it
them, but you will be sure not to give that which shall mischief them; if there
be any so unnatural amongst you, that when your son asks a fish, if he will
not give him a fish, surely he will not give him a scorpion: Now thus stands
the case between you and your heavenly Father, that if he should not give his
Spirit to them that ask him, they must needs have the evil spirit, for there is
no medium, whosoever has not the one must needs have the other.

Thirdly, In the redition of the simile, Christ does not say, How much more
shall be not give good things to his children, but to them that ask him, to
show that all that are frequent in that duty are his children.

Fourthly, It is not said, that God always gives the very thing we ask, for
sometimes it is not good for us, or not so good for us as that which he gives
us, 2 Cor. 12. for sometimes we ask a stone and he gives us bread, sometimes a
serpent, and he gives us a fish.

Fifthly, See the wonderful liberality of God, as

1. He gives freely, only for asking.

2. He gives that which is good.

3. He gives not only one good thing, but all good things; for it is not only
good thing but things, and it is not the least act of his wisdom and
goodness, not to give them except they be good.

Verse. 11. If ye then being evil, krow how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things
to them that ask him?

Verse. 12. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets.


Therefore whatsoever] Our Savior here concludes with that general Directory
concerning our carriage toward others, because that to set down every
particular would be endless.

2. This rule must admit of some limitations, viz. that if the thing be
unlawful that we would have others do to us, we must not do the same to them:
as for example, The woman that in time of famine would have and had her
neighbors child for food, she was not bound the next day to give her child
to her neighbor.

3. All which the Prophets did preach is not included in their rule, for the
Credenda are not included, but the Agenda, and they also concerning such
things, and concern the duties of the second Table.

Verse. 13. Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat.
Enter in at the strait, etc.] 1. Our life is compared to traveling, it is but
a journey either to heaven or hell, we are but viatores, therefore must not set
up a rest here.

2. There are but two ways and two ends of every man living, every one goes
either in the way to heaven, or in the way to hell, none can go neither way,
nor both ways.

3. No man that gives himself liberty to do whatsoever he desires, may imagine
that he goes in the way to heaven.

4. It is not enough for us to come and look in at the gate, and see, and
understand what God would have us to do, if we enter not in, and do that which
we understand of the mind of God.

5. This is a sufficient motive to persuade any one patiently to bear and to go
through all difficulties and straits, that the end of them is everlasting life,
1 Cor. 15. ult.

6. It shows that by nature we are not in the right way, for it is a way out of
the reach of nature.

Verse. 14. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it.
For strait] There are two reasons why we endeavor not to find the way to
heaven.

1. Because every one by nature loves carnal liberty, Psalm. 2.2.

2. Because there are so many that go in the ways of hell, evil example is a
dangerous and prevailing temptation.

3. That this notwithstanding is enough to deter us from the sinful pleasures
of the world and flesh, that their end is destruction, Isa. 50.11.

Verse. 15. Beware of false prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves.
Beware of false prophets] 1. For the adherence, it may stand thus: As I have
already warned you of profaneness and licentiousness, I showing that that
would lead you to destruction, so now lest you should be careless of the
matters of doctrine, for errors in judgment are as destructive as
profaneness.

2. As they are as destructive, so they are more likely to be fallen into, we
are more apt to be deceived by errors then profaneness, in many respects,

1. Because no one almost does justify and plead for profaneness, for
drunkards almost are come to that impudence as to tell you that you must be
drunk, but all heretics lay it on your conscience to believe their errors,
and they do not only preach it for a truth, but generally for a fundamental
truth.

2. Because of the subtilty of deceivers; profane persons are not comparably
so wise in their generations as heretics are.

3. Profaneness is generally more dangerous to infect those that scarely have
any shadow of religion in their life; but heresies mainly Gods people;
profaneness is amongst the Heathens, but heresies in the Church; therefore
that may be one reason why false prophets are called wolves, because their
drift is to destroy sheep.

4. There is no calling under heaven so excellent, but the devil has some of
his agents that profess it. We read of false prophets, false apostles, false
Christ's, and those that pretended to be gods that were not Gods.

5. Christ has set down many signs, some more and some less, openly to know
false prophets by,

1. Their subtilty, signified in this word beware. We need take great heed, or
else we shall be deceived.

2. Because generally they come to you of their own accord, not sent by God or
man.

3. In respect of their fair carriage and pretenses, They come in sheeps
clothing.

4. Their fair conversation comes not from an inward principle, it is but put
on as a garment, and they care not for holiness, they can part with it without
any trouble, as a man can put off his clothes without pain, a sheep-skin cannot
be taken off from a sheep without a great deal of pain, but from a wolf it may,
because they only put it on.

5. By their earnestness and insatiablenesse in spreading their errors, They
compass sea and land, this may be intimated in ravening.

Lastly, It is by their fruits.

Verse. 16. Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do men gather grapes of thorns
or figs of thistles?
By their fruits] 1. That there is none of Satan's instruments can learn so much
subtilty of him, but God gives his people wisdom enough to discover them that
they may be known.

2. The Question is, What is meant there by fruits? And how it differs from the
sheeps clothing?

Some make their sheeps clothing to be only their fair pretenses, as the
Papists say, when they go about to seduce: now it is pity such an one, of such
parts, should go to hell for want of knowledge, etc.

Others make them to be their fair carriage and pious conversation.

Some make their fruits to be their doctrine: but it is safest to take in both,
for though it be generally true to say, that those that come unto us before
they be sent, do generally preach errors, yet the full meaning of the Text may
be this, Let men come to you with never such fair pretenses, telling you how
much they love you, and what care they have of your souls, etc. yet you must
take heed that their fair words deceive you not, look to their doctrines not
their pretenses.

So for their conversations it may be you cannot know them, by one or two
observations, yet by much observation you may, for generally heretics are
wicked men, and errors end in profaneness.

3. Take heed of judging by blossoms, for then the thorn will be more glorious
that way then the vine.

4. You must not judge by one, but by their fruits, that is, by their constant
walkings.

1. It shows the difference between the conversation of the Saints and false
prophets; you may stick grapes to thorns, but thorns do not bring forth those
grapes, so their holiness proceeds not from any root from within.

2. It shows the noxious nature of false prophets, they are like thorns and
thistles.

3. You may see the excellency of true Prophets, they are like vines and
fig trees.

4. Generally these thorns and thistles, these heretics grow in the sluggards
fields, where Gods Ministers, his husbandmen do not plough and sow.

They may be compared to thorns, because they so easily get in, but with much
difficulty get out.

Verse. 17. Even so every good tree brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt
tree brings forth evil fruit.

Verse. 18. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt
tree bring forth good fruit.

Verse. 19. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire.

Verse. 20. Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.


Every good tree, etc.] 1. It is not enough for a Christian to have the leaves
of profession, and the blossoms of resolution, but must have the fruit of
holiness.

2. That no unregenerate man can do one action that is good; the word fruit is
in the singular: But you will say, Neither can any good man do any evil action,
that follows you will say. I answer, that in a good man there are two
principles and denominations being from the better part, we do not say that the
good man sins, as the Apostle says, Not I, but sin, but an unregenerate has
but one principle, and that the root of bitterness.

Some good fruit may be stuck upon him, but he does not bring them forth; so a
wicked man's hand may give alms, but not his heart.

Verse. 21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven.
Not every one that] One may pray often, and be so confident of our interest in
Christ, that one may not only profess to men, that Christ is a Lord, but tell
Christ himself that he is our Lord.

2. Our obedience to Gods will must be constant, for so the word in the present
tense imp^rteth.

3. It is not said, the things that my Father commands, but the will of my
Father, to show,

1. That many do those things that God commands, that yet notwithstanding do
not Gods will, but wonderfully displease him.

2, Or to show, that it is not enough to do what God commands, but we must do
it because he commands us.

4. Christ when he speaks of wicked men, he never calls God their Father, but
when he speaks to the Saints he seldom says, my Father, but your Father, or if
he says my Father, he adds yours also.

Verse. 22. Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied
in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many
wonderful works?
Many will say to me in that day, etc.] 1. Observe the multitude that shall
perish by presumption, despair kills his thousands, presumption its ten
thousands.

2. Consider how long presumption continues, one may die and not have
presumption removed; nay at the day of Judgment after sentence past it must
still continue, for these words may very well be supposed to be spoken after
Christ speaking his sentence, for so it did evidently appear, Mat. 25.44. they
dispute their innocence with Christ after the sentence given: It Is very strange
that all the terrors of the day of judgment cannot shake their confidence.

3. The wickedness of a Minister hinders not the efficacy of his
administrations.

The efficacy of Sacraments depends not upon the piety of Ministers.

A wicked man may cast out devils miraculously out of the body and out of
souls, and yet go to hell himself.

4. It is a dangerous thing to try our states by gifts of edification, one may
be chosen to Apostleship, and yet not chosen to salvation, Joh. 6.10. comp.
with 13.18.

5. One may have faith of miracles and not justifying faith, one may both heal
others in the name of Christ, and be healed in body himself by Christ, and yet
be a castaway, and by consequence believe Christ when he gives us power to do
such miracles, and experimentally find his word to be true, and yet that
experience of his truth in those things, may be without the believing of his
promises or obeying of his commands in other matters.

6. See the wonderful power and divinity of Christ, that not only be himself
cast out devils, but could authorize whom he pleased to do it.

Verse. 23. And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: Depart from
me, ye that work iniquity.
And then will I profess unto, etc.] 1. The word know signifies generally
amongst the Hebrews knowledge of approbation, Psalm. 1. ult. Romans 7.15. 1 Timothy
2.19.

2. It is one of the strongest places to prove perseverance, for those to whom
he shall say Depart, he says also, that he never knew them. It is not I do not
know you, but never did know you, surely if they ever had been Christ's he had
then known them, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Verse. 24. Therefore whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I
will liken him unto a wise man which built his house upon a rock:

Verse. 25. And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew and
beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was founded upon a rock.


Every one that hears, etc.] 1. The world accounts them fools that are holy,
but Christ accounts them the only wise.

2. The difference betwixt these two is not in their house, but in their
foundation, one builds his hopes upon the sands, the other upon the rocks; nay
it may be the presumption of the wicked may carry a fairer show then the
confidence of the Saints. Confidence does not become presumption by being too
great, but by being upon false grounds.

3. All must expect at one time or other by afflictions, persecutions or
temptations to have their confidence tried upon what foundation it stands.

4. Until persecution, etc. arises, it is not to be known whose profession is
true or false.

5. Our strength is not from our selves, but from the rock upon which we are
built, 1 Pet. 1.4.

6. When a Professor falls away, his fall is very great and notorious.

7. Therefore try not what thou hold, but upon what grounds; if thou have no
grounds for thy religion but education, custom, etc. these will not stand a
storm.

8. One Christ is better then a thousand creatures, one rock then millions of
sands to build on.

Verse. 28. And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people
were astonished at his doctrine:

Verse. 29. For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes.


And it came to pass, etc.] 1. We must stay to the end of the Sermon, else we
shall go away without a blessing, else it shows some dislike of the Sermon, for
their being astonished made the stay.

2. One may be astonished at a Sermon by which he is not converted.

3. One that is a true Minister has authority over his hearers, let their
persons be never so mean, in respect of their office they are above them.

4. A Minister ought to keep up his authority, and not to be despised by his
people, 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.15.

5. The Question may be, Why the Evangelist takes such special notice, that the
people were astonished, because he spoke as one having authority, and seems to
pass by the matter of our Saviors Sermon, and takes notice of the manner of
delivering of it, one would think rather that the Evangelist and the people
should have taken notice of the heavenlinesse of his doctrine rather then the
authority with which he delivered it. The reasons may be,

First, It is said in respect of Christ, to show the difference betwixt his
preaching and all others, for whether they were Prophets, Scribes, or any
others, they preach not so authoritatively as Christ did, for the Prophet said,
Thus says the Lord; the Scribes, Thus says such a Rabby, etc. They proved
what they said by the testimony of others, but Christ upon his own authority, I
say unto you; and this was that wherein our Savior excelled all other
preachers. For the substance and matter of his doctrine it was wonderful
heavenly, yet for the substance of it it had been formerly preached, but no one
ever preached upon their own authority before: his doctrine differed from the
Prophets and all other teachings in heavenlinesse and clearness, but that was
only in degree, but in respect of his authoritative preaching it differed but
in kind.

2. In respect of the people; the meaning may be thus, That the Sermon of
Christ came with such authority and power upon their spirits, that they were
fully convinced of the truth of those things he preached, which conviction in
any proportionable measure they never had experience before of, as often as
they had heard the Scribes preach.

3. Or may it not be to show, that though they were astonished, yet it was not
upon right grounds, for whosoever is taken with the eloquence, pronunciation,
or any thing else in a Sermon, besides the holiness of the matter that is
delivered, though their delight be spiritual in respect of the object; for it
is the Word preached that delights them, yet in respect of the formality of
their delight, viz. the ground why they are delighted in the Word preached is
carnal.

And if you take the word so, then this reason of their astonishment is set
down, that we might understand that this our Saviors Sermon did astonish them,
yet it did not convert them.

FINIS.

