A Whisper in the ear. OR A DISCOURSE BETWEEN THE KINGS MAJESTY, AND THE HIGH
COURT OF PARLIAMENT. Concerning a Pacification, and Conditions of PEACE.

By a Scholar of Oxford, and a Citizen of London.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1642.

A Conference between a Gentleman of Oxford, and a Citizen of London.
Cit. NOble Sir, you are welcome, more, and most welcome all the degrees of
welcome, thrice welcome you have been, and shall to my house, and to the best
entertainment I may or can afford you.


Gent. Deserving friend, you have really showed it, and I have experimentally
found it; for which, I must ingenuously acknowledge, that I am deeply engaged
in the debt-booke of your love, and so far ^^nae in arrerage upon the score
of your favor, that for the present, though I am your obliged debtor, yet for
the future I shall endeavor by all fair and civil respects to demean my
self as your vowed, devoted, and most grateful servant; for to you I may well
say, as sometimes Aeschines said to Alexander, Debeotibi meipsum, I owe you my
very self.


Cit. Sir, you transcend the sphere of my deservings, and assure your self, I
am all yours.


Gent. You are all goodness, the cord of whose fidelity has so firmly tied
me unto you, that I am yours soly, and yours inseperably, yours perpetually,
upon all occasions, wheresoever, whenever, or in whatsoever you shall
vouchsafe to command me.


Cit. Sir, all the favor that at this time I shall request of you is only
that you would be pleased to impart unto me the late passages and occurrances
which have been in agitation at Oxford, where His Majesty has been and is now
resident: The state of the whole Kingdom is concerned therein; and we
Londoners are of the Athenians humor and disposition, desirous and inquisitive
to hear news.


Gent. Indeed, it is the demand of all men now a days in all places wheresoever
they come, what novelty is abroad: hark in your ear, the times are now grown
so perilous, that to be an honest man its a dangerous matter, and who is truly
religious in these destracted days, (wherein most men have a form of
godliness, but deny the power thereof) its a difficult question to determine.
There are so many Sectaries sprung up amongst us, that more for number, and the
like to these for nature, was never known in the memory of man. Hence it is,
that so many men, so many towns, Cities, nay whole Counties are divided. Some
are for the King, others altogether for his great Council, the Parliament.
Wiltshire, and the County of Salop are wholly for the King, as by their
engagement and resolution does appear: Hartfordshire and Buckinghamshire, (cum
multis altis) are as much for the Parliament, and are fully resolved to hazard
their lives in the Parliaments cause.


Cit. It Is strange that such divisions should be amongst such loyal subjects
under so royal a Sovereign; for though Prince and people have been happy a
long time, (to the admiration of other Nations) yet never did the King and
Kingdom suffer more then both these have done of late.


Gent. It Is not so strange as true: I Will tell you the ground of it. Hark in
your ear. In these our present distractions, when foreign forces threaten,
and probably invited, and a Malignant Party at home offended: The Envious one,
that grand Impostor has cast a bone, and raised a contestation between the
King and his two Houses of Parliament touching the Militia. His Majesty claims
the disposing of it to be in him by right of Law; the Parliament says, rebus
sio stantibus and nolente Rege, the ordering of it is in them. That ordinance
of the Militia without the Kings consent, has been a fomenter of his Malitia,
and was one of the bones of our unhappy division.


Cit. I am of your mind, that that was the first fuel to the fire of this
unnatural war.


Gent. There was not wanting other matter to increase this flame: Listen, and
I Will tell you, the keeping the King out of Hull, and taking his Arms and
Ammunition from him.


Cit. But with your favor Sir, these were not taken from the King, but for the
King: and good ground is there for it; for the high and honorable Court of
Parliament is His Majesty's just and faithful Council, and what soever they
do, or have at any time done, is upon grave advice, and in mature
deliberation, and does undoubtedly tend to the good and benefit of the King and
the whole Kingdom.


Gent. You say well, yet give me leave to tell you that the Kings Councillors
at Oxford are of another opinion: They confess it is so pretended, but the
quere is, whether is he so intended: If it be, why is his Navy at sea employed
against him? why have they made an ordinance for settling Customs without an
Act of Parliament? when an act of this Parliament declares, that no Custom is
due without an Act and all such persons as receive the same* incur the
forfeiture of a praemunire. Hereupon His Majesty has set forth a Proclamation
at his Court at Oxford the 16. day of this present month, prohibiting the
payment and receipt of Customs, and other maritime duties upon that late
ordinance of both Houses of Parliament. In the Proclamation His Majesty does
relate, that the monyes arising from these duties, are to support an unnatural
rebellion against him, and to foment an intestine and civil dissension; and
does thereby declare to all his people of what sort soever, that whosoever
henceforward shall by virtue of the pretended Ordinance of Parliament, pay any
monyes for custom or other duties therein mentioned, other then to his proper
ministers, what is due to him by the known Laws of the Kingdom, that he will
proceed against him or them in due time, as an ilaffected person or persons to
the peace of this Kingdom.


Cit. It Is impossible that such an aggregate body as the Parliament is, can or
should do any injury either to the King, or his three Kingdoms.


Gent. I assent to you in that. It is not the Parliament, (for that assembly
is, Fens Iustitiae) but some Malignant members of the representative body,
which have been taxed by the King, in his several Declarations.


Cit. The King stands for his Prerogative, the Parliament for their privilege,
about these there are a great distance, and grievous difference between them
both, insomuch that both are displeased, and 'its much feared that nothing but
the sword can decide their controversy; I would to God it were once sheathed;
I am sure so long as it is brandished over our heads, it is a sad Omen of fatal
destruction, and does menace ruin and desolation to the Kingdom of England.
War is the way to destroy all, and of all war a Civil war is the worst,
and at this time our land is so fruitful of such monsters who like so many
Neroes, are ready to destroy their own mother. How many Myriads of barbarous
men are there amongst us, who delight in nothing more then in the effusion of
blood: These are the hot-spurres of the times, whose spirits have no spirit at
all to peace. All are not well-affected unto peace: But it is, and shall be my
prayer to the God of peace, that the wounds of this distractive war may be
healed, that our peace may be, as formerly it has been, again restored; and
to this end, I pray God amend all those that are malevolently disposed.


Gent. Amen say I.


Cit. And further, may it please God to take away the wicked from the King,
that his throne may be established in righteousness.


Gent. You wish well, but who (I pray you) are those wicked ones*


Cit. Why, the malignant party, and they are the Cavaliers, and evil
Counselors that have bin, and are still about his Majesty, who have seduced
our good King, and withdrawn him from his great and best Council.


Gent. I wish that all who have been engines in withdrawing, or maine actors of
withdrawing the King from his Palace at Whitehall and from his Parliament at
Westminster, (...) labor and invention. For had not His Majesty (...) from us,
there had not been such an unhappy (...) his present there is.


Cit. That I verily believe; but I pray, Sir ^elolve m^ who those main Ropes
are (a rope take 'em) in withdrawing the King.


Gent. Hark in your ear, for fear one of 'em may overheare me: Though my
brain^ be muddy, I would be lo^^ to have them washed in the kennell, by those
rude, unruly, headstrong, and gl^diheaded Schismatics. They are rabble of
^rownists, and Anabaptists, who have beeene and continue still the chief
disturbers of the peace both of the Church and Commonwealth. By their factious
meetings and illegal tumules, they have driven His Majesty from us: The King
himself professes no less in these words, No other reason induced (...) ^ve
our City of London, but that with honor and safety We could not stay there,
and it was in regard of them; therefore they are a most dangerous and
mischievous generation: They are li^^ ^he Devil himself, Legion multitudes of
them are now resident in the City of London, in every Parish round about us.


Cit. I cannot confide in all that you aver.


Gent. (Hark in your ear) There are a great many of ^^ese waspes now at this
instant in the Countries, and in the Parliaments Army.


Cit. Say you so: Pray Sir what have they done?


Gent. What have they done? nay what have they not done? Their barbarous and
sacrilegious inhumanity has been of late exercised in Churches, as in
Canterbury, Worcester, Oxford, and other places, where they have perpetrated
(...) committed such horrid and unheard of outrages, as Jews and Atheists never
practiced before.


Cit. I am sorry whi^ my h(...)o hear it.


Gent. I would ^ had no (...) ^e it. At Canterbury in Kent, they no sooner
entered the Church (...), but ^i^nt-like, they began a fight with God himself;
overthrew the Communion Table, tore the velvet cloth from before it, defaced
the goodly ^eene, violated the monuments of the dead, spoiled the Organs, broke
down the rarest windows in all Christendom, with the ancient railes and
seats, and the brazen Eagle that did support the Bi^^^, forced open the
cupbords of the singingmen, rent some of their Surp^s, gowns and bibles, and
carried away others, mangled all the Service books and books of Common
Prayer, bestrowing the whole pavement with the leaves thereof.


Cit. If such an outrage was committed, may they answer for it that did it.


Gent. Nay this was not all: For as if all this had been too too little to
satisfy the funy and madness of these miscreants, they further increased
their malice and cruely upon the Arras hangings in the Quire, representing the
whole story of our Savior, wherein observing diverse figures of Christ I tr^ble
to express their blasphemy one said here is Christ; swore that he would stab
him; another said here is Christ, swore that he would rip up his bowels, which
they did accordingly, so far as the figures were capable thereof; besides
many other never the like heard of villainies: And not content therewith,
finding another statue of Christ in the frontispiece of the South gate, they
discharged against it forty shot at least, triumphing much when they hit it in
the head or face, as if they were resolved to Crucify again the Lord of life.
They threatened the ruin of the whole ^a^rick and would have done more
mischief, had not Colonel Sandis with some others come to the relief and
rescue.


Cit. I pray God amend all that is amiss.


Gent. The times are grown so bad that better they may be, but worse they
cannot be. We heard lately at Oxford that many of your Citizens have petitioned
to the Parliament for peace; their Apprentices likewise, and diverse well
affected young men of London have supplicated to the two honorable Houses for a
blessed Accommodation.


Cit. It Is true, there are some for it, and some against it.


Gent. Sir Robert Heath sometimes Lord chief Justice of the Commonpleas, after
glad to have the favor to plead as a Common Sergeant, now Lord chief Justice
of the Kings bench, is in great fame and favor, with his Majesty.


Cit. So are many more at this present, but the Parliament are fully resolved
to proceed against two persons, (Delinquents) as the maine promoters and
fomentors of this unnatural war upon the Subjects, thereby to give
satisfaction to the world in an example of Justice to be excuted upon them.


Gent. Who are they.


Cit. The one is the Lord Digby, whom fame taxes to be the adviser of his
Majesty to come in person to the House of Commons in a hostile manner, to
accuse the five members of high Treason. This Lord failing of his end in that
design, advised a war upon the Parliament, as it evidently appears by his
actions and preparations both beyond sea and here in England, and by several
letters which have been intercepted. The other person demanded to be proceeded
against, is the Earl or Newcastle, who has put the sword into the Papists
hands, who has in a most rigorous manner tyrannised over the Kings good
Subjects in Yorkshire, imposing upon diverse, men great and grievous taxes as
upon some, 2000, (...) upon others 3000 (...)


Gent. This is one ground (...) Marquess of Hartford has of late, declined
the service his (...) him in, for that the King ^ath not (...) given way to the
^ling of a Popish army in the North, but has granted Commission to the
Marquess of Worcester a known Papist to be General of the Forces in those
parts where he is, whose Army consiste most of professed Papists.


Cit. Have you heard yet of Colonel Go^es late landing at Newcastle?


Gent. I have. It Is for certain that that faithless Colonel, once Governer of
Port smouth, who afterward desired banishment, and promised never more to
serve against the Parliament is yet for all his vow and promise come over
again, and has taken ^es contrary to his faith. He is landed with a regiment
of a thousand old experienced soldiers, eighty brave Commanders, and twenty
pieces of Ordnance, with all Ammunition and equipage promotionable: besides he
has bro^ht with him arms for ten thousand men, and her Majesty's Standard,
which is to be the blazon of her army, and erected at the head of it (called
the Catholic Army) under the command of the Earl of Newcastle.


Cit. They say there are three Regiments more coming from the Northern
Counties to the said Earl of Newcastle, which army of Papists come completed
will prove more formidable to this Kingdom then is at present imagined.


Gent. It Is credibly reported likewise, that in Nottinghamshire the Cavaliers
do make a p^^^y, having possessed themselves of Newarke upon Trent, and put
400. men into the Castle, and command the passage there over the River.


Cit. But I Will tell you of a strange thing, the like you never heard of; It Is of
a Pamphlet that was on Saturday last published and printed, entitled, A
complaint to both (...) of Parliament. The author and publisher of it has
scattered man^ of them in diverse places, as in Paul's Churchyard, in
Westminster Hall, and Westminster-Abey. The aforesaid Pamplet is stuffed with
intolerable language, full or bitterness and invectives against the
Parliament, and their legal proceedings: therein that great Council of the
King and Kingdom is called a corporation of Projectors, and most unjustly ^ed
for doing nothing these two years past tending to the good of the Republique.


Gent. In that the Pamphleteer (or rather scandalous Libeller) is most
injurious to our grave Senate; for the world knows, and we can all
sufficiently relate what memorable acts, and never to be forgotten things, the
indefatigable labors and endeavors of those Worthies have effected, and
brought to pass for the public good (against all opposition whatsoever) ever
since their first Session, to this present day.


Cit. Blessed be God for it, and I pray God still bless and prosper them in
their determinations and consultations.


Gent. And as that scandalous Pamphlet is condemned to be burnt by the hand of
the hang man, to may the malignant author, contriver, etc publisher thereof be
stigmatized and branded with the perpetual mark of infamy for defaming so
renowned an Assembly in that false and infamous and libellous Pamphlet. At
Oxford lately at the Council Table, the Earl of Bristol made a speech, the
effect whereof was to animate His Majesty not to lay down Arms, but to
prosecute the Parliament with all vigor: And at the same time the Earl of
Dorset rose up, and spoke bravely for a happy agreement and concurrence
between the King and his Parliament.


Cit. Pray Sir, how stands His Majesty affected?


Gent. Our gracious King desires it, and would willingly upon honorable
terms, embrace it with all his heart So does his Nephew Prince Rupert, if we
may believe that speech which he lately spoke to His Majesty and the Lords of
His Privy Council, at his return from Redding to Oxford.


Cit. I shall love Prince Rupert the better for this, and am now persuaded that
he has suffered more by the obloquie and detraction of factious spirits then
ever he deserved.


Gent. That I verily believe. For my part I think there is no good man but
desires peace.


Cit. May peace be within our walls, and plenty a^^ine within our dwellings.


Gent. May the clouds of discord, discontent, d^ and difference be all
dissipated, that there may be a clear and right understanding between the
King and the parliament. Then, come (...) or war, life or death, it is, and
shall be our prayer, God save the K^^g.


Cit. And preserve the Parliament.


FINIS.

