THE FIRST CENTVRY OF Scandalous, Malignant PRIESTS, Made and admitted into
Benefices by the PRELATES, in whose hands the Ordination of Ministers and
government of the Church has been. OR, A Narration of the Causes for which the
PARLIAMENT has Ordered the Sequestration of the Benefices of several
Ministers complained of before them, for vitiousnesse of Life, errors in
Doctrine, contrary to the Articles of our Religion, and for practicing and
pressing superstitious Innovations against Law, and for Malignancy against the
PARLIAMENT.

IT is Ordered this seventeenth day of November, 1643. by the Committee of the
House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, that this Book Entitled,
[ The first Century of Scandalous, Malignant Priests, etc.] be printed by
George Miller.

JOHN WHITE.



LONDON, Printed by George Miller, dwelling in the Blackfriars, M.DC.XLIII.

To the READER.
Reader:
THis ensuing summary Declaration, of the Grounds and Causes, whereupon this
Parliament has proceeded against diverse Ministers, to sequester their
Benefices from them, and to place in their rooms, godly, learned, orthodox
Divines, diligent Preachers of the Word of God, may serve thee for many
excellent parposes.

First, To open thine eyes and clearly convince and satisfy thee, that the
Parliament had good, and very great cause from hence, among many other things,
to declare and resolve, that the present Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, Commissaries, Deanes, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical Officers, depending upon the Hierarchy, is evil and justly
Offensive and burdensome to the Kingdom, a great Impediment to Reformation and
growth of Religion, and very prejudicial to the State and Government of this
Kingdom, and therefore to be taken away See the Preamble of the bill for the
Assembly of Divines, and of the Ordinance by which they sit.
: They have been by our Laws entrusted with the Care and Provision for the
souls of the King and Subjects, to heed, feed and watch over them Acts 20.28.
1 Pet. 5.2. Heb. 13.17.
: And to attend upon the great Embassy they pretend unto, to pray and beseech
them to be reconciled unto God 2 Cor. 5.20.
: and to preach and to cause to be preached by able and faithful men 2 Timothy
2.2.
: The Word of God in season and out of season 2 Timothy 4 2.
: They have not only neglected their Personal Execution of this weighty
trust, but also have generally and mostly committed the same to Persons
illiterate and insufficient, dumb Dogs, as the Scripture calls them Isa.
56.10.
, that cannot bark, against whom God has protested for their ignorance Hos.
4.6.
, and to men swallowed up with Wine and strong drink, whose Tables are full of
vomit and filthiness Isai. 28.7.8. Quorum ess. et vivere est esse and bibere.
: Whoremongers and Adulterers, who as fed Horses neigh after their Neighbors
Wives Jer. 5.8.
: Buggerers that change the natural use into that which is against Nature Romans
1.26.
. And to others scandalous of corrupt minds, and ill affected to the Peace and
Safety of the Kingdom, men unfit to preach to, or live among Christians, their
wickedness being so great, as that they are condemned by Heathens: And hereby
they have taken the highway to destroy the souls committed to them, and to
drown them in Perdition. The evil life of a Minister, being like the rods,
which Jacob spread before the Sheep Precepts are iter longum. Examples iter
breve.
, the people write after his copy with ease and confidence. Sins are
reputed, as none, or as venial, which receive Patronage from the Ministers
Example Hae hominum faces non Dei ministri, sed Satanae satellites, non Christi
seblatores, sed Antichriste successores.
. And though some few of these Church Governors, have been men that have
otherwise expressed in the course of their lives a true fear of God, yet by a
strange Influence of the Divine Curse upon their Offices, branches of the
Hierarchy of Rome, plants not planted by our heavenly Father, these as well as
the rest, have unhappily laid hands suddenly upon many, and preferred diverse
wicked and unworthy, by partiality 1 Timothy 5.2.
, to marry and put off their hands a Daughter, a Kinswoman, and upon other bie
and base respects, without regard of the good of the souls of them, over whom
they were set. And in this Book, thou shall have an Assay of the Gall and
Worme-wood of the Episcopal Government, taken out of London the Metropolis,
and of the Counties adjacent, that when thou see what Vermin crawles upon,
and devoures the principal and vital parts, thou may reflect with a
mournful heart upon the more miserable condition of Wales, and of the North,
the more remote parts of this Kingdom, where upon scrutiny will be easily
found, many for one as vile and abominable as these. And if thou wouldost have
the people perish for want of vision or impoysoned with the destructive Errors
of Popery and Arminianisme, and the Land yet more defiled with cursing,
swearing, drunkenness; whoredom, sodomie, then put thy shoulders still to the
support of the said Church Government and Governors, but if thou be better
minded (as in Charity I hope thou art) then join heart and hand with the
Parliament, to purge out such Popish dreggs, and together with them, pray for
and endeavor a through Reformation, according to the word of God.

Secondly, Thou may by perusal of this book clearly see what manner of
persons those Cleargie-men be, that favor the present course of his Majesty
against his Parliament and people, and dislike and malign the ways of the
Parliament, they will appear unto thee to be such as cannot endure the purity,
power and strictness of the true Religion, that hate Reformation, and to be
brought in their hearts, Religion and lives to the holy Word of God, that seeks
themselves and not the things of Jesus Christ, that are given over to vile
affections, to superstition, ambition, persecutions, covetousness, malignity
and all wickedness, and knowing the judgment of God and what they deserve that
commit such things, yet not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them Romans 1.28, 29 32.
.

Thirdly, Thou may hereby discern one principal ground and cause of the
general ignorance and debauchery of the Gentry and people of this Kingdom.
Like Priest, like people Hos. 4.^.
: They cause the people to err by their lies and by their lightness Jer.
23.31.
: They are a snare on Mispah, and a net spread upon Tabor Hos. 5.1.
. They have wrested and broken the law of the Lord, defiled his holy things,
hid their eyes from his Sabbaths, polluted his Sanctuary Ezekiel. 22.26.
, and seduced the people to the same wickedness, dawbing with untempered
Mortar Ezekiel. 13.10.
These Prophets prophecy falsely, the Bishops bear rule by their means, and
the people love to have it so Jer. 5.31.
.

Fourthly, Behold with admiration, and acknowledge with love and thankfulness
the transcendent mercy of the Lord, to his poor people among us, that whereas
he has infinite just cause to destroy these Priests and people together,
cloth them with desolation, and do unto them after their ways, and judge
them according to their desert Ezekiel. 7.27.
. He is graciously pleased to stir up a spirit of zeal and judgment in the
Parliament to deliver the people from the mouths of these Shepherds, that
feed not the flock, but kill them that are fed, eat the fat, and cloth
themselves with the wool Ez k. 34.3, 10.
: and to set true shepherds over them, to seek that which was lost, and bring
again that which was driven away, to bind them that were broken, and
strengthen them that were sick, and to feed them all, with knowledge and
understanding; and to feed with judgment the wicked shepherds that before with
force and cruelty ruled over them Eze. 34.15, 16.
.

Fifthly, Behold with comfort and assured expectation of good from Heaven, that
as the Lord has manifested his gracious purpose to reform his Church in this
Land, and set up the Kingdom of Christ among us, in the purity of Doctrine and
Discipline, and has for that purpose called this Parliament, fixed it, set it
upon that work, and maintained it therein, and in all these has manifested
his immediate hand and finger, in stupendous works of Divine providence,
opening obstructions, working that himself which his servants could not,
making the very enemies of Reformation means to further it; discovering and
preventing the horrid, hellish, treacherous plots of his and our enemies,
turning the counsels of Achitophell into folly, discovering the rotten hearts
of them, that said they were for the Cause of God, but are found liars; and
holding up the hearts of his faithful ones in the midst of, and against all
discouragements. So the Lord is pleased to carry on his great work of
Reformation, in the very face and in aispight of all oppositions and dangers,
that it gains ground and creepes on every day. These Priests of Baal, sons
of Beliall, that know not the Lord, whose sin is very great before God, in
making multitudes abhor the Offerings of the Lord 1 Samuel 2.12, 17.
, are taken away and removed as filthy rubbish from the house of God. The
Antinomians that destroy the Law, as neither directory nor obligatory of a
Christian to duty: and teach, that God sees not, is not angry with, will not
correct, requires not sorrow for, nor repentance of the grossest sins that
are committed by such as believe they be in Christ; and that the elect are
actually justified as soon as borne, though they have not faith in forty
years after, and many such absurdities and barbarismes in Divinity, are
questioned and in a good way to be suppressed, and the Doctrine of our Church
in a great part cleared from all aspersions and misconstructions. This is the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. And certainly these works of
God, are so many earnest-pence unto us, as the first fruits to the harvest,
that God will in his own way and time perfect his said work of a through
Reformation, and bring forth and lay the head and topstone thereof, that we and
our postority shall rejoice and cry grace grace unto it Zech. 4.7.
.

Sixthly, Whereas in several Proclamations, Declarations and Pamphlets set
forth in his Majesty's name, and otherwise sent us from Oxford, the Parliament
has been exceedingly reproached and condemned (as in truth they have been for
all the good they have done for the Kingdom) for Sequestring the Livings of
Reverend Divines (as they style them) thou may by a serious perusal of this
Book, clearly see what Divines the Authors and publishers of the said
Pamphlets do so reverence and esteem; And from thence observe of what spirit
these men are that side with, honor, plead for, and receive unto them such
Priests of Baal, of Bacchus, of Priapus; Does not their affection unto, and
high esteem of such unclean beasts, abundantly evince, that they serve and
prostitute themselves unto the same dunghill Idols and filthy lusts, and that
they are all of the same Father? And note further, that these Libellers not
only speak evil of Dignities, but also of those things that they know not
Jude 8.10.
, they Censure the Supreme Court of Judicature, themselves being Delinquents,
deferving the severest judgment, and that without hearing them, or informing
themselves of what they have done, notwithstanding all their acts and
proceedings lie fairly of record in their Journall books, obvious to every
man that desires to understand the same. And that the Parliament may appear
just in their doings, and the mouth of iniquity may be stopped, this Narrative
of the crimes, The grossest faults stand proved by many witnesses, seldom
less then six.
and misdemeanors of those sons of the earth are here published, that all the
world may see, that the tongues of these that speak evil of the Parliament,
are set on fire of Hell, and lift up against Heaven, and that they hide
themselves under falsehood, and make lies their refuge.

And let not the Learning of some few of these men (for which if they had any
grace to use it well, they were considerable) move thee to think they be
hardly dealt with, for learning in a man unsanctified, is but a pearl in a
Swines snout, Arrins, Pelagius, Arminius, all of them learned, but thereby the
more serviceable to do mischief in the Church; like Curio, who was facundus
only ad reipublicae perniciem. Learning and knowledge we honor in any, but
vitiousnesse and lewdness we condemn in all: had some of these men sanctity
of life as well as light of knowledge, they had been honorable to Religion,
and useful to souls; but their abhorred lusts casting out of them the
guidance of light, it is but justice to cast them off from being guides to
others: I say, Justice to them, and withal mercy to the poor people, who at
once are rid of a plague, and enjoy a blessing, are freed from such who
poisoned their souls, and supplied by such as take care to feed and save their
souls None succeed these sequest. red Priests, but such as are examined and
approved by the Assembly of Divines.
.

I know well that all we say or do in this particular will be reproached by
some, but good services must not therefore be deserted because reproached. When
the fat Abbeys were taken down in Henry the eights time, the Friars cried out
that holy Church was destroyed, yet when the draughts and ponds were searched,
so many bones and skulls were found, which assured men of practices distant
enough from holiness. For my part I shall not cease to endeavor and pray for
a perfect reformation of the Church, which is the garden wherein God delights
to walk, and therefore must be purged of all stinking and noisome weeds. And
do thou (whosoever thou art, that fixest thine eye on this display) learn by
the evils which thou read, to bewail the greater evils in this sinful
Land which thou yet do not know The following Centuries will make a more full
Discovery of the wickednesses that are among us.
: When malice has spoken its worst and done its utmost, then shall thou
clearly understand what I daily see and certainly know, that the great
services and pains of the Parliament have no other scope but divine glory, the
Churches reformation, and the Kingdoms safety. Consider sadly and seriously of
these things, and the Lord give thee and me understanding of these times, to
know what Israel ought to do in the same; and let us without fear of the
hand of violence, or foot of pride, set hand and heart, and shoulder and all,
to the perfect cleansing of the house of the Lord, and advancing his Sion to a
perfection of beauty, and setting up his Christ upon his Throne, to rule over
us in all things according to his own mind, and then expect with fullness of
assurance, that he will speedily make all his enemies his footstool, and ease
himself and us of all his adversaries. Which is the prayer

of him that desires to spend himself and be spent in the service of the King
and Kingdom, JOHN WHITE.

THE FIRST CENTVRY OF Scandalous and Lewd MINISTERS.
1. THE Benefice of John Wilson Vicar of Arlington in the County of Sussex, is
sequestered, for that he in most beastly manner, diverse times attempted to
commit buggery with Nathaniel Brown, Samuel Andrews and Robert Williams his
Parishioners, and by persuasions and violence, labored to draw them to that
abominable sin, that (as he shamed not to profess) they might make up his
number eighteen; and has professed, that he made choice to commit that act
with mankind rather then with women, to avoid the shame and danger that often
ensues in begetting Bastards; and has also attempted to commit Buggery with a
Mare, and at Baptizing of a Bastard child, blasphemously said, openly in the
Church, That our Savior as he was in the flesh, was a Bastard; and usually
preaches, That Baptism utterly takes away original sin, and that the
sins committed after Baptism, are only by imitation, and not by natural
corruption; and has in his Sermons, much commended Images in Churches, as good
for edification, and that men should pray with Beads, and has openly said,
that the Parliament were Rebels, and endeavored to starve the King, and that
whatsoever the King commands, we are all bound to obey, whether it be good or
evil; and has openly affirmed, that Buggery is no sin, and is a usual
frequenter of Alehouses, and a great drinker.

2. The stipend of John Aims Curate of Lowis in Kent, is sequestered, for that
he is a common drunkard, a common haunter of Alehouses, and a common swearer;
and has affirmed the Parliament to be a Round-headed Parliament, and that
their heads should be all shortly chopped off; and wished, that the King might
grind them in pieces like a Potters vessel, and for above 15. weeks has
altogether deserted his Cure.

3. The Benefice of Charles Forbench Parson of Heny in the County of Essex, was
sequestered, because he is a common swearer, oftentimes breaking forth into
fearful Oaths and Imprecations, and very careless of his pastoral function,
and wholly neglects the observing of the monthly Fast, setting his men to
plow, himself also working on those days in the fields, and has affirmed,
that the Earl of Strafford was no traitor, and that he was put to death
wrongfully by the Parliament.

4. The Benefice of Stephen Withers Parson of Kelvedon in the County of Essex,
is sequestered, for that he has solicited oftentimes the Wife of Philip
Glascomb to commit adultery with him, and diverse other women, affirming it to
be no sin to lie with them. And has not only practiced Altar-worship, but
urged his people to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper at the railes,
and in his Church read the Book for profanation of the Sabbath by sports, and
will not suffer his people to have above one Sermon on the Lords day, though at
their charge; and has expressed great malignity against the Parliament.

5. The Benefice of Emanuel Vty, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the Parish
Church of Chigwell in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he affirmed,
that there has been no true Religion in England these forty years, and that
he loved the Pope with all his heart, peremptorily maintaining that whatsoever
men of holy Orders speak, they speak by Divine inspiration, and that if the
Devil himself would have holy Orders put on him, he would be inspired by the
holy Ghost, and has denied the Kings Supremacy, and exalted the Power of
Bishops above the Authority of the Prince, affirming them to be the head of the
Church; and blasphemously broached, That the Command of the Archbishop of
Canterbury was to be equally obeyed with the Word of God, and has declaimed
against the Authority of Parliament, and affirmed, That Parliament Men are
Mechanics and illiterate, and have nothing to do to intermeddle in matters of
Religion.

6. The Benefice of Edward Cherry, Rector of the Parish Church of Much-holland
in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he usually boweth twelve times
toward the East, when he goes into the Chancell, and his Sermons which were
rarely above one a Month, mostly tend to the upholding and pressing of that
and the like superstitious innovations, and has refused to give the Sacrament
to those of his Parishioners that would not come up to the railes to receive
it; and has taught in his Sermons, That Baptism washes away original sin,
and that all men may be saved if they will, and have free will thereunto, and
has been very often drunk; and affirmed, that a man may more lawfully play,
game and drink in an Alehouse on the Sunday, then on any other day; and has
published a very scandalous Libell against the Earl of Essex, Earl of
Warwick, and Earl of Holland, and has affirmed, That he never knew any good
the Parliament did, unless it were to rob the Country and pick their purses,
and has deserted his said Cure for above a year last past, leaving the same
wholly unsupplied, and is reputed to have betaken himself to the Army raised
against the Parliament.

7. The Benefice of Thomas Thrall, Vicar of the Parish Church of S. Mary
Mount-thaw London, is sequestered, for that he has neither Preached nor
Catechized on the Lords day in the afternoon, nor suffered his Parishioners to
have any to perform the same, though they have desired it at their own charge;
And is a common haunter of Tavernes and Alehouses, spending much of his time
there, and has been often drunk, and not only read the Book for sports on
the Sabbath in his Church, but has stirred up his Parishioners thereunto, and
countenanced them with his presence at Cudgells and the like other sports on
that day, and said, that the House of Commons in Parliament was an unjust
Court; and does ordinarily swear and curse, and uses superstitious bowing and
cringing to the Communion Table.

8. The Benefice of John Gordon, Rector of the Parish Church of Ockley in the
County of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a common haunter of Alehouses
and Tavernes, sitting and tippling there, night after night, and has spent the
whole Sabbath there, so that no Service nor Sermon was in his Church by reason
thereof, and is a common drunkard, and has not preached on any Fast day since
it was enjoined by King and Parliament, and has published in his Church, all
those to be Traitors that lent to the Parliament, and has deserted his said
Church for about six Months last past, and is reported to have been seen in
the Army of Cavalieres, raised against the Parliament.

9. The Benefice of Lawrence Washington, Rector of Purleigh in the County of
Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of Alehouses, not
only himself sitting daily tippling there, but also encouraging others in that
beastly vice, and has been often drunk, and has said, That the Parliament have
more Papists-belonging to them in their Armies, then the King had about him or
in his Army, and that the Parliaments Army did more hurt then the Cavaleeres,
and that they did none at all; And has published them to be Traitors, that
lend to or assist the Parliament.

10. The Benefice of Philip Leigh, Vicar of the Parish Church of Redburne in
the County of Hertford, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard and
haunter of Alehouses, usually drinking healths, and pressing others thereunto,
a common swearer and quarreller, and has expressed much malignancy against the
Parliament.

11. The Benefices of Francis Fothersby Vicar of S. Clements in Sandwich, and
Parson of Lingsteede in the County of Kent; are sequestered, for that he is a
common drunkard, and common swearer and curser, and has expressed great
malignancy against the Parliament, in not only refusing to contribute to the
public defense of, but saying, that they that would not lend the Parliament
money, should be sent with Ordinances to Hell.

12. The stipend of Daniel Tutivall Preacher of Suttons Hospital in the County
of Middlesex, commonly called Charterhouse, is sequestered, for that he has
been often drunk, and that on the Lords day, and has taught in his Sermons to
the said House, that Moses and Aaron being before them (meaning two Pictures
set up in the Chapel) and the Organs behind them (newly also set up there)
they were a happy people, and what greater comfort could mortal men have? and
has wholly neglected the observation of the Monthly Fast, not preaching
thereupon, and procured scandalous and Malignant Ministers to preach there to
corrupt his people.

13. The Benefice of John Gorsuch, Doctor of Divinity, Rector of the Parish
Church of Walkerne in the County of Hertford, is sequestered, for that he is a
common haunter of Alehouses and Tavernes, and often drunk; and often sits
gaming whole nights together, and is seldom in the Pulpit, preaching scarce
once a quarter; And has often denied many of his Parishoners the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, without any cause shown, and refused to administer it to such
as would not come up to the railes; And endeavored to hire one Ioanes to ride
a Troope-Horse for Prince Rupert, to serve under him against the Parliament,
saying withal, he had a snotty nose Jade to send to the Parliament to poison
the whole Band, and has published a wicked Libell against the Parliament, That
some of the Lords whom he Named, were Fools, Bastards and Cuckhoulds.

14. The Benefice of Edward Thurman, Rector of the Parish Church of Hallingbury
in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a Common drunkard, and
has presented his Parishioners for going from their own Church to hear
Sermons, when they had none at home; and has affirmed, that he would drive
away all the Puritans out of his Parish, and enforced his Parishioners to come
to the railes, and has wholly deserted his said Cure for the space of half a
year now last past.

15. The Benefice of Robert Snell, Vicar of the Parish Church of Maching in the
County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has often refused to administer
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to such of his Parish that refused to come to
the railes to receive it, and there being a Crucifix in the window over the
Altar, he uses to bow toward it, and would not suffer it to be pulled down,
notwithstanding the Order of Parliament for it: And has taught his people,
that God has now an Altar, and that the Table set Altar-wise, put him in mind
of God, to worship him the better, and in administering the Sacrament, called
one of the Communicants Puppy, for that being left handed, he put forth that
hand to receive the Bread, and caused the Churchwardens to present such as
would not come up to the railes, to receive there, and kneel before them, and
has expressed great Malignancy against the Parliament.

16. The Benefice of Robert Hiliard, Vicar of the Parish Church of Ewell in the
County of Surry, is sequestered, for that he said, The Parliament is a
Parliament for the Devil, and the Devils Court, and that the Petitions of the
Parliament to the King, are like the Petitions of Jeroboam to Rehoboam,
commands and not Petitions, and has discouraged diverse from giving or lending
toward the public defense, expressing, that he hoped they that did so should
never see penny of it again, and that he would rather live under the
government of a Heathen, then of the Parliament, and is a common frequenter of
Tavernes and Alehouses, sitting tippling and quarrelling there, and is often
drunk, and is a common curser and swearer, and has jeared the holy Spirit of
Grace, saying, We have Ministers now, will preach forsooth, and pray by the
Spirit, and has threatened to kill those that have exhibited Articles against
him in Parliament, in case they should proceed against him, and went about with
the Cavalieres at Kingstone, directing them to plunder honest men there.

17. The Benefice of Joseph Soane, Vicar of Aldenham in the County of Hertford,
is sequestered, for that he is a common Gamester, a common Alehouse haunter,
and frequently drunk, and a common quarreller, and has called the Parliament
Soldiers, under the command of his Excellency the Earl of Essex, Parliament
dogs.

18. The Benefices of William Fairefax, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the
Parish Church of S. Peter's in Cornhill London, and Vicar of East-Ham in the
County of Middlesex, are sequestered, for that he has refused to deliver the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper to such of his Parishioners as refused to come up
to the railes, and refused to let his Parish have a Lecturer on the Lords day
in the afternoon, except he might have 50lb. given unto him for the same: And
for the space of eight years, refused to let his Parishioners have a Lecturer
on a week day, which was appointed, and maintenance for the same given by the
will of the dead, and uses to profane the Sabbath Day, by playing at Cards,
and has been often drunk in Alehouses and other places, and usually seeks
and haunteth the company of women, notoriously suspected of incontinency, and
intrudes himself into their company, and into the company of other women,
walking alone in the streets in the dark and twilight, and tempts them to
uncleanness, leading them into dark places, and into Tavernes, fit for such
works of darkness, and has expressed great malignity against the Parliament,
and charged the Parliament to be the cause of all the trouble, and disturbances
in the Kingdom, and has greatly neglected his Cure, and in his absence has
provided scandalous Ministers to supply the same.

19. The Benefice of James Bradshaw, Vicar of the Parish Church of Chalfont, S.
Peter's in the County of Bucks, is sequestered, for that he is not only a
practiser and maintainer of all the late innovations, but has also preached in
his Sermons, That the Commissaries Courts were the suburbs of Heaven, and the
Commissaries and Officers of that Court, the very supremacies, next to
Archangels, and that it was a damnable sin for any warned to that Court not
to appear, and that to preach twice on the Lords day is a damnable sin, and
that to use any prayers besides the Book of Common Prayer, was likewise a
damable sin, and wished, that all Lecturers were hanged.

20. The Benefices of Robert Cotesford, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the
Parish Church of Hadleigh and Munkes Ely in the County of Suffolk, are
sequestered, for that he is a strict observer of the late Innovations, still
continues bowing toward the East in divine Service, and has often preached
for auricular confession of sins, and that the reason why so many fall into
despair, is, because they come not to their ghostly Father to confess their
sins, and that men have by nature free will to all good, and that Baptism
does wash away original sin, ex opere operato, and has been often drunk,
consuming his time in tippling and drinking, sometimes from morning to night,
and has often attempted the chastity of his maidservant, that she could not
live in the house for him, and seldom preaches; and for five Months last
past, wholly deserted his said Cures, so that the Churchwardens were enforced
through his default, to make some provision for the said Cure of Hadleigh, and
has not only refused to read the Declarations of Parliament, and especially
that of the 22th. of October, 1643. concerning his Majesty's Commissions
granted to Papists to raise forces, commanded to be read in Churches, but has
expressed otherwise great malignity against the Parliament and the proceedings
thereof.

21. The Benefices of Nicholas Andrews, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the
Parish Churches of Guilford, and Vicar of Godalmine in the County of Surrey,
are sequestered, for that he is not only negligent in preaching himself, but
has also expressed himself to be an enemy to frequent preaching, inveighing
in his Sermons against long Sermons, saying, that Peter's sword cut off but one
ear, but long Sermons like long swords, cut off both at once, and that the
surfeit of the Word is of all most dangerous, and that the silliest creatures
have longest ears, and that preaching was the worst part of Gods worship, and
that if he left out any thing, he would leave out that, and refused to give the
Parishioners leave to have a Lecturer to preach unto them, and has presented
his Parishioners that went to hear Sermons at other Churches, when they had no
preaching at home; and caused the Churchwardens and Sides-men to be presented,
for not presenting such into the Ecclesiastical court: And in delivering the
Bread in the Sacrament, he elevateth it, looks upon it, and bows low unto it,
and uses other frequent bowing in administering the Sacrament, and in his
Sermons greatly exclaimes against that Doctrine which teaches, that the
greatest part of the world should be damned, and frequenteth Tavernes, and
consumes his time in sitting and tippling there: And has refused to publish the
Order of Parliament, concerning the removal of superstitious and Idolatrous
pictures and Images, and has substituted to officiate for him in the said
Cure, very scandalous and Malignant Curates, viz. Bacock, Leverland, Pastorloe,
Heath, and one Blane, who is in the Army raised against the Parliament, and
when his people have propounded honest and Orthodox men to be his Curates, he
has refused them.

22. The Benefice of Ephraim Vdall, Rector of the Parlish Church of S. Austins
London, is sequestered, for that he has affirmed, That the great reformers of
the Church now were Hypocrites; and has made, framed and published a Book,
entitled, Noli me tangere, without License, Charging the Parliament with
Sacrilege, in endeavoring to abolish Episcopacy, and to take away the Lands
of Deanes and Chapters, to amend therewith the maintenance of preaching
Ministers, and that they have thereby brought a National sin upon the Land,
as was formerly done by them in taking away the Monasteries, and that an
unclean spirit did breathe these things into their minds, a devout Devil,
pretending care of Gods service, and that all their goodly pretenses are
hipocriticall, and the mask of vile iniquity and holy theft; and that it is a
thing senseless, that Laymen should have any Tithes, and that Tithes are Jure
divino, and that to alien the Lands of Cathedral Churches, to maintain
preaching Ministers, is, to pervert the will of the dead that gave them; and
otherwise expressed great Malignancy against the Parliament.

The Benefices of (...) Ieofferis, Doctor in Divinity, Vicar of the Parish
Churches of Feversham and Ticehurst in the County of Kent, are sequestered, for
that he has preached, That the King may take not only part, but the whole of
his subjects Estates, if it please him; And in the same Sermon wished, that
evil might befall those that went about to take away government by Bishops,
which had its plat-forme from Heaven, and that the government by Bishops,
Priests and Deacons under the Gospel, was from God, as under the Law, the
government of Highpriests, Priests and Levites, and that he knew not from
whence the Presbiterian government came, but from Corah, Dathan and Abiram:
And has opposed and hindered the Lecturer from preaching a Lecture in the said
Church, although appointed by the House of Commons thereunto; And said of the
Parliament, That Schismatic and Pragmaticall fellows were met together to
make new Laws; and he has neglected the monthly Fast, and the Lords day,
there having been for diverse Sabbaths, neither preaching nor prayers in the
said Church, and has deserted his said Cure, for the space of half a year
now last past.

24. The Benefice of James Mountford, Rector of the Parish Church of Jewing in
the County of Hertford, is sequestered, for that all has refused to deliver the
Sacrament to his Parishioners, for not coming up to the railes, though some of
them begged it with tears, and openly reviled them for not conforming to that
superstitious Innovation, calling them Dogs, Rogues and Beggars, and presented
them to the Commissaries Court for the same, to their great damage and
vexation; and has published in his Church the Book of Sports on the Lords
day, and commended the same, and has publicly in his Sermons affirmed, That
preaching is not necessary for the sanctification of the Sabbath, and that the
Sabbath was made for Ministers to rest in as well as for the people, and that
Laymen ought not to meddle with the Scriptures, but must believe as the Church
believes, which Church he made to be Archbishops and Bishops; And the railes
being removed, he placed forms instead of them, making his people kneel at
them to receive the Lords Supper: And has preached, That if the King should
set up flat Idolatry, we ought to submit, and not to take up Arms, as some do
now; and enveighed against the Parliament, for endeavoring to take away
Episcopacy, and has not only refused to join in the public defense, but has
also discouraged such as have so done.

25. The Benefice of John Peckham, Rector of the Parish Church of Hosteede
parva, in the County of Sussex, who gives out that he is the Kings Chaplain,
is sequestered, for that he has been very negligent in his Cure, absenting
himself from his Parishioners, sometimes a whole Month together, without
leaving any to Officiate for him, and has refused to administer the Lords
Supper to those of his Parish that would not come up to the Railes; and is a
common drunkard, and notorious adulterer and unclean person, having drawn
diverse women to commit uncleanness with him, and has bragged, that he could
lie with women, and never get them with child, and has used sordid and beastly
carriages toward women, to entice them to satisfy his lust, not to be named
among the Heathen, and has expressed great malignity against the Parliament
and proceedings thereof, and has affirmed publicly, that a man might live in
murder, adultery and other gross sins from day to day, and yet be a true
penitent person.

26. The stipend of John Kidd, Curate of Egerton in the County of Kent, is
sequestered, for that he preaches not to his Parish above once in a fort-night,
sometimes not once in a Month, or two Months, though there be in the said
Parish near 400. Communicants, nor provided any other to instruct them, and
has used frequent and unreasonable bowing to the Communion Table in his said
Church, and persuaded his people so to do, and called them openly unreverent
Puppies that passed by it without such bowing, and in administering the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when he had received himself, and was going to
administer the Bread to his people, assaulted one of the Communicants; and
pulled him by the hair of the head, and thrust him out of the Church and
Congregation without any just cause, and has never preached to his
Parishioners upon any of the Fast days.

27. The Benefice of Griffith Roberts, Vicar of the Parish Church of Ridge in
the County of Hertford, is sequestered, for that he has not only practiced the
late Innovations, and neglected the public Fast, and employed his neighbors
to carry home wood for him upon a Fast day, but has openly declared the Earl
of Essex and all his followers, and Armies of the Parliament to be Traitors,
and that whosoever sent Horses, Money or Plate to the Parliament, were also
Traitors, and that this Land was governed by Children and Fools, and that the
Parliament had done that that they must die for, even the best of them, if ever
the Laws were settled, and that the said Roberts is a common drunkard and
tipler in Alehouses, and drinker of healths, quarrelling with them that will
not pledge him therein.

28. The Benefice of Peter Dausem, Vicar of the Parish Church of Camberwell in
the County of Surry, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard, and
drunk at the times of his officiating at Burials and Baptizings; and has by
his debaushed conversation, disabled himself from preaching, and has not
preached for these 12. years and upwards, and did protect and hide a Romish
Priest in his house, from the Officers that came to seek him, and has extorted
undue and unreasonable fees from his Parishioners, and after the administering
of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, expended the money given to the poor in
Sack, and drank it in the Church; And in delivering the Sacrament to one
Mistress Wilson, one of his Parishioners, cast the Bread upon the ground, saying
to her, take it there if thou will have it, and is a common curser and swearer,
and has read in his Church his Majesty's Declaration against the Parliament,
concerning Levies; and being told of an Ordinance of Parliament against the
reading of such things, answered, He cared not for it.

29. The Benefice of John Mountford, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the Parish
Church of Austie in the County of Hertford, is sequestered, for that he has
introduced into his said Church and other Churches, a turning of the
Communion Table Altar-wise, and having a great Crucifix and Picture of the
Virgin Mary in the East window over the said Table, used bowings and cringings
before the said Table and Crucifix set Altar-wise, and caused the said Table to
be railed in, and the Jesuits Badge to be set upon the Carpet there, compelled
the people to come up to the railes, there to kneel to receive the sacrament,
teaching them, that God was always present at the Altar by the presence of his
grace, and was therefore to be bowed unto, and in his going up to the Table to
read second Service, usually caused that part of the 43. Psalm to be sung,
viz. Then shall I to the Altar go, of God, etc. And has endeavored to leaven
his people with the doctrines of Arminianisme, and has forbidden, by virtue of
a Commissary or Surrogates place he held under the Deane and Chapter of Paul's,
preaching in the afternoon on the Lords day, and expounding of the Catechism
within his Jurisdiction, only tying them to use the same by bare Questions and
Answers, and pressing the reading of the Book of Sports on the Sabbath day,
and usually enveighed in his Sermons, against those that went out from his said
Parish Church to hear Sermons when they had none at home, and did arrest the
Churchwardens of the said Parish and the Glasier, for pulling down the said
scandalous Pictures in the said window, in obedience to Order of Parliament,
and has preached against praying ex tempore, as unlawful, and has in his
absence, substituted a very scandalous Curate, very superstitious in his
practices, who preached that that conscience was neither good nor quiet, that
could not be content with one Sermon a day on the Lords day, and charged them
as Rebels, that did not observe his superstitious practices of the late
illegal Innovations, and that his people are bound in conscience, to believe
whatsoever he and the Doctor did preach, and that the material Church was the
Mystical body of Christ, and to give any thing to it, was to beautify Christ's
body, and that to go out to hear Sermons on the Lords day, when they had none
at home, was spiritual whoredom; And the said Doctor being informed of his
said Curates superstitious practices and false doctrines, and desired to remove
him, refused it; affirming, that he would mainetaine him in whatsoever he had
said or done.

30. The Benefice of Edward Brewster, Rector of the Parish Church of Lawshall
in the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he has refused to administer
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to such of his Parishioners as would not
kneel at the railes, and after they were taken down, from the place where
they had stood, caused diverse of them to be presented in the Ecclesiastical
Court, for not kneeling at their first coming into the Church, and compelled
them to do penance for the same, and has refused to observe the late day of
Thankes-giving, appointed by the Parliament, for the discovery of the late
hellish Plot against the City of London and the Kingdom, and is a common
Alehouse haunter, and has been found guilty thereof upon Indictment at the
Assizes, which he never traversed, but submitted unto a Fine thereupon, and
has continued since his frequent sitting and tippling in Alehouses, and has
spoken very disgracefully of the Earl of Essex, and has expressed great
malignancy against the Parliament, and neglected the keeping of the monthly
Fasts, and out of mere wilfulness, has refused to baptize children brought
to the Church unto him for that purpose.

31. The Benefice of Richard Heart, Rector of the Parish Church of Hargrave in
the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse
haunter, and upholder of private Alehouses, and commonly sits drinking in
them diverse days together, and lately continued drinking and tippling there,
from Tewesday till Sunday-morning, and that morning being come home, durst not
come to Church, his face was so battered and beaten, and forced his
Parishioners to go to other Churches by reason of his inability to read
Divine service or preach unto them; And used on the Lords-daies in the
afternoones after his reading of Divine service, to draw his Parishioners with
him to his house, forcing them there to drink, until they be drunk, causing
every one to cast a Dye in their course, and to drink up so many cups as fell
to their chance, persuading them that if they will take their cups, he can
forgive them that sin, and when he has preached on the Fast Day, has told
his Parishioners, that he knew not wherefore the Fast was, and that it was not
material to be kept, and consumes the after-noones of such days in drinking
with some of his Parish in his own house, or at some private Alehouse. And
upon Whit-sunday last, though he had administered the Communion in the
fore-noone after Evening prayer read, he drew a man and his wife to a private
Alehouse, and there kept them drinking till night, and after led them to his
own house, and there made the man so drunk, as he fell a sleep, and then
enticed the man's wife up into his Chamber, where they were all night
suspitiously together, and drinking and taking tobacco, and has expressed
great malignancy against the Parliament, professing, he would rather carse
them, then pray for them.

32. The benefice of Edward Ienkinson, Parson of the Parish Church of Panfield
in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he did set the Communion Table
Altar-wise, and railed it in, and commanded the Churchwardens to present such
as refused to come and receive at the railes, and called them that refused,
Wall-eyed Horses, and has in his Sermons taught, That the Table is Gods Altar,
and that those that would not bow here at the Name of Jesus, should bow in hell
hereafter. And that such as taught them they need not bow, were blind guides;
And has compared the godly, reverend Ministers, living about him to
Saltbitches, which Dogs run after, and to roasted Dogs, which draw away
other men's Pigeons, because his people went to hear them preach, when they had
no Sermon at home. And has said, that such as preach twice a day, are but
praters, and that he, will want of his will, but he will put by preaching in
the afternoon, himself being a Judge in the Ecclesiastical Court; And he is
an encourager of profaning the Lord's Day, sending then for Cudgels for his
people to play withal; and being present himself at the Cudgel playing: And
has expressed great malignancie against the Parliament.

33. The Benefice of Black Novelty, alias Notly in the County of Essex, is
sequestered from Joseph Plumm Parson thereof, for that he is a common Alehouse
and Taverne-haunter, and has been diverse times drunk, and not only used
superstitious bowing himself at the Name Jesus, but has presented the
Churchwardens for not bowing, and threatened his Parishioners, because they
refused it, commanding his Churchwardens to look to them, and has absented
himself from his said Cure, for the space of eighteen weeks last past, and
is reported to have betaken himself to the army of the Cavaleers, and has
otherwise expressed great malignity against the Parliament.

34. The Benefice of William Grant, Vicar of the Parish Church of Iselworth in
the County of Middlesex, is sequestered, for that he has called the singing
Psalms, Hopkins Ligges, And affirmed, That he had rather hear a pair of
Organs ten to one, then the singing of them; And has read the Declarations and
Proclamations, set forth by his Majesty against the Parliament in his Church,
and has refused to read the Ordinances of Parliament, enjoined to be read,
and has often preached against the present Defensive War, averring the same
to be against the Kings Person, and wishing, their hands might rot off, that
should be lift up therein, and preached in like manner before some Regiments of
the Parliament soldiers, and has also preached, That they that went about to
change the Laws and Government of the Church and Ceremonies, would at last
change their Religion too: And has absented himself from his said Cure ever
since the Kings Forces were at Branford, and has said, That the Court of
Parliament, was a Court of no equity, and affirmed, the marrying of the
Clergy to be the undoing of them, and that it would never be well with our
Church, until auricular Confession be set up again in it. And is a common
haunter of Alehouses and Tavernes, and that on the Lord's Day, even since the
Order of Parliament for observing the Lord's Day, and has been often drunk,
and that many times in one week; And that he complained, that all good
fellowship was laid aside in his Parish, but he would bring it in again and
maintain it, and invited and entertained all he could procure, to come to his
house on Sundays after prayers, to sit there with him and consume their time
in drinking and tippling.

35. The Benefice of Henry Hancocks, Vicar of the Parish Church of
Fornax-Pelham in the County of Hertford, is sequestered, for that he has
preached, That it is as lawful for a woman if she dislike her Husband, to
leave him, and take another, as for one to go out of his Parish to hear
another Minister; And that to go to another Church, was as the sin of
Witchcraft and Idolatry, and fills as well his Sermons as his ordinary
discourses, with bitter invectives and slanders against those that are
religiously affected, especially presenting them under the names of Puritans
and Roundheads, and has said in his Sermons, That the Puritans forced the
Parliament to make Laws according to their own fantasies, and not according to
the Law of God; And after the fight at Edgehill, said in his Sermon, That he
was overjoyed, to think that God should put it into the heart of the King, to
fight the Lords battle on the Lords day, to uphold the old ancient Catholic
Faith; And fearing the pulling up of the railes about the Communion Table, he
walked with his Sword about the Churchyard in the night, saying, he would
rather loose his life, then suffer them to be pulled up, and that if the Bishops
should command him to wear a Kettle upon his head, he would do it, and is a
common tipler and haunter of Alehouses, and a profane swearer of bloody
oaths.

36. The Benefice of Alexander Clarke, Vicar of the Parish Church of Bredfield
in the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he has used very frequent
bowing to the Altar, in his going and returning from it, and has pressed the
observing thereof upon his Parishioners, and refused to let the Churchwardens
level the ground where the Altar stood, because it was holy and consecrated,
and not fit to be thrown out or mixed with common earth, and has enveighed in
his Sermons aginst praying by the Spirit, calling it a Monster, conceived,
borne, and dying all in an instant, and has read the Book of Sports on the
Lords day, and encouraged his Parishioners to observe the same, telling them,
that it was sitter to play and follow their business on the Lords day then on
holy days, and has publicly sported himself with his parishioners on the
Lords days at Barly-breake, and has taught to the people, that he has
absolute power to forgive sins, blaming them that they did not send for their
ghostly Father to have them forgiven, and has seldom observed the monthly
Fast enjoined by Parliament, and has endeavored to draw his Parishioners to
the Forces raised against the Parliament, affirming, that the Parliament had
driven the King away from them, and that the proceedings of them about the King
were just, and that there was not a Papist near him; And has affirmed, that
the Earl of Strafford did die wrongfully, and that the Parliament put him to
death without a cause, and has spoken reproachfully of the Earl of Pembrooke,
and has threatened his neighbors to give a list of the Names of them to the
King, that encouraged any to contribute to the Parliament.

37. The Benefice of Zachary Tusham, Vicar of the Parish Church of Dallington
in the County of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard, and
has solicited the chastity of one Alice Thorpe, and is a common quarreller,
and did way-lay one Edmund Gore about midnight, and fell upon him, and bear
him, and has greatly neglected his Cure, sometimes deserting the same for
two-Moneths together without any supply, and has spoken very disgracefully of
the Earl of Essex, and expressed great malignity against the Parliament.

38. The Benefice of Nicholas Wright, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the Parish
Church of Thoydon-Garnon in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he
has not preached above twice or thrice a year to his Parishioners, and yet
has presented diverse of them, and put them to great charges in the
Ecclesiastical Courts, for going to hear Sermons in other Churches when they
had none at home, and brought also such Ministers as they heard so preach into
trouble; And has procured the Communion Table to be set Altar-wise, with
stepps to it, and railes about it, and constantly bowed toward it at his
coming and going out of the Church, refusing to administer the Sacrament to
diverse of his Parishioners without any cause, other then his own wilfulness,
and read the Book for Sports on the Lords day in his said Church, and preached
to maintain the lawfulness of it, by means whereof the Lords day has ever
since been much profaned, by Football playing and other ungodly practices,
and has deserted his said Cure ever since Palme-Sunday last, and betaken
himself to the Army of the Cavaleeres, and is in actual War against the
Parliament and Kingdom. And has brought and continued long under him for his
Curate, a drunken, lewd and scandalous person, that has been indicted and found
guilty at the Sessions for a common drunkard.

39. The Benefice of John Woodcock, Vicar of the Parish Church of Elham in the
County of Kent, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Alehouses, and commonly drunk, and abuses them that will not keep company
with him at the Alehouse, and is a common swearer, by Wounds, Blood, and other
like execrable Oaths, and a common curser, and has deserted his said Cure
ever since the first of August last, and has expressed great Malignity against
the Parliament and the proceedings thereof.

40. The Benefice of John Manby, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the Parish
Church of Cottenham in the County of Cambridge, is sequestered, for that while
the Table was set Altar-wise, he did constantly bow to it eight or nine times
in a fore-noone, and though he knew that the Parishioners could not hear him,
yet did always read second Service at the Altar, and affirmed, That it was no
matter whether they heard or not, for he prayed for them at the Altar, which
was, Sanctum Sanctorum, and affirmed, That God was there more peculiarly
present, then in any other place of the Church, and has pressed his people in
his Sermons, That they ought to bring their offerings to the Altar, and offer
them there to him, for that he was there in Gods stead to receive them, and
preached, That he had power not only to pronounce absolution, but had undoubted
power to forgive sins, and that the same was given him by the Bishops laying
on of hands, and that the Holy Days ought to be kept with as much reverence as
the Lords day, and that he read the late new Cannons, and exhorted the people
to receive and observe them as Scripture, affirming them to be drawn out of
Scripture; And refused to Baptize children brought to the Church on the Lords
day at evening Prayer, though earnestly desired, giving no other reason for it,
but because it was not his pleasure, and has preached openly, That
Ecclesiastical government does not belong to the King; but as the King had
power to make Laws to govern the Temporal estate by, so the Prelates had
power to make Laws and govern in Ecclesiastical things, and has affirmed,
that he ought not to be judged by a temporal Magistrate, and is a common
swearer and curser, Wounds and Blood, and Pox and Plague, and such like horrid
oaths and curses do commonly proceed out of his mouth, and did brag, that
he has out-sworne a great swearer, and is a frequent Gamester, even upon the
Lords days, and when the late Innovations were growing to an height in the
Church, he did openly say in the said Church, That the Kingdom had been
governed by Puritans, but now he hoped they would be rightly governed, and has
read in his said Church, all such Declarations and Proclamations as came forth
in the Kings name, and refused to read the Ordinances of Parliament, or to
contribute to the Parliament, or associate for the public defense.

41. The Benefice of William Muffet, Vicar of the Parish Church of Edmonton in
the County of Middlesex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Tavernes and Alehouses, and a common swearer, curser and blasphemer, and is a
common fighter and quarreller, not sparing his Majesty's Officers, and is
commonly drunk, and scarcely sober at all, but when he wants money to
consume in drink, and in his drunkenness, goes up and down the said Town,
breaking glass windows, which has cost him twenty shillings at a time to
repair, and is a common drinker of healths, and forcer of others to do the
same, and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament.

42. The Benefice of John Denn, Vicar of the Parish Church of Dartford in the
County of Kent, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse and Tavern
haunter, and commonly drunk, and on Sabbath days, uses to sit till twelve of
the clock at night, sending for bottles of Wine, and clubbing, and in a Sermon,
described a drunkard to be only such an one as lies in the Cart-way, foaming at
mouth, and not able to remove from the Cart-wheeles, and refuses to preach on
the Lords days, and Fast days, and is unwilling to suffer any to do the
same, and has expressed great malignity against the Parliament, and the
proceedings thereof.

43. The Benefice of Richard Tanton, Parson of the Parish Church of Ardingly in
the County of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard and
Alehouse haunter, and in his Sermons has wished, That every knee might rot
that would not bow at the name Jesus, and has read in the said Church,
Declarations in his Majesty's name for raising of horse and money to maintain
war against the Parliament, and against the Militia, and has stirred up his
Parishioners to join with the Kings forces, and has affirmed, That he would
bear out his Curate in refusing to deliver the Sacrament to such of his
Parish, as would not come to the Railes to receive the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

44. The Benefice of Thomas King, Vicar of the Parish Church of Chesill magna
in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Alehouses and Tavernes, and very frequently drunk, even upon Fasting-dayes,
and upon the Lord's Day, and has refused to deliver the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper for diverse years to his Parishioners that would not come up to
the Railes, having set up the Table Altar-wise, and used bowing and cringing to
it, although they did upon their knees entreat it at his hands in the
Chancell, where they were wont before to receive it, and has deserted his Cure
for above three months, and did read the book of sportes in his said Church
for profaning of the Sabbath.

45. The Benefice of Edward Alston, Parson of the Parish Church of Pentloe in
the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has attempted the chastity of
some women, and has used very unchaste demeanours toward other women,
snatching a handkerchiefe from one, and thrusting it into his breeches, and
forcing her hand after it, and putting his yard into her hand, pulling up the
coats of another, and thrusting his hand into the placket of another, and
using other wicked temptations, to draw them to his lust, and was a forward
maintainer and practicer of the late illegal Innovations, and has expressed
great Malignancy against the Parliament affirming, That they sat to make Laws
by authority, and brake them without authority, which was mere hypocrisy. And
in his Pulpit spoke against the present defensive war, protesting that now
when every child lift up his Sword to shed innocent blood, it was high time for
him to lift up his voice like a trumpet; And did read in his Church
Declarations set out in his Majesty's name, but refused to read any
Declarations of Parliament. And at Christmas was 12. month having appointed a
Communion, and all things were ready for it, and the Parishioners prepared, he
turned his back and went away, refusing to deliver it, because the Surplice
was not there. And falsely affirmed, That the Parliament gathered great sums
of money to enrich their own purses.

46. The Benefice of Christopher Webb, Vicar of the Parish Church of
Sabridgworth in the County of Hertford; is sequestered, for that he is a Common
drunkard and Alehouse haunter, negligent of his Cure, and not suffering others
to preach, when himself would not, and has expressed much malignity against
the Parliament, affirming among other things, That he hoped in God he should
see the Confusion of the Parliament.

47. The Benefice of John Reynolds, Parson of the Parish Church of Haughton and
Witton in the County of Huntington, sequestered for that he is a common
Alehouse haunter and tipler therein, and swearer, and in stead of preaching
did read the Book of Canons, condemned in Parliament, to his people; and
pressed them to observe the same, commending them for the admirablest things
and wittiest piece that ever was set forth, and affirmed, The Synod or
Convocation of the Bishops to be of more force and authority then all
Parliaments, and to be before any of them. And has altogether left his said
Cure for four months last past.

48. The Benefice of Edward Ashburnham, Vicar of the Parish Church of Tunbridge
in the County of Kent, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse haunter
and Tavern haunter, and very often drunk, even upon the Lords-days; and has
driven diverse of his Parishioners with their families from their dwellings, by
pursuing them for not coming up to the Railes to receive the Sacrament, and
seldom preaches upon the public Fast-days, and made a public speech for the
encouraging of the late Insurrection and Rebellion at Tunbridge, and to
contribute to the maintenance thereof.

49. The Benefice of Nicholas Bloxam, Parson of the Parish Church of great
Waldingfield in the County of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a common
drunkard and inticer of others to that beastly vice, a common swearer by great
and bloody oaths; and has bin very careless and negligent of his Cure,
seldom preaching above once a month, and never on the Fast-dayes, and is
seldom present at Church on the Past-dayes, and often absent on the Lord's Day,
when he has drunk hard the day before, and has carried himself very
lasciviously toward several women, and is greatly suspected of Incontinency.

50. The stipend and Benefice of John Man, Curate of the Parish Church of
Stroode near Rochester in the County of Kent, is sequestered, for that he is a
common drunkard and frequenter of Alehouses and Tavernes, drawing others to
the same excess with him, and is a common swearer by bloody oaths, and uses
to curse, and is a common quarreller and fighter, and said, That he scorned the
Parliament, and that the Parliament Men were not Gentlemen of quality, and has
otherwise expressed great malignity against the Parliament.

51. The Benefice of Nicholas Lowes, Vicar of the Parish Church of Much-Bently
in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has been often drunk, and
uses to sit tippling in Alehouses seven or eight hours together, even on the
Lords days, and affirmed, That he hoped to see them all hanged that had set
their hands against Bishops and Papists, and he and by his example the people
spend the greatest part of the Lords day in pastimes and drinking at the
Alehouse, and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament.

52. The Benefice of William Evans, Parson of the Parish Church of Sandcroft in
the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse
haunter, and notorious drunkard and campanion of Alehouse haunters, and has
altogether neglected the public Fast, even since the Order of Parliament for
the better observation thereof, and spent the same days, or the greater part
of them in Alehouses, and wholly neglected to preach in the after-noones on the
Lords day, or to suffer any other to do it; And has driven diverse of his
Parishioners out of the Parish, by prosecuting them in the Ecclesiastical
Courts, for going to other Churches to hear Sermons, when himself preached
not, and in his Pulpit delivered, That those that did give or lend to the
Parliament, were accursed, and instead of a Sermon on the Lords day, read to
his people a Declaration set forth in his Majesty's name, concerning the
Militia, the Ships, Fortes and Town of Hull.

53. The Benefice of John Squire, Vicar of the Parish Church of Shorditch in
the County of Middlesex, is sequestered, for that he has publicly in his
Sermons affirmed, the Papists to be the Kings best Subjects, for their Loyalty,
and for their liberality, and that like Arauna, many had given like Kings to
the King, to maintain his Honor against the rebellious Scots, and for their
patience, that enduring the many grievances under his Majesty, they had buried
all in oblivion, and the Protestants would afford him nothing but in a Legal
way, yea but in their own way, and exhorting that none should come to the
Sacrament, unless they were so affected to his Majesty as the Papists were,
and compared his Majesty, to the man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho, and
fell among thieves, that wounded him of his Honor, robbed him of his Castles
and hearts of his people, the Priest passing by, was the Protestant, the
forward professor the Levite, but the Papist was the good Samaritan,
especially the Irish Papist, and that the Subjects and all they have, are at
the Kings command.

54. The Benefice of John Clarke, Rector of the Parish Church of S.
Ethelburrough within Bishops-gate London, is sequestered, for that he has
endeavored to corrupt his auditory with the leaven of Popish doctrine, that
the Bread and Wine after the words of consecration, cease to be Bread and Wine,
and differ specie from what they were before, and that the Virgin Mary was the
window of Heaven, and the very clouts and rags wherein Christ was wrapped,
were glorious rags, and that the cross whereon Christ was crucified, was made
of four sorts of wood, and that he is a common haunter of Tavernes and
Alehouses, and uses to sit tippling there till he be drunk, and has expressed
great malignity against the power and proceedings of Parliament, saying, That
the Parliament could not meddle or settle the business of the Church, they
being not Scholars, but Mechanic men.

55. The Benefice of Richard Nicholson, Parson of the Parish Church of
Stapleford Tawny in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common
drunkard and swearer, and has expressed great Malignancy against the
Parliament, saying, They were a company of Factious fellows, and that this
Parliament is no Parliament, and that the major part of the Lords and Commons
being with the King, they were the Parliament, and used diverse other wicked
speeches against the Parliament, and against several Lords in the House of
Peers, and had three wicked and scandalous Libells against the Parliament
found in his Study, and did sing one of them in an Alehouse.

36. The Benefice of Francis Wright, Vicar of the Parish Church of Witham in
the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has tempted diverse women, both
his servants and Parishioners to uncleanness, and is a common haunter of
Alehouses and Tavernes, and a common drunkard and prophaner of the Worship of
God, by public performing of the same in his drunkenness, and a common
swearer, and common user of corrupt communication, and has not officiated in
the said Cure for the space of twelve Months last past before the
sequestration.

57. The Benefice of Curthbert Dale, Rector of the Parish Church of
Kettleburrough in the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he was a
constant observer of the late illegal Innovations in the Worship of God, and
presented and troubled his Parishioners in the Ecclesiastical Courts, for not
coming up to the railes to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and not
observing other of the said Innovations, and is a common swearer and curser,
and in his Sermons has maintained, That the Angels did mediate for the
children of God, and that men might drink one pot for necessity, a second for
recreation, and a third for good-fellowship, and that it is not the blood of
Christ that takes away sin before God, but it is repentance and tears that
washes away sins, and has read the Book of sports on the Lords day, and has
slighted and neglected the Monthly Fast, and suffered his servants to work
thereupon; And seeing a stranger in the Church put on his hat in Sermon time,
he openly then called him, saucy unmannerly Clown, and bid the Churchwardens
take notice of him, and the next Lords day took occasion in his Sermon again
to speak of him being then absent, and to call him Lobb, saucy Goose, Idiot, a
Wigeon, a Cuckoe, saying, he was a scabbed Sheep, a stragler, and none of his
flock, and is a common Alehouse and Tavern haunter, and has been often
drunk, and frequently in his Pulpit, upbraideth his Parishioners, calling them
Knaves, Devils, Raskalls, Rogues and Villains, using other opprobrious
speeches against them, and in one of his Sermons affirmed, That he hoped the
late Lord Cook was in Hell, for maintaining Prohibitions, and has been very
negligent in his Cure, often absenting himself from it for many weeks together,
and leaving the same in his absence to very scandalous Curates, and has wholly
deserted his said Cure, for above nine weeks last past, and has expressed
great Malignancy against the Parliament.

58. The Benefice of Thomas Goade, (...) of the Parish Church of East-Hatley in
the County of Cambridge, is sequestered, for that he was for his scandalous life
and misdemeanors, deprived of his Benefice at Guningson in the County of
Nottingham, about 20. years since, and has not since reformed his life, but
is still a common frequenter of Alehouses, and very often drunk, and often on
the Lords day; And on Newyeares-day was twelve-moneth, the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper being to be administered in his Church, he came from an Alehouse
where he had been all night, and was so drunk, that he fell down twice or
thrice in the presence of the Parishioners, who expected him at the
Church-doore; And has been often likewise drunk when he should have been
preaching, and taken up drunk in the Churchyard coming to perform that duty,
by reason whereof, diverse times his Parishioners have had neither prayers nor
preaching on the Lords day; And has often sat so long drinking, that he has
bepist himself, and sometimes the room where he sat, and is an outrageous
common swearer and curser, and in his Tippling uses to say, Now Devil, do thy
worst, and caused his servants to go to their earthly labors upon the
Fast-dayes, and finding his neighbors Hoggs trespassing, wished the plague of
God in Hell might take her and her Hoggs, and has been a great practiser and
presser of the late illegal Innovations in the Worship of God; And because his
Parishioners would not come up to the railes to receive, caused the
Parish-Clarke to carry away the Bread and Wine, and has expressed great
malignancy against the Parliament.

59. The Benefice of Nicholas King, Vicar of Friston and Snape in the County of
Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse haunter, and
companion of scandalous persons, and men of evil fame, and often drunk, and
attempted the chastity of Elizabeth Scotchmer, who going to his house to pay
him some moneys, he enticed her to lie with him, and did strive a long time
with her to abuse her by force, and would have corrupted her thereunto with
moneys, but she protesting unto him she would not sell her soul to the Devil
for money, he replied to her, She was a fool, for God did forgive the greatest
sinners, and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament.

60. The Benefice of Edward Turner, Parson of the Parish Church of S. Lawrence
in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common swearer, and
common Alehouse haunter, and strong to bear strong drink, and uses to sit
five or six hours together tippling at Tavernes, sometimes whole days and
nights tippling and drinking, and sometimes drunk, a common practiser and
presser of the late illegal Innovations, and has deserted his Cure for the
space of a year now last past.

61. The Benefice of John Wells, Parson of the Parish Church of Shimplyn in the
County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse haunter and
common drunkard, and in his drunkenness has layne abroad in the fields, lost
his hat, fallen into ditches, and so bemired himself, that he has been feign
to be washed, and has attempted the chastity of diverse women, and sold his
Calves for kisses with them, and having locked himself up in a chamber in an
Inn with a lewd woman, after a long time the door was broken open upon him,
upon his refusal to unlock it, and he found in a very suspicious manner upon a
bed with her, after which he conveyed her secretly away, and sent gifts unto
her; And has affirmed, That the Land was governed by wicked men, and that the
Papists were the Kings best subjects, and is a common swearer of very great
Oaths.

62. The Benefice of Thomas Geary, Vicar of the Parish Church of Beddingfield
in the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Alehouses, often drunk even to vomit, and has been and is a common swearer
of bloody oaths, and curser in a fearful manner, as God damn me, the Devil
damn me, refused to preach for many Sabbath days together, and said, he
thought preaching would do his Parishioners no good, and uses in his Sermons
to rail upon his Parishioners, calling them, sowded Piggs, Bursten Rams, and
speckled Frogs, and one of the chief women of the Parish, greatly grieved at
such miscarriages, and going out of the Church, the said Geary openly in his
Pulpit thereupon said, that if there were but one Whore in the Parish, she
would kick and fling, and never keep her seat, and affirmed, that he had
absolute power to forgive sins, and said, that though this doctrine had lain
hid for many years, yet he blessed God that it was now revived again, and on
a Fastday disheartend men from attending on that sacred Ordinance, and was a
great promotor, practiser and urger of the late illegal Innovations, and when
the railes were taken away, affirmed, that the place was the worse for thowant
of them, and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament.

63. The Benefice of Thomas Darnell, Vicar of the Parish Church of Thorpe in
the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is an usual prophaner of the
Lords day, by sports and plays, and by making clean his Cow-house and
outhouses, and other like servile works, and read the Book of sports on the
Lords day in the Church, with approbation thereof, and is a common swearer and
curser, and a notorious drunkard and Alehouse haunter, even upon the
Fast-dayes, and is a common Gamester at unlawful games, and has been
convicted of incontinency and adultery before Doctor Warren and others,
Justices of peace, and began suite at Law in an action of slander for the same,
but durst never proceed therein, and has preached, That he that would not
conform to his Prince in any Religion, ought to be burnt, and was a constant
practiser of the late Innovations, and put such of his Parish from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as would not come to receive it at the railes,
and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament.

64. The Benefice of John Wood, Vicar of the Parish Church of Marden in the
county of Kent, is sequestered, for that he did read the Book of sports upon
the Lords day in his Parish Church, and did preach for the maintenance thereof,
and is notoriously infamous for sundry adulteries, a common Alehouse haunter,
often drunk, a common gamester and quarreller in gaming, a great swearer, and
was punished at a quarter Sessions for adultery, committed with the Wife of one
Prior of the said Parish, and having contracted one Margaret Parkes his servant
to Thomas Maplesden, his own Wife happening to die, afterward took to Wife
the said Margaret, against the will of the said Thomas Maplesden; And on the
Fast-dayes, uses to sit drinking and tippling two or three hours together in
an Alehouse, in the company of other men's wives, by him seduced thereunto, and
has said, That the Parliament has no power to do any thing in the Kings
absence, no more then a man without a head, and has otherwise expressed great
malignity against the Parliament.

65. The Benefice of Thomas Heny, Vicar of the Parish Church of Arundell in the
County of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Alehouses and Tavernes, and has been often drunk, a common swearer, and
has often procured Alehouses to be set up in by-corners of the said Town in
despite of the Magistrate, and not only preaches very seldom himself,
except it be for special reward, but refuses to suffer others to preach to
his Parishioners, when himself does not, and checks them for desiring
preaching so much, telling them, That he would make them content with a Homily,
and before he had done with them, would make them glad with one Sermon in a
month: And by his power in the Ecclesiastical Courts, has caused scandalous
persons to be placed for schoolmasters in the said Town to corrupt the youth,
and has expressed great malignancie against the Parliament.

66. The Benefice of Erasmus Laud, Rector of the Parish Church of Little-Tey in
the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard, even on
the Lords day, thereby disabling himself to officiate his Cure, and sitting
drinking late on a Satur-day night, was demanded, who should preach on the next
day, he answered, Let the devil preach, give me another cup of sack, and is a
common swearer, and has used frequent superstitious cringing to the Altar, and
seldom preaches to his Parishioners, not above once in five or six weeks
before the Parliament, and diverse times through his neglect, his Church-doores
have been shut up all day on the Lords-dayes and Fast-dayes, and at those
times set his servants to work, and did work himself with them.

67. The Benefice of Anthony Hugget, Parson of the Parish Church of the Cliffe
in the County of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he has preached, that it was
more lawful to steal or do servile works upon the Lords day, then to go to
other Churches to hear a Sermon, when there was none at home: And has sued
diverse of his Parishioners for going to other Churches to hear Sermons, when
he preached not, and forced two of them to do penance for it, and to
acknowledge openly, That they had offended God in it, and grieved, and gave
offense to their fellow-Parishioners, And procured one of them to be
excommunicated for it. And put one Peter Pennell, whom he had 7. years before
admitted to the communion, from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, because he
would not come among the boys to be catechized; and likewise refused to
deliver the Sacrament to William Pennell, because he was lame and could not
kneel to receive it. And has been bound at the general quarter Sessions to
his good behavior for several Misdemeanors, and in stead of a Sermon on the
Lords day, did read to his people the late new Canons, and is greatly
suspected of Incontinency, and has had the French Pox, and was cured thereof
by one M. Abell for 10. pound promised him. And the said Huggets wife, asking
him for a piece of gold, which he took from her, and gave to a light woman, in
fury he spurned her on the belly, when she was quick with child, so that she
was forced presently to take her chamber, and was delivered of a dead child,
notwithstanding which he vowed he would never have more children by her: And has
wholly deserted his Cure for above 6 months from the time of the said
sequestration, and has been seen in the Army of Cavaleers raised against the
Parliament.

68. The Benefice of John Sydall, Vicar of the Parish Church of Kensworth in
the county of Hertford, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Alehouses, and commonly drunk, and has several times refused to administer
the Sacrament to such as would not come up to the Railes to receive the same.
And when the Railes were taken away, said it was the beginning of the
abomination of Desolation, and that Whore-mongers and Drunkards are as
excusable as those that go from their own Parish to hear Srrmons, and that
Papists were better Subjects then Puritans: And has neglected his Cure for
several Lords days without any supply, and has expressed great malignancy
against the Parliament.

69. The Benefice of John Rannew, Parson of the Parish Church of Kettlebaston
in the county of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common Alehouse
haunter, and much given to tippling and drinking, and uses to provoke others to
the same, and has been oftentimes drunk, and has preached in his Sermons,
That Original sin is washed away in baptism: And read the book of sports
on the Lords day, and encouraged his Parishioners to practice the same, and
has procured some of his parishioners to be punished in the Commissaries
court, for going to hear Sermons in other Churches when they had none at home;
and has sundry times wholly neglected the monthly Fast, and employed his
servants in their weekly labors and work on the same; And has been a
zealous practiser of the late illegal Innovations, and has wholly deserted his
Cure for half a year and upwards.

70. The Benefice of Ieoffrey Anherst, Doctor in Divinity, Rector of the Parish
Church of Horsemauden in the county of Kent, is sequestered, for that he has
been a diligent practiser of the late illegal Innovations in the Worship of
God, and refused to administer the Sacrament to those that would not come up to
the railes, reproaching such as would not comply with him in those Innovations,
as such as shall have no part with the Saints in light, nor inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven, and is a common swearer and haunter of Alehouses, and has
been often and extremely drunk, and has wholly deserted his said Cure for
above seven Months last before the said sequestration, and has expressed
great malignity against the Parliament.

71. The Benefice of Miles Goultie, Vicar of the Parish Church of Walton in the
county of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a great practiser and presser
of the late illegal Innovations in the Worship of God, and has refused to
give the Sacrament to his parishioners that would not come up to the railes to
receive the same, and being pressed much by his parishioners to preach twice a
day, or to give them leave to procure one to do it, he utterly refused,
professing he would bring no such new orders among them, and in his Sermons
usually enveighs against his parishioners for going to hear Sermons at other
Churches when they had none at home, and finding his Curate painful in
preaching twice on the Lords day, he put him away, and entertained in his room
a most drunken scandalous and idle Curate, and is a common frequenter of
Tavernes and Alehouses, sitting ripling there four or five days in a week,
and often till midnight, and has been often drunk, and has expressed great
malignancy against the Parliament.

72. The Benefice of Samuel Alsop, Vicar of the Parish Church of Acton in the
county of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he has attempted the chastity of
diverse married women, and frequented the company of women greatly suspected to
be lewd and of ill fame, and got a maid with child in the house where he
sojourned, and has set up in his chancell the Jesuits Badge in gold, in diverse
places thereof, and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament, and
has wholly deserted his said Cure for half a year last past before the said
sequestration.

73. The Benefice of Robert Senior, Vicar of the Parish Church of Feering in
the county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of
Alehouses, and commonly drunk, and has been admonished by his Ordinary for
it, and yet has not left it, and was for his continuance therein suspended by
the Ordinary, and yet still persisteth in the same, and commonly marries any
manner of persons even without license, and of the monthly Fast said, he
wondered who a pox devised it, and swear by his Maker, that he would preach no
more on it, and has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament, and
great affection to the Cavaleeres, and Army raised against the Parliament, as
more suitable to his spirit.

74. The Benefice of Henry Kybert, Parson of the Parish Church of S.
Katherine-Coleman London, is sequestered, for that he got into the said parish
indirectly, by means of a false Certificate, subtly procured by false
suggestions, from diverse of the parishioners of the said parish, who having
complained and Articled against him and Percivall Hill his predecessor, for
great misdemeanors, pretended that he was upon some hope of preferment else
where, and that if his parishioners would subseribe to a Certificate and
testimonial of his good behavior, they should be rid of him, and having
thereby obtained such subscriptions, the said Hill and he went to the Bishop of
London, Patron of the said Church, and the said Hill to fly from the censure
of Parliament upon the said Articles, resigned the said Church, and upon
vehement affirmation, that the said Certificate was true and fairly gotten,
procured the said Bishop to present the said Kybert to the said Church, who was
thereupon instituted and inducted; And the said Kybert is a common frequenter
of Tavernes and Alehouses, and commonly frequents the company of a married
woman of very ill fame, and has been seen to embrace and kiss her very
lasciviously, and has been in a very suspicious manner in private with her,
and has not been ashamed in Divine-service, publicly to express unseemely
gestures and behaviors toward her in the Church; and being told that he was
seen to be in such private miscarriage with her, answered, that he would after
be more cautions, which accordingly he observed, resorting commonly to her
house afterward by night and not by day, and has since his institution into
the said Church, seldom preached, and in his absence committed the Cure to
drunken, lewd and lascivious Curates, and has been a great practiser and
presser of the late illegal Innovations in the Worship of God, and has
expressed great malignancy against the Parliament, and has deserted his said
Cure, for more then four Months last past before the said sequestration.

75. The Benefice of Walter Mattock, Parson of the Parish Church of Storrington
in the county of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a zealous practiser of
the late illegal Innovations, and has not preached above once or twice in
four or five years in his Parish, and refuses to Church women if they have
not on a Veil, and come not up to the rail, and has given his Curate charge
to observe the same; And is a common swearer and curser, and a common gamester
at Cards and Dice, and uses to sit tippling with loose and lewd companions, and
has been over-seen in drink, and has said, That none but a company of
giddy-headed fellows would preach twice a day, and caused and countenanced the
reading of the Book of Sports in his Church to profane the Lords day, and has
sent his Arms to assist the illegal Commission of Array, and to oppose the
Forces of the Parliament, and has otherwise expressed great malignancy against
the Parliament, and has wholly deserted his said Cure ever since the first of
February last.

76. The Benefice of Clement Vincent, Rector of the Parish Church of Danbury in
the county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a great practiser of the
late illegal Innovations, and does not only encourage sports and playing on
the Sabbathday before his own door, but has also been a practiser himself
thereof, giving ill example thereby, and neglected the keeping of the
monethly-Fast, and instead of fasting, suffered on the Fast Day, Football
playing in his own ground, himself being a spectator thereof, and is a common
drunkard, and common swearer and curser, and has expressed great malignancy
against the Parliament.

77. The Benefice of Matthew Clay, Vicar of the Parish Church of Chelsworth in
the county of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he has very little resided upon
his Parsonage-house, but lets one live in it that turns it to an
Alehouse, in which there is very much disorder, even upon the Lords days, and
has neglected the observation of the monethly-Fast, affirming that the time
for them is expired, and is a common swearer, a haunter of Alehouses and
Tavernes, and has been often very drunk; And has often preached, That sins
of ignorance and sins of infirmity do not grieve the Spirit of God, and has
expressed great malignancy against the Parliament, and has wholly deserted his
said Cure for above four Months before the said sequestration, leaving upon
his departure a scandalous Curate, a drunkard that state in the stocks for his
misdemeanors, and for diverse Lords-dayes the Church doors have been shut up,
and the Parish left without prayer or preaching.

78. The Benefice of Daniel Horsmande^, Doctor in Divinity, Parson of the
Parish Church of Vlcomb in the county of Kent, is sequestered, for that he did
affirm, That the late Deputy of Ireland was put to death wrongfully, and was
sacrificed as our Savior Christ was, to give the people content, and is and
has been for eleven years last past, a common haunter of Alehouses and
Tavernes, and very often exceeding drunk, and has expressed great malignity
against the Parliament, and preached, That to hear a Sermon on the week
days, was a will worship.

79. The place and stipend of Joseph Daves, Curate and Hospitler of S. Thomas
Hospital in Southwarke, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard, and
common haunter of Tavernes and Alehouses, and a common swearer, and has
expressed great malignancy against the Parliament, affirming them, to be all
Rogues, and that he was consident God would show no mercy to them that died in
the Parliaments service, and that all that went forth in their service, were
Rogues and Rascals, and that those that died in their service at Edge- Hill
went to the Devil.

80. The Benefice of Henry Osbalston, Doctor in Divinity, Parson of the Parish
Church of Much-Parudon in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he in
his absence, supplied his said Cure by scandalous and insufficient Curates, and
has in his Sermons preached against frequent preaching, affirming it to be
properly no service of God, and that it was never a merry world since there was
so much of it; and that if he could preach twice a day, he would not, and that
once hearing of Common Prayer, is better then 10. Sermons, and has read in his
said Church, the Book of Sports on the Lord's Day, and encouraged men to
Football and other like sports on that day; and has taught his people, That
the water in Baptism does wash away original sin, and being desired to pray
for a sick child that was two years old, said in his prayer, That actual
sin it had committed none, and as for original, it was done away at
Baptism, and has pressed his parishioners to come up to the railes to receive
the Sacrament, professing that otherwise he would not deliver it unto them; And
has threatened to present such of his parishioners as went to hear Sermons
elsewhere, when they had none at home, calling them Hypocrites, and of the
tribe of God, and said to one of his parishioners, that he could not abide him,
because he shanke of two Sermons a day; And being demanded to contribute to the
association of the Counties for the public defense, said he would first have
his throat cut before he would.

81. The Benefice of Humphrey Dawes, Vicar of the Parish Church of Mount-Nezing
in the county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has discouraged his
parishioners from assisting the present defensive War, affirming, That they are
damned and are Traitors to the King, that have lent money to the Parliament,
and that he has read the Book of Sports; and encouraged his parishioners to
profane the Sabbath, and has been often drunk, and came so drunk to Church
on the Lords day, as he bad his people sing a Chapter in the Hebrews for a
Psalm, not knowing what he did.

82. The Benefices of Richard Tailor, Parson of the Parish Churches of
Buntingford, Westmill and Aspeden in the county of Hertford, are sequestered,
for that he has not only used frequent bowing to the Communion Table set
Altar-wise, but affirmed, That there was a more peculiar presence of God there
then in the Church, and has compelled his people to come up to the railes to
receive the Sacrament, refusing to administer to such as scrupled to do it;
and there being a Cross at the head of the Font in his Church, upon every
approach toward the Font, used to bow to it, and urged some of the parish to
make auricular confession to him, affirming that he could forgive them, and
having the Office of Surrogate in the Ecclesiastical Court, he did improve his
authority to introduce the late Innovations into the Church, and in his
preaching also pressed his people to bow three times at their coming into the
Church, and keeps a picture of Christ in his Parlour, which he has
confessed, was to put him in mind of his Savior, and has affirmed the fourth
Commandment, to be merely ceremonial, and accordingly uses to hire
servants, ride journeyes, buy wood, and send his Hopps to market on the Lords
day, and upon the dissolution of a late Parliament, he said, If he were as the
King, he would never have Parliament more, while he lived: And affirmed, that
the last Parliament was the weakest that ever sat, because they went about to
question the Kings servants and the Ministers that went to the Table to say
second Service, and said, There was no need of a Parliament, for the King might
have money another way; and charged this Parliament with doing great wrong in
committing and executing the Earl of Strafford, and would neither preach on
the Sabbath days in the afternoon, nor suffer others to preach, though he
could do it, as he said, with half an hours study, and prosecuteth his
people for going to other Churches to hear Sermons, when they had none at
home, and has expressed great malignity against the Parliament, and refused to
publish the Protestation, and has deserted his cure ever since a fort-night
before Easter last.

83. The Benefice of Thomas Baily, Rector of the Parish Church of Brasteed in
the county of Kent, is sequestered, for that he has endeavored to corrupt his
people with the leaven of false Doctrine, teaching them, that ex tempore prayer
was Pharisaicall at the best, and that no prayer ought to be longer then the
Lords prayer, and that people ought not to pray privately or secretly any
prayer that was not first written, and showed to and allowed by a Priest, That
though people confess their sins to God, yet they ought for more surety of
forgiveness to confess them to their Priest, their ghosty Father, and that
for want of auricular Confession, some have been brought to confess at the
Gallows. And has labored by his preaching and otherwise to draw his people
to auricular confession, averring that he had power to absolve them, and that
the Priest, though wicked, had power to forgive others sins, though not his
own, and that such as refused to give their children and servants liberty on
the Lords day, after their observation of the time of publike-worship, to sport
and play, did break Gods Commandments. That Offering on the Altar upon their
knees is of absolute necessity; and accordingly, while the Churchwardens are
collecting the moneys, given at the Sacrament, he uses to suspend the
celebration thereof, and when it is brought up to the Table takes it from them,
lays it on his book, blesses it, offers it up, and re-delivers it unto them,
and then proceeds. And has also publicly preached, That it is a great grief
to Gods people, that Abbeys are not again erected, because diverse could not
endure to live publicly, and that the curse of God was on them that kept the
Abby-Lands, and therefore they did not prosper. That he turned the
Communion Table Altar-wise, railed it in, used frequent bowing before it, urged
his people to come thither to receive, set the Jesuits badge with a glory
about it over the Communion Table on the East-wall, and on the north-wall near
the Altar, caused the picture of a flying Dove to be set over the Font to
represent the Holy Ghost, altered the deske in the Church to a place in the
chancell, where he was not seen nor heard of many in the Church, and has
refused to read the Act of 21. Iacobi, against swearing, saying, he knew a
better means to help it, namely by confession and penance. And has refused
to read the burial service at the burial of some children, because they dyed
before Baptism, and in visiting the sick, uses to mumble somewhat overthem,
and then to cross them upon the face and the forehead, and has expressed
great malignity against the Parliament.

84. The Benefice of Richard Duxon Doctor in Divinity, parson of the Parish
Church of St. Clement-Danes without Temple-barre London, is sequestered, for
that in his catechizing in his said Church he has taught, That children dying
after Baptism are saved by the faith of the Godfathers and Godmothers: And
spends much of his time in gaming for money, and uses to swear by the faith
of a Priest before God, and upon his salvation, and is very superstitious in
bowing and cringing to the Altar, and practicing the late illegal Innovations,
and compared them that used ex tempore prayer, and enlarged themselves therein
with pertinent expressions, to Baals Priests, who thought to be heard for their
much bauling. And neglecting to preach himself upon Christmas Day last in the
afternoon, and finding a very great congregation met to hear M. Evans the
Lecturer preach, kept the Pulpit and deske himself, with a strong hand,
refusing to let the Lecturer preach, and openly protested to the congregation,
that they should have no Sermon then; and in the pulpit read a few collects to
them, and then charged the Churchwardens to drive the congregation out, or to
shut them in, and so enforced the congregation to depart without any Sermon in
great discontent: And speaking of the present troubles said, It had been a
happy thing for the Kingdom, if they had made choice of such Parliament Men,
as they might have trusted without any Puritans. And reading in his Church an
Ordinance of Parliament for a collection for maimed soldiers, to discourage
his people from giving to that pious use, told them, That charity did begin at
home, and for his part, he thought their own poor had more need of it, And
has not only refused to take the late Protestration, but also being desired
to lead his people in taking the late Covenant, answered openly in the Church
before them, That he would not lead the people into sin, and yet was a great
promoter of the Churchwardens and Sides-men of the said Parish to take the
Oath of the late new Canons with himself, and has otherwise expressed great
malignity against the Parliament, and has extorted excessive fees from his
Parishioners for burials, viz. twenty shillings for a Sermon, when there was
none, twelve shillings for the use of a black-cloath, hanged about the Pulpit
at the time of the burial, not being desired and otherwise, and has deserted
his cure for six weeks last past, before the said sequestration, and has
betaken himself to the Army of cavaleers, raised against the Parliament, and
was seen in Oxon since in a colored hat and coat.

85. The Benefices of Edward Marten, Doctor in Divinity, Parson of the Parish
Churches of Houghton-Conquest in the county of Bedford, and of Dunnington in
the county of Cambridge, is sequestered, for that he usually prayed openly for
the Saints and people departed this life, and that they may be eased and freed
of their pains in Purgatory, and has said, that preaching is profaned when
it is in a dining-roome, or other place, not hallowed by the Bishop, and that
the Ordinance is profaned by the place, and does not consecrate the place: And
that having great yearly revenues, did notwithstanding upon the Sabbath Day
steal wheatesheaves out of the field in harvest, and laid them to his tithe
shock, and has not preached since he was Parson of Houghton-Conquest in five
years, not above five Sermons there, and has substituted there in his absence
very scandalous and malignant Curates, and was a great promoter of the late new
Canons, and is most unreasonable in adoring of the Altar, making five low
cursies in his going to it, and two at it, and then falling down upon his
knees before it, with his eyes on a crucifix, being in the East window over it.
And when he did preach, his Subject was mostly in exalting of holy ground, and
pressing the practice of the said illegal Innovations, and he forced diverse
women that came to be churched to come up to the Altar; and there to ducke and
kneel unto it, and at their coming and going from it, and had made his
Parishioners, not only to cringe to the said Table, and come up to the Rails,
but also to offer money there unto him, holding a basin for the fame purpose on
his knees, commanding them so to offer their gifts. And has openly preached
that the Parliament goes about in a factious way, to erect a new Religion, and
has confessed before the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning plundered Ministers, that he had lent and given money to the King
to maintain this unnatural war against the Parliament and Kingdom.

86. The Benefice of James Buck, Vicar of the Parish Church of Stradbrocke in
the county of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he has preached openly, That
the Pope is the head of the Church, and head of the spiritualty, and that there
would never be any conformity in the Church, till a Patriarch should be above a
Bishop, a Bishop above a Priest, a Priest above a Deacon, and the Bishop of
Rome above them all. And that this is my Body in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper is to be understood in the literal sense, and that there is a
Transmutation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ, as in
John 2. the substance of water is turned into the substance of wine. And that
the words, Do this, are spoken to the Priest to create the body of our Lord,
affirming, the Priest to to have power to create the very body and blood of
Christ, and that it is lawful to invocate Saints and Angels, and that Infants
dying after Baptism, become Interceders, even for their Parents: And that
auricular Confession to the Priest is absolutely necessary to salvation, once a
year, or at least once in a man's life. And has also labored to maintain
universal grace, and that the Church of Rome is as honorable a Church as any
in the world: And that he uses to make as low obeisance at the mentioning of
the Virgin Mary's name, as he does at the name Jesus. And does not only bow
thrice at his going, and thrice at his return from the Communion Table set
Altar-wise; But teaches, That Adoration is due to it, when the holy mysteries
are absent; and that it is as lawful to worship the Altar, as for the woman
that touched the hem of his garment to worship Christ, and as it was for the
24. Elders in the Revelation to worship before the Throne, And has refused to
deliver the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to diverse of his Parishioners, though
they desired it on their knees at the Railes, merely upon his own will, and
denied the cup to diverse to whom he gave the bread, and has often preached,
That if a child die baptized, it is undoubtedly saved, but if it die before
baptism, it is undoubtedly damned, and has expressed great malignancy against
the Parliament.

87. The Benefice of Thomas Vaughan, Curate of the Parish Church of Chatham in
the county of Kent, is sequestered, for that he has been a great practiser of
the late illegal superstitious Innovations and presser of the same upon the
consciences of his auditory, protesting against them that would not comply with
him therein, as men of a devilish spirit, and has been very negligent in his
Cure, many times not preaching above once a month, and affirmed, That to
preach in season is to preach on Sundaies in the fore-noone, and out of season
in the afternoon: And endeavored to hinder his parishioners from going to
hear Sermons else where, when they had none at home, affirming to them, That
it was as lawful for him to use Dalliance, or lie with his neighbors wise, as
for any of them to go from their own Parish. And is a common frequenter of
tavernes, sitting a tippling there, and has been often drunk, and drew one to
the tavern that had vowed not to drink wine, and mingled wine and beer and
drew him to drink it, and then clapped him on the shoulder and bad him make
vows no more, for he had now broken it; and did preach openly, That to preach
nothing but Scripture without authority of the Fathers, was like the devils
sheering of hoggs, a great cry, but a little wool. And said upon the
dissolution of the late Parliament, that the Members of that Parliament were a
company of logger headed fellows.

88. The Benefice of Richard Goffe, Vicar of the Parish Church of
East-Greensteed in the county of Sussex, is sequestered, for that he is a common
haunter of Tavernes and Alehouses, a common swearer of bloody oaths, and
singer of baudy songs and often drunk, and keeps company with Papists and
scandalous persons, and has confessed, That he chiefly studied Popish
Authors, highly commended Queen Mary's time, and disparaged Queen
Elizabeth's, as an enemy to learning, and hoped to see the time again that
there should be no Bible in men's houses. And has openly preached, That such as
go to other Parish Churches then their own, are in the state of damnation,
and that after the bread and wine at the Sacrament is consecrated, it is no
more bread and wine, but the body and blood of Christ. And in a funeral Sermon
at the burial of a woman, said, That she being regenerated in Baptism did
live and die without sin: and has expressed great malignancy against the
Parliament, saying, That he hoped to see it confounded, and that he cared not a
figg for the Parliament.

89. The Benefice of Thomas Staple, Vicar of the parish Church of Mundon in the
county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter of Tavernes
and Alehouses, and a great drinker, and companion with drunken, debaushed and
malignant persons: And upon the first of June in this instant year, 1643.
being the next day after the Fast, invited to his house a riotous company, to
keep a day of profaneness by drinking of healths round about a
joyn'd-stoole, singing of profane songs with hollowing and roaring, and at the
same time enforced such as came to him upon other occasions, to drink healths
about the stool with him, until they were drunk. And has taught, That it is
not for Laymen to meddle with the Word, nor yet to search the Scriptures. And
has often left his parishioners destitute of preaching on the Lord's Day, even
within these 12. months, and when he has been absent from them, has
substituted in his room very drunken and debaushed Curates, and has
professed, that if any of his parish that did not like of his course of life
should be sick, and send for him to be reconciled to him, he would not come
at him, though he were sure to save his soul thereby. And has taught, That
children dying without Baptism are all damned, and if any Infant that received
the Sacrament of Baptism should be damned, he would be damned for him.

90. The Benefice of Peter Allen, Vicar of the Parish Church of Tolsbury in the
county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he has lived incontinently a long
time with several women, that is to say with Mary Tim, who went from his house
with child by him, Frances Smith, by whom he also had a bastard. And with Ann
Cooper whom he has kept for the space of 7 years last past, and yet keeps in
his house, who miscarried of a child begotten by him. And while the Railes were
standing about the Communion Table, he refused to administer the Sacrament to
such as would not come to them. And has been very negligent of his Cure,
absenting himself without any care taken for supply thereof a month together,
whereby the bodies of the dead have been left unburied several days, and
has expressed great malignancy against the Parliament.

91. The Benefice of John Hurt, Vicar of the Parish Church of Horndon upon the
hill, in the county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common frequenter
of Tavernes and Alehouses, and a common drunkard and gamester, a common
swearer and curser, and has been convicted before the Justice of peace for
six oaths at a time, and then swear by God, he did not swear, and has a very
evil report of uncleanness and abuse of women, and has spoken basely of the
Parliament and expressed malignancy against the same, and taught his
Parishioners on Fast-dayes in the afternoon to follow their worldly
occasions, and used himself then to spend that time in the Alehouse.

92. The Benefices of Paul Clapham, Vicar of the Parish Church of Farnham in
the County of Surry and Parson of the Parish Church of Martin Worthy in the
county of South-hampton, are sequestered, for that he has lived in adultery
with several women, and has had diverse bastards and charged the Parish with
the keeping of them, and has two bastards at this time kept, one of which he
pays for the maintenance of, and is bound with his son to pay for the
maintenance of the other. And has called the Parliament and their adherents,
Rebels and Traitors, and exhorted men to contribute and take up Arms against
the Parliament, and has deserted his said Cure and betaken himself to the
Army of Cavaleers about January last.

93. The Benefice of John Amnes, Parson of the Parish Church of Charleton in
the County of Kent, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard, and has
been drunk on the Fast-daies, and uses to drink healths, and in them to
wish, That he might be cursed by Father, Mother and all his Kin, that ends
one health and will not another begin; And has kept a common Alehouse, and is
a prophaner of the Sabbath day, by common sequenting of Alehouses thereon, and
is a practiser of the late Innovations, and would never preach himself, nor
suffer others to preach on the Sabbath-dayes in the afternoon, and has
attempted the chastity of diverse women, and used unchaste behavior toward them.

94. The Benefice of Robert Shepard, (...) of the Parish Church of Hepworth in
the county of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he is a common drunkard, and
frequenter of Tavernes and Alehouses, lying and continuing drunk in the said
houses diverse nights, sometimes twice or thrice a week, and is greatly
suspected of incontinency, having had diverse maidservants depart from his
house great with child, none living in the house with them but himself, and
some of them have returned again to live with him, and within a short time
have been with-child again; And has been a great practiser of the
Altar-worship, an inforcer of his Parishioners to receive the Sacrament at the
railes, and has put 15. at a time from the Sacrament for refusing to receive
it at the railes; And in his Catechizing and preaching, calls his parishioners,
Black-mouthed hell hounds, Limbs of the Devil, Firebrarnds of Hell, Plow
joggers, Bawling dogs, Weaverly Iacks, and Church-Robbers, affirming, that if
he could term them worse he would; And has endeavored to persuade poor men
to forswear themselves for him, and has affirmed, That the Parliament were
but a company of factious spirits.

95. The Benefice of John Woolhouse, Vicar of the Parish Church of West-Mersea
in the county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common and excessive
tipler and drinker both at home and abroad, a common Alehouse haunter and
drunkard, and on the Lords day going from the Church to the Alehouse in the
fore-noon, and continuing tippling there till the afternoon service, and uses
to entice and provoke others to join in the same excess with him, even to
drunkenness, and is a common dicer and gamester for money, enticing his
tippling companions thereunto, and is a common curser and swearer, and has
tempted women to incontinency, and has expressed great malignancy against the
Parliament.

96. The Benefice of Henry Hannington, Vicar of the Parish Church of Hougham in
the county of Kent, is sequestered, for that he is a common and notorious
drunkard, and often lying deaddrunke in highways, and has continued so for the
space of twenty years and upwards, and uses to sing in his cupps in the
Alehouse baudy songs, which he calls Cathedral Songs, and on Easter-Eve and
the several Saturdayes before and after that, he was so drunk that he was
scarce able to speak, and yet did administer the Communion on the three
Sundays following them; And being likely to recover the Peer of Dover to be
within the bounds of his Parish, he was asked how so great a number could have
room in so small a Church as his, and his answer was, Let them pay me their
offerings at Easter, and let them all go to the Devil at Whitsontide, and
has been so negligent of his Cure, as children have been six or seven weeks
unbaptized, and the rest of the parish wholly neglected; And when he read the
Book of Sports on the Lords day, there was Beer laid into his Barn, and
dancing and drinking there that day, and to give them the more time for it, he
dismissed the Congregation with a few prayers, and left off preaching in the
afternoon; And was at the time of the late Innovations, a very forward
promotor, and diligent practiser of them, and threatened the Churchwardens when
they took down the Communion Table into the Church, and when young people and
servants have come to him to pay their offerings and be examined of their
fitness to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, his manner always was,
to ask them, How many Piggs their Fathers and Masters had, and how many Foul
they kept, and how many Lambs, and when they had fully informed him thereof,
admitted them to the Sacrament without any further examination.

97. The Benefice of Samuel Sowthen, Vicar of the Parish Church of Malendine in
the county of Essex, is sequestered, for that he is a common haunter of
Alehouses and Tavernes, and often drunk even upon the Lords day, and is a
common provoker of others to drink excessively, rejoicing when he had made
them drunk; and is a common swearer and curser, and has refused to deliver
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper to his parishioners that would not come to
the railes to receive, and uses to bow to the Elements in the Sacrament,
lifting them up and embracing them, and has administered the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper in one kind only, and preached in maintenance thereof, and has
been a diligent practiser of the late Innovations, and perswader of others
thereunto, and has frequently enveighed against painful Preachers and their
hearers, comparing them to Pedlers and Ballad-singers, that have most company,
when rich Merchants have but few, and has persecuted his Parishioners even to
excommunication, for going to hear Sermons at other Churches on the Lord's Day
in the afternoon, when they had none at home, and has expressed great
malignity against the Parliament, and is vehemently suspected of living
incontinently, and in adultery with Katherine Hayward, and has been several
times presented to the Ecclesiastical Court by the Churchwardens and
sides-men for the same.

98. The Benefice of Thomas Heard, Vicar of the Parish Church of West-Tukely in
the County of Essex, is sepuestred, for that he is a common drunkard and
companion of drunkards, and has been so drunk, that he has tumbled into
ditches and mire, and has been often drunk since he was complained of in
Parliament, and in one of his drunken fitts, called for a fire to be made, and
vowed he would burn his Wife and children in it, and refused to deliver the
Sacrament to his Parishioners for not kneeling at the ledge of the railes,
though they did present themselves kneeling near unto it within his reach, and
when the former Parliament brake up, said boastingly, That he hoped then to
live to see all the Puritans hanged.

99. The Benefice of Samuel Scrivener, Parson of the Parish Church of Westhropp
in the County of Suffolk, is sequestered, for that he did frequently bow toward
the Communion Table, affirming, That there was an inherent holiness in that
place, and has committed adultery with Margaret the Wife of George Woods, and
is a common frequenter of Alehouses, and has been often drunk, and has
said, That the County of Suffolk had chosen such factious fellows for their
Knights, that the Parliament was not like to hold, and has preached against
this present defensive war of the Parliament and Kingdom.

100. The Benefice of Ambrose Westrop, Vicar of the Parish Church of
Much-Totham in the County of Essex, is sequestered, for that he does commonly
profane the ordinance of preaching, by venting in the Pulpit, matters
concerning the secrets of Women, to stir up his auditory to laughter; And has
taught in his Sermons, That a man that uses carnal copulation with his wife
the night before the administration of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
unless his wife require him so to do, ought not to come to the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; and that a woman that has Monthly sickness, ought not to
come to the Sacrament; That a Woman is worse then a Sow, in two respects;
First, Because a Sowes skin is good to make a Cart-saddle, and her Bristles
good for a Sowter. Secondly, Because a Sow will run away if a man cry but
Hoy, but a woman will not turn head, though beaten down with a Leaver; and
that all the difference between a Woman and a Sow, is in the nape of the neck,
where a Woman can bend upwards, but the Sow cannot, and that a woman is
respected by a man, only for his unclean lust, and that she that is nursed
with Sowes milk, will learn to wallow; and diverse modest women absenting from
Church, because of such uncivil passages, he affirmed, That all that were then
absent from Church were whores: And having been a suitor to a Widow whom he
called Black Besse, who rejected him and married another, he observed in his
Sermon out of one of the Psalms, That David prayed to God, not to Saint or
Angel, nor yet to black Besse, who was then in the Church before him; and that
Jacob to deceive his brother of the blessing, made lie upon lie, but when Esau
came home and perceived it, he flung away with a pox, and speaking against such
as pleased him not in paying the tithes, in the Pulpit he turned toward his
brother in-law then in the Church, and said, You brother Block-head will pay no
tithe-Bushes neither, And being angry with one whose name was Kent, he said
thus in the Pulpit, they say the Devil is in Harwich, but I am sure he is in
Kent; And speaking of the Parable of those that made excuses for not coming to
the marriage, he observed, That the married man had no excuse, but said in
plain terms, he could not come, Nay said he, the married man cannot come, but
must go to Hell in his whore: And at another time told a story in the Pulpit
of two several women, that in their husbands absence had familiars, and said,
that when it was night they went up into the chamber together with a candle,
and put out the candle, and there is sport, heavenly sport, such sport as never
was in little Heaven; and when their husbands come home, they must enquire the
way by Horne-row, and that Rahab was a whore, and kept an Alehouse at Jericho,
and that so are all Ale-wives whores and their husbands Cuckoulds; And being a
suitor to one Mistress Ellen Pratt a Widow, he did write upon a piece of paper
these words, Bonny Nell, I love thee well, and did pin it on his cloak, and
ware it up and down a Market-Towne, which woman refusing him, he did for five
or six weeks after, utter little or nothing else in the Pulpit, but invectives
against Women; And being suitor to another woman, who failed to come to dinner
upon invitation to his house, he immediately road to her house, and desiring
to speak with her, she coming to the door, without speaking to her, he pulled
off her head-geere and rode away with it, and many other like passages fall
from him in his preaching, and were proved against him.

FINIS.

