The Copy of a LETTER Sent to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax.

With an ACCOUNT TO THE OFFICERS OF THE Generals Regiment, intended for
satisfaction to their demands. Likewise seven heads which are presented to the
General by some Officers of the Regiment, and some other particulars in
relation thereunto published.

By Francis White, Mayor of the Generals Regiment of Foot.

Blessed is the servant whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing.

But if the evil servant shall say in his heart, my Lord delays his coming,
and shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to hate, and drink with the
drunken; the Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks for him,
and in an hour he is not aware of

Mat. 24.46, 48.49. Printed in the Year. 1647

The Copy of a Letter sent to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, with an
account to the Officers of the Generals Regiment, intended for satisfaction to
their demands.
ITt is not my desire in publishing these things, after written to appear
singular, or to be taken notice of among men, but only to clear my integrity,
to seek preservations. I being chosen an Agitator for the Generals Regiments
to act in relation to those ends expressed in the solemn engagement of the Army,
and being called thereunto by the General, and also chosen one of the
Committees appointed by the general Council, to dispatch things of immergent
necessity, and to prepare things in order to the great ends, viz. satisfaction
and security, I was likewise appointed by this Committee, with the approbation
of the General, to sit with the Committee of Lords and Commons at the Head
Quartes, which they were not very well pleased with. But being at their
convention I spoke some words which gave distaste, viz that they were repairing
an old house and that when they were laying the top stone, it would fall about
their ears. I also said it is evident, that the Parliament dare do nothing,
but what is agreeable to the sense of the Army. And that the Parliament was
grown into parties and factions. The next day, the Commissary General speak
to the Grand Committees, where I was present, to have another set in my room
and told me that he was going to the General, to desire him to call me to a
Council of War, I answered that I would be accountable for what I had
spoken, and would justify the same, I then desired the Committee to choose
another in my room, that I might be no stop to their proceedings, but the
Committee were unwilling so to do, but I pressing the same, they new chose the
whole four, after which I heard no more of that matter.

I being sensible of what design was laid by some great men, and knowing how
far short it came of comprehending general freedom, and preserving all
interest, according to our First declaration, I did by my endeavors labor to
break that prerogative design, and to inform others what J knew thereof, upon
which grounds there was displeasure conceived against me, and e was informed
before the next general Council sat, there was an intention to cast me out
of the Council, which the Lieutenant General did ingeniously acknowledge, the
great thing that I conceived to be the cause thereof, was the opposing the
fastening the Generals negative voice over the Grand Council. My Lord Says
son informing a Member of Mr. Goodwins Church, that all things went on very
well, and that there was but one man opposed, which he named to be my self, in
opposing the Generals negative voice. So that what I speak in relation to the
visible authority of the kingdom, and the power and force of the sword, upon
which the Declaration was set forth to the kingdom as the cause of my
expulsion, was grounded upon that accidental occasion, the cause being before
declared.

Immediately after, I was put of that employment, I went to the Regiment that
employed me, and gave them a full account of the whole, and desired them to
send another in my room, they desired me to withdraw, which I did, and they
immediately drew up these lines as follows.

To the Honorable the grand Council of the Army.
THe humble desires of us the Officers, and Soldiers of his Excellencies
Regiment of Foot, are, that this Honorable Council would be pleased to
satisfy us upon what grounds Major White formerly chosen by us for our
Agitator, is dismissed from a capacity of discharging that trust by us reposed
in him, whom we have ajudged both honest and faithful, and have no solid
grounds as yet to think otherwise of him, and we do subscribe out selves
yours and the kingdoms servants according to our Engagement in the faithful
discharge of our duties.


This was signed by all the Cptaines, Lievtenants, Ensigns, and Agitators of
the Regiment then present at a Convention at Rygate in Surry, Saturday
September 11 1647.

But my Lieutenant Colonel, and two Captains being not present, it was
ordered to stay till Monday before it was sent, to receive their hands, but
they understanding which way the stream run, and of what consequence this might
prove, procured the alteration of the same, since which time I have been very
little acting in any thing in relation to the public affairs, more then my
employment with the Regiment. And being necessitated to make means for
preservation. which is the alone cause of publishing hereof. On Friday after,
the Officers of the Regiment under my command, coming unto me with demands,
which I was not bound to give them an account, but I being willing to give them
satisfaction, I did desire to walk into the garden at my Quarters, and
discourse the matter, then did I show them this letter following, which I sent
to the General, which contained my principles, and told them it was well known
at the Head Quarters, notwithstanding they went away unsatisfied, I desiring to
inform them more at large, drew up this paper hereunto annexed, and intended
to have presented it to them the Friday following, but on the Monday, contrary
to my expectation, all the Officers came to town, and sent to me desiring to
speak with me, when I came to them they presented diverse Articles which they
had collected from the former discourse and desired to know if I would own
them, because they did intend to send them to the General, and to call me to
account for the same, I finding them contrary in circumstances, and some
substantial to what I had spoken, did by their approbations draw up and
contract theirs into these seven heads following, and signed them with my own
hand, expecting to be called to justify the same. And knowing not what may be
the issue, it ingageth me to publish the whole matter, that all men may know
thereof, and if the Army and Commons will not own my cause, I shall with heart
and good will seals it with my blood, unless I am convinced of error.

To the Right Honorable his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax General.
Right Honorable,
IT is my desire, that honor may be given to whom honor is due, and here is
no man living more honorable in my account then your self, it would be an
injuri us thing to detract from you where in you have mer^itted in the
deliverance of this people so far as now is. But seeing the end is not
accomplished, nor yet in a visible way for complete deliverance, give me leave
to plead with your Excellency in the behalf of my self and the people, and to
tell you, that your Excellency and the Army, are bound in duty toward God and
this Nation, to endeavor a perfect deliverance in as much as human
providence can provide for the setting the people free, which was the moving
cause of our first taking up Arms, and seeing the Parliament which was the
authority by whom we were directed, and were no^ properly the judges of the
peoples freedom, did endeavor the continuance of more servill bondage, being
persuaded thereunto by the prevailance of the Presbyterian faction of this
kingdom and of Scotland, who made it the end of their desires only to unsadle
the Bishops, and bring in the King to confirm the Presbytery, and to make
their faction most prevalent in Courts, with little care to gratify the
exhausted Commons for the expense of so much (...) blood, we waited long after
the subduing of our enemies power. For the Parliaments settling the Kingdom in
peace and freedom, but contrary to our and the peoples expectations we were
provoked to resist their authority, and to repel all power they could procure
against us, theirs and the kingdoms best friends without asking who should be
judge of the justness thereof, they or the Army, it is easy when the sun
shinoth, for men to tell whether it be light or dark.

And if any power now remaining, shall proceed in ways of injustice, to
support their self interest by the help of a public ministry, crying up
authority to maintain their greatness, it will be in vain to imagine, the
continuance thereof, certainly the highest and most legal authority in this
king* come will appear to be the Commons in Parliament, yet now I dare with
confidence speak it, they are not the highest power.

That is properly the highest power that is best able to act, and that only the
power of God among men, so long as they do what is just, and are a terror to
evil works, the Army now at your and his command in all just things, is the
highest power visible in this Kingdom, and if you see not a good Government
established for the weal of the people, according to equity and reason, it
will lie upon your Excellencies and the Armies account.

Now whether it be safe for the Army and people to set up the King by an act of
Oblivion, and general pardon, and to give him a neggative voice by consent,
which before has been in dispute; I leave your Excellency to judge, seeing no
Ordinances of Paliament can be made Laws upon this account, but by his consent
it will be of little worth to the people, to have (...) perpetual Parliament
or a Bieniall, which you please, it is a vain thing for any to flatter
themselves with the advantage of the command of the Melitia, by sea and land
for ten years, when all the Judges of the Land are corrupt, and plead the
Kings interest, and bound to it by oath, and the Laws of the Land, and no way
left for defense, but the Sword, which will prove but little, succor, to a
poor man especially.

Whether we have any reason to set up the King upon those tea^mes, seeing how
cloose he sticks to his own party, or whether he will not in seven years, in
all likely hood by policy, be a greater Conqueror, then he could have been
by the Sword? I leave it to your Excellency, and all wise men to judge, if your
Excellency shall be pleased to consider these things with candid interpretation
of my former actions known to your self, it will appear that with
integrity, I have sought no other interest, then the general freedom of the
people, and that which I spoke in Counsel or else where, for which I was
expelled, and made incapable of discharging that trust, I can make manifest to
be most true, only a judged unseasonable to cross the Byas of some men's
affections, which we may have cause to wish a remedy, for when the
oppertunitie is past, it will appear no weakening of your authority, by
endeavoring to prevent the faltering your negative voice, over the grand
Council of the Army, who are to judge of satisfaction and security in
relation to dividing, or disbanding, or to declare any thing to the Kingdom*
in the name of the Army: this no way alters the conduct, as a Army acting in
this capacity.

It is far from my heart to desire the seting up the power and force of the
for continuance, though I affirm as the condition of the Kingdom now is,
there is no superintendent authority, but what is exercised by the power and
force of the Sword, and of necessity for some time must be so, if we
immediately give up ourselves to the authority of Parliament, I know not but
that all those which have been our opposers, not exempted, may soon appear too
numerous for them that came to the Army, and the Minor glad to call for our
help again, as was the saying of one soon after our re-instating them, that
they were not able to carry on the business without our helping them, I know
the people have cause to bless God that the swords is in the hands of men of
such integrity to the public, that desire the continuance of the same no
longer then all a happy government be established, wherein there needs no such
pollicle to be used, as the making use of a public ministry to preach up a
states design, but that is may be fi^me, distinct from the Clergy, and all
men to receive justice in what capacity soever, to taste of subjection as well
as di^soveraignity, which is impossible to be brought to pass without
establishing the supreme law, making power in the Commons in Parliament and
that changable, successively by an indub^tate Right, as in reason it should be
so to the people, there is no friend to Englands freedom, will oppose this in
the restoring the kingdom to its ancient Liberties as before the Conquest, and
if your Excellency will with courage as has been never wanting, make this
your work, you will never want the assistance of hands and heart of the people.

Now I shall only crave pardon for my troubling your Excellency, and remain
your Excellencies servant in the recovering of Englands freedom.

From Rygate, in Surrey, September. 23. 1647. Francis White.


An Account to the Officers of the Generals Regiment, intended for
satisfaction to their demands.
Sirs,
YOu being unsatisfied in what I had delivered at the General Council of the
Army, I gave you some account. But seeing it was not satisfactory, I proceed to
give you a more full relation of my principles, with endeavors to clear the
same.

Your demands were thus, that seeing I affirm there is no visible
superintendent authority in the Kingdom, but what is exercised by the power
and force of the Sword, you desire to know under what authority I stand in this
Regiment as Major, I answered you.

That I was made Major of the Generals Regiment by Commission from himself
before we had repelled the power which the City and Parliament had raised
against the Army, but after the authority of the Parliament was disobeyed and
the power they could procure against us, theirs and the peoples best friends
repelled,) and yet those Members that acted or voted against us, sitting in
Parliament as ours and the Kingdoms judges, I acted no more under that account
to the Parliament, but only under the authority of the General, by virtue of
the Solemn Engagement of the Army, and by the approbation and consent of the
Regiment, not one man denying when J presented my self their Major, J also
said that the Army was the highest power now visible in this kingdom, and the
General in chief authority, and a man whom J would obey in all commands from
him that I did receive, which were just and honest according to my
understanding, and that if he commanded me any injust thing, J would not
observe it, nor act therein. J affirming that all authority is but ministerial
in the persons, and that neither God, nor the people has given them authority
to do any unjust thing, neither will any people willingly be oppressed with
injustice, and that the commands of a Superior Authority do not justify the
inferior in unrighteous actions.

J further declare, that whatsoever action is set for ward by vetrue of
authority, that is unjust, and pressed by power of stronger power may resist
and suppress their power and the authorities also, if they persist in the
prosecutiof it.

It is the equity of a thing that makes it lawful. I know the strong man
armed keeps his house, till a stronger then he comes, I have well
confidered the words of the Apostle, Romans the 13. saying, Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, For there is no power but of God, the powers that
be, we ordained of God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves
damnation. For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to evil, will thou
then not be afraid of the power, do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the sam^.

Here the case is clear, the powers that be are of God, even all powers in the
world, now J affieme that that is properly power that is able to act whersoever
it is, and may resist the unjust commands of authority, and if the authority
do gather strength to enforce their unjust commands then may the power justly
cast of obedience, and defend themselves, and repel their strength by force,
this principle must of necessity be granted or else all war either offensive
or defensive is unlawful, and we have done evil in fighting against the Kings
force, and likewise in suppressing those powers raised in London by the
Parliament. J acknowledge the Parliament if once purged of those Members that
assisted the King in the former war, and of those that voted the raising of a
new war, to be the most legal and supreme authority of this Nation, though
not so legal as it ought to be. And J affirm the Army the highest visible
power, and to be commanded and directed by the Parliament, and bound to obey
all things just which are commanded by them, it is clear to me, the Mayor part
in them often visible capacity to act, is the highest power, and he that
resists them is culpable of the breach of this Scripture laid down be the
Apostle, only observe this, every gainesaying is not resisting, and J will
never resist any power, unless J thought J sin if J did not.

But if a Mayor in a Nation rise up to procure justice and supp esse the Minor,
it is clear to me they are the highest power and may justly appoint authority
over themselves and all that shall concur with them, or consent thereto for
their well being and safety, and may not be charged of resisting the highest
power.

There is no form of government by divine appointment, but the voice of the
people is the voice of God as much for one as another, and that is the most
legal and just authority which is set up by consent, and that legally by
judging, but to the generation that appointed it. For the father has not power
to engage the son bus by consent, and may not justly make him a slave.
Children are only to obey their parents in the Lord, that authority that is set
up by force is to be obeyed in all just things, but if it grow corrupt and
depart from the ways of justice and righteousness, then may a people justly
deliver themselves from their oppressors, and repel their power by force. I
took up arms at the first in judgment and conscience against the Kings power
to procure deliverance for this people and Nation of my nativitle, from the
oppression and injustice that was exercised by the King and his Ministers, and
likewise opposed the Parliament upon the same grounds, and shall again with
heart and hand oppose tyranny and injustice whersoever J find it, (...) shall
enable me and make me a clear way and call thereunto.

J know the^e is a divine power over all the creatures in the world, and God
suffers the Devil to deceive men so, that out of zeal toward God, they
think they do him service to distroy the Persons of his people, and seeing
there is such actings to distroy honest people, J account it my duty toward
God and the people, to endeavor by all means to preserve them, and my self
knowing, that if J do not use what means God gives to preserve natural
life, J am accessory to my own ruin, and become a self murtheter.

It is not difficult to be understood, that the authority and government of
this kingdom, was set up by force, by the Norman Conqueror, and by policy and
force fastened by his successors to these times, winding in the people into
snares by craft, imposing oaths of Alleagence and Supremacy, etc. setting up a
public ministry to preach up the authority divine, and to be accountable to
God only, strengthening it by the Gentry, which receive honor one of another,
the King being the fountain of th^s honor, and all Lawyers having dependence
on the King, plead his interest, and likewise the Law forfitting him as much as
the invention of man can imagine. But what reason can be given, that one man's
wit should contradict the wisdom of 400 the wisest men that can be chosen in
a Nation, I know not; or that all laws that a people shall choose for their
well being and safety, should be accounted of as acts of grace and favor from
a single person, unless it were in his power to consum them, or they in his
hands, as the clay in the hands of the potter? It is beyond my capacity to
conceive the equity thereof, this is no other but the adoring that image
spoken of in Daniell the second, which shall be as ch^ffe before the threshing
flower, verse 26.

Now that the Army, Parliament, and City and Commons of the Land, which have
joined with them, should ask the King an act of oblivion, and general pardon
after they have conquered his power, is most preposirous and ignorane, and will
clearly in my judgment through the guilt of blood, which is little thought of
upon themselves, and make him merely passive, which has been most active.

Now for the prevention of those mischiefs that may fall upon us, and for the
settling a firm peace for the safety of the whole, J see no other way but to
stand to the House of Commons, who first called us together, and with the
consent of the people establish the supreme law making power in their House,
which are the most proper representative of the people, and to procure that
changeable and equally chosen for the future by an indubitat^ right.

J am sencible that if we should receive an act of oblivion from the King,
which I never will accept of, yet may the next King call us (...) account, or
if he will nor, yet the law will, which is a written setter, and will ^ill us,
and hang the Judges if prosecuted, which shall give sentence contrary thereto,
we have some experience hereof in the case of James Symballs, Crab, White, and
Ward, which were all sentenced to the confiscation of their estates and to
imprisonment, during the Kings pleasure, for speaking words against the King,
in the time of the late wars, and at the Armies marching through London, some
of them had enlargement by Mr. Devenish, for which he was fined 60. l. to the
King, and some remain in prison at this day, notwithstanding i^ has been
insisted upon by the Army for their enlargement.

The like example of a Soldier of Col. Rocestors Regiment, sentenced by Judge
Reeves and Bacon, contrary to the Law of Arms, notwithstanding the Parliament
gave them instructions not to meddle in matters of the Military affairs and
the General sent his letter to them desiring he might be sent to the Army to
be tried at the Martiall-law as a Soldier ought to be. For all this the Judges
writ to the General, which letter I red, signed with their names, that they
could not do it, and in another letter from Col. Twisselton, then Major,
informing that the Jury brought in verdict not guilty, yet the Judges sent them
backagaine, tell they brought in their verdict for man slaughter, and then the
Soldier was burned in the hand. If such affronts and sufferings may be put
upon an Army in full power and strength, I know not what may our mischiefs,
nor where or when our miseries may end, if we have not sure security before
the power of the Army be scattered, and before I would be so regardlesse of
those Soldiers that had acted in this employment, I would sacrifice, my life in
pleading for their deliverance.

I see no sufficient security, but by turning the current of the laws to run
in the name of the Commons of England, which will be for the general safety,
which is the ground and primitive end of all law.

Dear Sir, ny heart is toward you and all men, with affection and love, even
to the most bitter enemy I have, and I speak it in the presence of God, J know
no desire of my heart running after profit or honor or with any a^^imossitie
against any man's person, or general party, but desire that pure justice may
be exercised, which is part of the image of the diety, if not part of the
essence. I desire that the poor of this people may be raised to a condition of
livelihood and subsistence, and that prisoners may be executed, judged, or
restored, and not have their prisons made places of execution, which were never
ordained to that end, but to keep persons in custody tell time of trial. I
desire not a dissolution of all government, or a party that has been
retorted. For I know so long as there is corruption among men, there must be
government to suppress licentiousness and wrong, and to encourage godliness
and honesly according to the light of God manifest. It would be no difficult
thing to clear these principles from the law of nature, Scripture, and Reason.

It is far of my thoughts for promoting any design for a party, or to
procure the alteration of the conduct of the Army either in whole or in part,
or particular person, for I think the Officers to be the cream of the Army,
and the Army, such as is not parralell in the world, and if their judgments be
convinced, and their way clear, for action I am confident they would not fear
the power of the earth, it is wicked policy will be their greatest mischief.

We have had to much experience of former declarations, Protestations, and
promises, and though the parties mean really to perform them, yet one party
may turn over another, and they may be easily trampled upon, and soon
forgotten, therefore what reason have we to trust the King, or any other for
our future security, I know not. J am sure that if the King be set up without
further diminition of the regal power then is provided in the proposalls of
the Army, we shall never want subtle tormentors. J admire what stupiditie it
is that lies upon the spirits of gallant men, that do not fear the looks of
the most daring enemy in the field, and yet their hearts fail them, when they
look upon a single person.

But for a little the more clear illustration of the maine subject of the
inperintendent authority, J state a case parralell thus. The Lord Mayor of
London has the command of the Militia, he has likewise the Regal Authority
for administration of justice, he calls a Council of Aldermen and Common
Council men to consider of some weighty affairs, and to determine of things
for the weal of the City, there arises a great difference among the Council
in matters of great importance to the City the Lord Mayor and part of the
Aldermen and Common Council will have it one way, the Mayor part will have it
another way. The difference causes a breach, the Lord Mayor pleads the
Royalty of the command of the Malitia, to force them to his and his parties
prerogative principles, he calls in the corrupt party to his assistants,
many ^ich Merchants, Monopolizers, with all his officers that a^ecotrupt, and
all such as fear justice, the Major part of the Council call in the trades
men, and all the free Commons of the City to defend their just rights and
liberties, who willingly assist them, and by whose means and help they
subdue the Lord, Major and his party, after which the Lord Major by flattery,
and the help of his agents, gains the Major part of that Council, which
directed the Commons, the Council plead his interest; and seek to put
insufferable abuses upon the power that did preserve them, and those that were
most faithful* they reproach and contemn, and seek to put in^amie upon them,
the powers beat long with much parience, but when they see no way but ruin
designed them, they refuse the commands of this authority that commanded them,
and seek to deliver themselves and their friends from apparent ruin, and are
clear and justifiable in the suppressing the injustice of their authority,
after which the said Lord Major corrupts some of the leaders of that power,
and by the assistance of all his former parties that fear justice, or are
ambitious, or coveteous for profit or honor, he is in a fair way, with a
little loss to gain the day, whether the power remaining being the highest
visible in order, may not preserve themselves, I leave you to judge, when those
that have acted against this power, and are declared enemies to this power, and
that they will not suffer those usurpers and intruders to sit as their and the
rest of the Commons Judges, where then is the visible super-intendent
authority, I beseech you resolve me, it needs no applycation.

I am sure that it is power that first makes authority to command in just
things, God himself had not authority over any thing, tell he had made some
thing by his power to be at his command, it is evident that power setleth
authority, as in most kingdoms of the world, the authority and government
has been established by the power and force of the sword, and the people made
subject to evil for fear, which I desire may not be so with us. For my own
part I do not stand in fear of the power, when I do what is just by the
testimony of a good conscience, I fear not them that kill the body only and
can do no more* I will be accountable for all actions to the highest power,
and if I cannot justify my self, I will ask God and man forgiveness, or
suffer what God shall permit with joy, J know my own infirmities, passion, and
weakness, I know my own heart is deceitful, yet if men and Dive^s prosecute
me, I shall appear righteous and just through Christ before God my father, in
whom I have my inioyment, peace, reconciliation, union and comfort, which
makes my heart more glad, then any worldly man is in the increase of his
treasure. Now if there be any thing here written which appears to you errors, I
desire you to endeavor to convince me, and I shall renounce the same, I leave
it to your understanding, and to the God that gives wisdom, I shall pray
both for you and my self, that he will give us wisdom and teach us love and
meekness, that we may live together in peace, and happiness, and keep union
in the ways of righteousness, which is the desire of him, who has, is and
shall be tell death, a servant to you, and the Commons of England.

Presented to the Officers the Regiment at Ware. Monday October. 16 1647. Francis
White.


I Did n^^ seek occasion to publish these seven heads ensuing, which were
extracted out of many more, which the Officers of the Genesis Regiment had drawn
up as a charge against me, and likewise backing the same with a dec^^^ation
against the Case of the Army, and the Agents of the five Regiments of Horse,
promising the General their assistance to suppress such principles as I held
forth, and likewise to suppress those persons that had published that book in
the name of five Regiments, which they said were not 15. men* I little expected
such proceedings from those that had declared themselves so much my friends,
and said, my heart is as your heart, and we will stand and fall together.

One Friday the 13. October when all the Officers were appointed to attend at
the Head Quarters of the Regiment, as is our custom once a week, they then
made their demands, which I told them I was not bound to give them account
after ou^ meeting, they come all to my Quarters, and desires in away of love to
be satisfied in my principles, but Ju^^^s like with a kiss to betray me they
drew up their Articles from the tenor of my discourse in the garden, but the
Lord reward them, I shall endeavor to do them a courtesy for the same,
desiring not to be overcome with evil, but to overcome evil with good. I
would have read this paper of my account to them, before they presented their
Articles and Declaration, but they desired me to read it to them afterward
which J did, yet notwithstanding some would not hear with affection, nor
consider, but proceed with their business, and after my extracting them into
seven heads, they al^ered their Declaration, and desired me to sign it, which
wou^d have been rediculous, I refused it, and three Captains there present,
and some Lievtenants and Ensigns.

There being diverse Articles drawn up by some Officers of the Genesis Regiment,
which they brought to me, desiring to know of me whether I would own them as my
principles, is they charged them. I finding them imperfect to what I had
spoken, drew up these ensuing as follows, and signed them with my own hand.

1. That there is no superintendent Authority in this Kingdom, but what is
exercised by the power and force of the sword. 2. That the whole government of
the kingdom, under all the laws that have been since the Conque^, is, or
ought to be made null, that are contrary to equity, and such (...) government
to be established, that all persons may ta^^ of subjection as well as rule,
which is impossible to be brought to pass, without establishing the supreme
law, making power in the representative of the people, and that changeable. 3.
That the General does not stand so strong by virtue of his Commission from the
Parliament, as he does by virtue of the solemn Engagement of the Army. 4 That
whatsoever commands I shall receive from the General, I will obey if just, and
if in my approbation they appear not just, I will not obey them. And if there
be prosecution to distroy me for refusing unjust commands, I will preserve my
self by power if I can, and this liberty I conceive every person in the
kingdom ought to have. 5. That the Mayor part in the most visible capacity to
act, is the highest power, and may refuse the injust comm^nds of superior
authority. 6 That the Parliament men* that sat with Mr. Pellam, were as much a
Parliament, as those that sat when the Members went to the King, and unless
the House be purged of those persons, that are unduly elected, and likewise of
those persons that voted the raising a ^ew war, declared us^^^ers and
intruders by the Army, the Parliament is no Parliament, and ought not to be the
Army and kingdoms Judges. 7. That the laws of the Kingdom that were imposed
or settled by policy and strength from the Conqueror and his successors, which
are adjudged prejudicial to the people by the Commons, may be adhered, and
that the Army are bound in duty and conscience to God and the people to see it
performed.
Francis White.


Th^se things before written containing matters of such great importance, of
such general concernment to all the Commons of England, and the heads drawn
up, with a Declaration in relation to my self and others, by some Officers of
the Genesis Regiment, being sent unto the General, I have therefore thought fit
to publish the whole, for in relation of what has passed in relation to the
matter for which I was expunged the General Council of the Army, that those
whom in concerns may rightly understand what interest I have prosecuted, and
if it be not just, and that which God and good people will own, I desire I may
be convinced, and I shall ask God and man forgiveness, till which I shall
prosecute the same till I dye, or am in bonds, I fear not the power of the
world in well doing, for I know where justice^s, God is; and his divine
omnipotency will subdue them all, Christ is my rock on whom my refuge is
grounded, and in whom I trust, and whiles I walk under his banner, I am sure I
shall never be confounded if I swarve from the ways of justice and
righteousness, I do not expect protection, but desire the God of heaven and
earth to give up my body to destruction, yet I am sure my redeemer lives, and
my spirit shall be at rest.

The supreme end of all actions ought to be the glory of God, the second end,
the safety of the people the foundation of which is laid in righteousness and
justice, which are concommitants with the former. But seeing every man will
pretend the safety of the people in his own way, it is of necessity there be
something to bottom upon for final determination, what is the safety of the
people, and who shall be judges thereof? I say not the King, not this
Parliament so unequally chosen, and so mixed, not the Army upon ^^^tearmes, but
a free Parliament equally chosen, with every free man of age having his voice,
and that Parliament to have its bounds, sit how long to continue, and so to
have Parliaments successively once a year or every two year at most, to whom
all Officers of what quallity soever shall give an account, till which be
accomplished, I shall never willingly aqui esse.

But seeing this is a great work in which we shall find opposition, it is of
necessity that the Soldery be preserved, and kept in constant pay, to prevent
free quarter, that great burden, which will make the people hate them.

Then for the gaining and retaining the affections of the people, the prisoners
must be pitied and delivered. And the Excise of all English commodities taken
of, and a period set for the dissolution of the whole.

That there be a redress in that great grievance of Tithes, that the wages of
the hirelings labor be raised according to the rates of provisions.

That wi^owes, criples, mainted Soldiers, and fatherless children may be
effectually provided for.

That the people may be righted in point of accounts, that the wages of all
Officers of public employment may be abated, that they may not be bought and
sold, nor coveted after. And that the wages of all field Officers of the Army
made lesser, and the foot Soldiers raised to 12. d. per diem, and the horse
according to their equipage.

That the business for Jreland be prosecuted as soon as we are in a visib^e
security here, otherwise, we may send over Soldiers that will go only for
profit and honor, which will hardly prove true to the principles of
righteousness and justice, but turn again to cut our throats, as some have
done before.

That no men be prosecuted with revenge for evil done out of their zeal
according to their judgment and conscience.

If the people once see this, the work of the Parliament and Army, and that
they do not deale^ deceitfully with them, they will never want their
affections, nor purses to the consumation of the work.

Now if this writing, speaking, and acting in truth, and the ways of justice,
be accounted vile, I shall as David said, be yet more vile.

Francis White.

FINIS.

