(...) this was the first end propounded for it: Afterward our English Zion
cried aloud for prayers and tears too. And now Gods Zion in Scotland cries as
loud as any, All but one Zion, one Church, professing one Religion, and faith
in Christ, yet each one laboring under (...) several pressures, under in
rage^ and cr^^ll (...).

Here is the occasion of your Meeting now: a treble heavy and doleful
spectacle you have to sad your eyes withal, whereas at first, you had but one.
I hope your affections will be suitable, that as you are come, and here set
down, so before you go away you will weep too, which me thinks you cannot
choose but do, if as you ought, you will remember Zion.

I will hold you no longer therefore from the Duty, you shall have a Discourse
answerable thereunto, void of ornaments or dress at all, sad and plain, fit
for Debemus considerare in omni re, quid aptu^ sit and consemaneum tempori and
personae, cum quid in dictis factisque deceat. Cic. in Orat. ad Brutum.
Mourners, may but Zion only be the better remembered by it, and that is all I
shall desire.

The words in themselves are part of that description which the Israelites make
of their own woeful and lamentable condition, under the Babylonish captivity,
wherein, as when they came out of Egypt, they had the red Sea before them, and
Pharaoh and his Host behind them; So here, before them is the present
condition they are in viz. sitting down and weeping, and their former state
behi^^^ them, which now they have lost, and are deprived of, and that is it
which now they remember, their beloved Zion.

I Will make but two parts of the Text; here is Paena Sensus, the punishment of
sense, in the first words, sat down and wept. Damni, the punishment of loss,
intimated in the last, when we remembered Zion: viz. that Zion which now we
have lost.


Or if you will have it plainer, you may observe three, 1. Subjectum, the
subject spoken of, We. 2. Passio seu affectto, the passion or affection of
this subject, Sat down, and wept. 3. Ratio seu Causa utriusque, the reason of
both, When we remember Zion.


I could easily give you a more curious division, and I do confess, were I to
make an Oration upon these words, me thinks I could find excellent matter
enough, to please both ears and phansy too: But as a Divine I wave all such
levities, and present you plainly with the sum of all; as if poor Israel,
should thus have said:

We unhappy Israel, once the beloved of the Lord, his Spouse, his Darling, his
Well-beloved; Nay we, Job 29.6.
who not long since wet our footsteps in Butter, and the rocks powered us out
rivers of Oil, while the hand of the Almighty was upon our Tabernacle, and his
Candle shone upon our head; Who wanted nothing of all outward plenty and
prosperity that this world could afford: yet even We, for our manifold sins
and transgressions against our God, for our rebellions and unthankfulness
against our Maker, are cast now out of our own holy Land, out of Zion into
Babylon, a land of heathens and Idolaters; nay, out thence too, out of their
Towns and Cities, to the Rivers, to the waters side, where disconsolate and
comfortless, we know not what to do, but only sit sadly down, yea, and weep
for our sins, wherewith we have displeased our God: for the miseries our, sins
have brought us into, but more especially for the sad, and heavy state, and
condition, we have left our poor Zion in, all rent and torn in pieces, all
ruined and destroyed: This, this is that which cuts us to the very heart Nimis
(...) est record^tio Patriae, quae in hostiti retrae pro^^^^ existere nam
quanto haec a nara sentitur, ta^^o sit (...) s^avior: (...) enim peregri (...),
brop^^^ domici^^^ crescie affect^^, C^^^. (...) Psalm. 137. Si (...) est Patria,
amara est peregrinatie; tota die Tribulati^, quando in patria non est
delectatio. Aug. in Psalm.
, This makes us sit down and weep, when we remember Zion.

I Will speak a little of the Subject here (we must not pass it wholly by,
That Is it this people complains so of, La^^. 1.12. Is it nothing to you all
ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow,
which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me, in the day of
his fierce anger) and therefore we will comprise it briefly under this twofold
consideration.

First, We Gods people, and his ancient inheritance, to whom ever before this
we have been dear and precious, and loved above any Nation under Heaven: We
who were called by his Name, and amongst whom he himself dwelt in the midst,
yet even we the children of the most Highest, (whiles other heathen folk about
us are in plenty and prosperity) are driven to this sad exigent, to sit down
and weep, having lost our Zion.

Whence may you please to Observe the Truth of that which the Apostle Peter
has forewarned us of, 1 Pet. 4.17. That

Judgments usually begin at the House of God,

According to that precept of the Lord by the Prophet, Ezekiel 19.6. Slay
utterly both old and young, and begin at my Sanctuary. Indeed our Savior
Christ has long ago told us our doom, what we are to expect, Matthew. 16.24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
Nullus servus Dei sine tribulatione est, si putas te non ha^ere persecutiones,
nondun caepisti esse Christianum, Aug.
and follow me. Deny, deny himself, thus denying himself and taking up his
cross, he is then fit to follow Christ, and not before. To the same purpose
Saint Paul has told us Act. 14.22. Genesis 39.20. Job. 2.8. 1 Samuel 23. Jer.
27.15. Act. 16.23.24. Act. 4 3. and 7.5^. 2 King. 25.
That through manifold tribulations, we must enter into the Kingdom of God.

I need not tire you with Examples.

He that has read of Joseph in prison, Job upon the dunghill; or David
wandering in the Wilderness; of Jeremy in the dungeon; Paul and Silas in the
stocks; Peter and John in prison; and Stephen under an heap of stones; of
Jerusalem sacked; Israel discomfited, and Judah wasted; with infinite examples
more of later days, may easily conceive the Truth of this, if these sad times
have not already given him sufficient proof thereof to his cost, (it may be)
in his own particular. Thus fares it with the righteous here, They are like the
Sun hid many times with dusky clouds, like sweet Violets quite covered over
with shady leaves, like precious Pearls, lodged in heaps of Sand and rubbish.
This earthly Moon the Church (as one says) as well as that in Heaven, has her
Fulls, and her Wanes; yea, and sometimes her Eclipses too, so long as she
wanders in this Planetary world, it is in vain for her to expect any better; It
is well for her when she is fixed above, if then she may be free from
Change. Nor can it be expected it should ever be otherwise, since through all
Ages, there has never wanted some to vex and trouble the peace of Zion.

Before the Flood there was a bloody Caine, after him a proud Nimrod, then a
cruel Pharaoh, Genesis 4. and 10. Exodus 1. Isa. 36 Act. 12.
after a blasphemous Senacherib, then a wicked Herod, after Nero, Caligula,
Domitian, Lulian, with many more, and now at this day, worse then all, (like so
many Hydra's heads, one springing up after another) the cursed race of Turk and
Pope, of Jesuit and Seminary, the influence of whose rage and malice, we too
dearly feel all the three Kingdoms over.

How hardly meanwhile would it go with the poor Israel of God, had not God
in his mercy forewarned them of these things before, (...), etc. 2 Timothy 3.12.
(...) Use 1.
that whosoever will live godly in this life must suffer afflictions?

Which should (me thinks) take away that stumbling block which has lain both
in David and Ieremies, and the best of Gods Childrens way, of being troubled at
this as though some new thing had befalnc them, since its no other, but what
has been the lot of all Gods Children through all Ages whatsoever.

Yea, but what comfort in thy service thou great Landlord of heaven and earth
(may some reply) if thou usest thy best servants so hardly? Nay, but rather
peace, (murmuring Soul) for what art thou that replyest against God? If
neither Examples of others, Romans 9.20.
nor Gods constant dealing in all Times, nor his forewarning thee so often, will
serve the turn. Were it directly pertinent to this point (which I desire only
to pass over in transitu) I could easily justify the proceedings of my Maker,
and give Reasons abundant of this the various dispensation of his providence
toward the Sons of Men. As,

First, to put a difference betwixt here and hereafter: The wicked usually have
their heaven here, and their hell hereafter, the righteous contratily, have
sorrow here, and joy when they come to a better place Mali nihil habent in
Coelo, vos nihil in mundo. Beda in sac. 1. Non te delectet virtditas faeni, sed
time ariditatem ipsius. Justus vero ut Palina florebit; Palma in Novissimis
pulchra est, Aspera radix in Terra videtur, sed pulchra coma sub Coelo est, sic
erit tua pulchritudo in fine, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 93.
.

Secondly, to show his care and Love of his own Magis amat objurgator sanans
quam adulaior dissimulans Aug. in Epist. ad Marc.
. how? strange love you will say, always to be raking in their wounds and
pressing them down with heavy burdens and afflictions, and yet this is that
which the Spirit of God assures, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives Asperioribus exercet
Paeter filium quam Dominus Vernaculum, sed dura Patris non impar^^ to flagella,
quia vult filium ineliorem esse quam servulum. Ambr.
. And again, ver. 7. If ye endure chastening God deals with you as with
sons, for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? And ver. 8. If ye
be without chastisement whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and
not sons.

Thirdly, to humble them and keep them down, lest they grow wanton and forget
God, it being usually proud Iessuruns fault, as soon as ever he is grown fat,
to kick against the Lord his God Magnae est misericordiae nequitiou unpunitam
non relinquere, necogatur damnara in gehenna. Aug
.

Fourthly, to stir up graces Sic solet Deus afflictionibus exagitare, ut vasa
Electiorus ev^^uentur nequitia, and impleantur gratia. Aug. Sinit Deus Justum
incidere in miserias, ut virtutem quae in illo latebat ape ^^iorem reddat,
Denique quae sunt haec ^mma nisi exerei^um fide^, insigne patientiae, eruditie
gloriosa virtut^^? Ambr.
in them. Pomanders never send out so sweet a smell as when they are rubbed,
and a Flint no sparks till it be stricken. It was Bishop Bonners ordinary
jeere to the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days, that the sight of a Faggot would
soon make them all recant, and yet never did God get more glory, then in the
constancy of hose righteous souls, never fish tasted sweeter then in those
brackish streams, and never did the Camomile of the Church send forth a more
fragrant smell, then when it was trodden down in those turbulent days; and
were it not for these trials, what use would the righteous have of Patience,
Faith, and other Graces, which by these are made to shine the brighter Igne
purgati splendent, Hilar. Electis suis ad se pergentibus Deus buyus mundi Iter
asperum facit, ne dum quisque chlectatur in via, chliviscatur quod desiderabat
in Patria Greg.
?

Fifthly, to make them out of love with this world, where there is nothing but
sorrow, and they strangers and pilgrims here, and to long for that place, where
there is nothing but joy, and they at home in their purchased possession.

Sixthly, to make Heaven welcome afterward. Calmes are never so pleasing as
after storms (...), etc. Sol nubibus obtectus, laetius postea splendet, and
Ver post byemis tristitiam est acceptius, jucundio^ tranquillitas blanda, and
mare quietum, post seditiones ventorum, etc. Sic post afflictiones Vita
tranquillior, etc. Nazien. in Orat. de Cypriano.
, health, as after long sickness, or after labor rest, so the joys of Heaven
will be truly welcome then, after so much sorrow, so much grief, When all
tears shall be wiped away.

These few (though many more might be added) may suffice abundantly, as to
satisfy the doubting soul; so,

Secondly, to comfort the poor Israel of God, now in these sad and drooping
times: O cheer up thy self, (whoever thou art) and lift up those hands which
hang so down; Remember what gracious promises thy Redeemer has made, and what
the holy one of Israel has said, that they Who now go on their way weeping,
hearing precious seed, Psalm. 126.6.
shall d^^btlesse come again with joy, and bring their sheaves with them. And
again, Psalm. 30.5.
They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. The seed-time indeed (as one of our
own says well) may be waterish and lowering, but they may well be content
with a wet Spring, so they may be sure of a clear and plentiful harvest.

And give me leave to add one word more, to make the proceedings of the
Almighty more clear. You must not look at Israel here, at this We, as
absolutely just and righteous, and without any faults at all, or matter for the
Justice of God to work upon; but We, who have sinned, and offended God, who
have provoked the holy One of Israel, and dealt exceeding deceitfully with him,
whom neither storms of judgments, nor calmes of mercies, nor any warnings,
could bring home, but have corrupted our ways before him, and done every one
what seemed good in his own eyes: and therefore We, We must look to smart for
it rather then others, We, for Gods correcting and chastising hand before any.

I remember a story in our own Chronicles, of Edward the first, King of
England, when a great Noble man had committed Treason against him, and some
pleaded for him that he might well be spared, he was a great Man, No, says
the King, but as great has been his Rise, so great shall be his downfall; and
as he has been raised high in Honor, and he abused it, so shall he be in
Disgrace (...) Chris.
. Not unlike is Gods manner of dealing even with his own, his beloved ones,
when once they abuse his goodness and forbearance.

Who fares worse, (if the Father takes in an unhappy turn) then his own Son?
he shall be sure to be beaten, Duos filies habet homo; alierum castigat,
alterum dimittit facit unus male and non corripitur a Patre; alter mox ut se
moverit Colaphis caeditur, flagellatur Vnde ille dimittitur, and ille caeditur,
nisi quia huic caeso Haereditas servatur, ille autem dimissus exhaeredatus est.
Aug. in Psalm. 93.
whoever else escape free. Whom sooner (being taken in a fault) does the Master
correct, then his own servants? whiles others who are strangers go untouched.

And did I not run over this point in haste (as not so pertinent to what is
intended here) I could tell you why; As,

First, Because We, Gods Children, have been better taught then others who
have not had such knowledge of his Laws, therefore for such to know their
Masters will and do it not, makes them more liable to be beaten with many
stripes, Quid mirum si iste mundus tanquam servus jam sciens voluntate^ Domini,
and faciens digna plagis vapulet (...)? Aust.
Luke 12.47.

Secondly, They have received more Mercies then others, and for them now to sin
against these, against all those precious privileges and immunities, all these
winning favors and goodnesses of their God, (as it is with a Candle the nearer
any thing is set unto it, the greater shadow it casts behind it) so to sin
near these means, and allurements unto good, amidst mercies and prerogatives,
is a great deal more intolerable then otherwise; Since Christ himself has
said it, Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required again,
Luke 12.48.

Thirdly, because God is more dishonored by one sin of the righteous, then
with thousands of the wickeds and ungodlyes. Because by this deed (says Nathan
to David) thou have given great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme: therefore, etc. So, because Gods children give such advantage to the
wicked, and profane ungodly men, to speak evil of the ways of God, and
dishonor him; therefore shall they smart the sorer for it.

Lastly, (to name no more) because otherwise God might seem a partial God, to
punish the same sins in some, and pass them by in others. Semper iniquus est
I^dex qui aut invidet aut favei, Cic. pro Psanc. Deus Index nec gratia
praevenitur, nec misericordia flectitur nec pecuntacor? rumpino, etc. Aug. l.
3. de symbolo.
Therefore to declare to all, that the Judge of all the world will do justly;
and that there is no unrighteousness with him, To stop the mouths of all
gainsayers whatsoever: We, the children of the most Highest, even before
others, shall suffer for our sins, and be abased for them.

Which in the first place should be a Caveat unto the righteous, Si pece^^^ris
and punitus non fueris, ne contem^as (dilecte) sed propter hoc ipsum magi^ time
qu (...) f^cil^ Deo est (...) velit iterum retribuert Christ.
. That of the Prophet Ezekiel in the 18 Chapter; is enough to startle any;
Verse. 20. The soul that sins shall die, etc. And ver. 24. When the
righteous turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and
does according to all the abominatious that the wicked man does; shall be live?
All his righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned; in his
trespass that (...) has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned; in
them shall he die. All his good he has done shall not excuse him in the evil
day. It could not excuse our fore-parents, but in the day that they sinned, did
they die the death, were thrust out of Paradise, and made liable, both they and
their whole posterity, unto everlasting death and destruction; it could not
excuse Moses the servant of the Lord; but he sinning at the waters of Meribah,
could never enter into the promised Land, though he begged it earnestly. What
need I mention David, a man after Gods own heart; yet lying under so heavy a
judgment, as that the Sword must never depart from his house; and all by
reason of his sin: or Hezekiah, or Jonah, or the best of all Gods children. I
might go a little higher, even to the very Angels themselves; who not keeping
their first estate, but left their own habitation, are reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day. Let these fairly
warn thee to take heed of the like judgment, by no ways indulging thy self
in the like sin.

2. When God does draw nigh unto the Tents of the righteous, and afflict the
habitation of the just; let them take need of murmuring or repining Dis^^t non
murmurare qui mala patitut: per hoc quisque se (...) patiarhitr^^^^ quia ah
illo judica^^^, cujus nunquam injusta Iudicia sunt, Is^d. l. 3. do sum. bon.
De^^^lla^e magis Deum ^ffendisse ille populus Iuda^^us dicitur, quam contra
(...), Aug sup. Joh.
; but rather learn to submit unto his will, knowing that there is matter enough
even in them for his justice to work upon, and that it is his mercy they are
not consumed, because his compassions fail not. Otherwise if he should (even
with the best of them all) be extreme to mark what is done amiss, neither
they, nor any flesh living were able to abide it.

3. If We the children and servants of the most High, be so hardly dealt
withal; (a you shall see by and by) We his own people be put to drink of so
bitter a cup; if We, what then may the wicked and ungodly look for, but that
dreadful sentence, Psalm. 75.8. The drogs thereof, all the wick'd of the earth
shall wring them out and drink them? Dam 6.5.
O how should this like Belshazzers handwriting upon the wall, Change their
countenance, and trouble their thoughts, cause the joints of their loins to
be loosed, and their knees as smite one against another? when they consider,
what plagues remain for the ungodly, and what shall he their portion another
day Elect^s Dei cer^^^^ and p^a (...) lia tolerare, hine ergo colligitur,
Districtus Iudex quanta illic feries districtione quis reprobat, si hic cruciat
quos amat, Greg. in Moral.
. I Will say no more but what the Apostle Peter does, 1 Pet. 4.18. If the
righteous soarcely be saved, where then shall the wicked and ungodly appear?
And so insist no longer upon this first Capacity which we consider Israel in,
but pass unto the second, as something more suitable unto to that condition
they were in, as if you heard them thus bemoaning themselves.

Secondly, We the unhappy subject of the displeasure of our God, who not long
since lived in as much ease, as much plenty and abundance as ever people did
enjoy. We who wanted nothing, while we were in Zion, in our Country: but now
having lost all, and Zion too, are forced with heavy hearts to sit down and
weep, when we remember all --. Alas! did we ever think we should have come
to this when we sat in Zion; compass't round about with the rich mercies of
our God, when the bright beams of his favor refresh't our souls, and his
loving kindness made us glad? When we sat as Head and Queen among the
Nations, and Princes among the People; did we ever think we should have been
driven to this and yet (...), Herodorus.
(...), etc. look upon us, and then learn.

The vanity and unconstancy of all these worldly things. O quantum est in rebus
inanel quantillum Christiano sufficit!

Se^^^^ Quam nulli^ conting^^ ^^gna bona and ^^^turna?
How great blessings (as he says) and a great while of enjoying them, can
seldom or never stand together. Vt in secundis rebus constdat neme, in
adversis nemo des^ciat, Sen.
That in prosperity none might presume, and in adversity none might despair.
All these sublunary things (says Plato) are like Gods Dei ludibri^ quae sursum
ac deorsum temere suo coele feruntur, intertoque hue and illue cursu vagantur.
Plat.
Tennis balls, tossed up and down, hither and thither, and there is nothing
certain under the sun: yesterday for thee, and to day for me, and who knows
what may be to morrow?

Thus who without astonishment can turn over the stories of ancient times, and
read of the glory of all the old world, on a sudden swallowed up in an
universal Deluge, or of Pharaoh, Exodus 14.
that sun of Egypt with his numorous Host, all drencht in the red Sea, and
never rise again. Of Sodoine and Gomorrah with all the wealth and souls the
(...), Genesis 19.
devoured in an unheard of shower of fire and brimst one from heaven? Job 1.
of Job, the greatest man in all the East in the morning, in the evening
spoiled of all, and set down upon the dunghill full of sorea? What shall I
speak of David, 2 Samuel 15.
at night banished, and shifting for his life, Acts 12.
who in the morning ruled Isral. Or of Herod, taten with worms, who yesterday
was entitled a God? Haman upon the gallows, Hest. 7.
who even now was at the Queens banquet? Nebuchadnezzar eating grass like an
Ox, Dan. 4.33.
who not long since was vaunting himself upon the top of his Palace? What
need I reckon up more? both King and Kingdoms, particular men, and whole
Countroys, have their ebbes and their tides, their rising and their setting,
there springing out, and their cutting down.

And that our latter times have not been different from those of old, will soon
appear to those who have read of that great Frederick the Emperors full sea
of his fortunes and magnificence, end in so shallow a stream, as that he was
driven to be a suitor but for a Singing man's place, in that Cathedral Church
which he himself, had formerly built, Cui Orb^s angus^^^ erat quod ille ^rbi
magr^^^.
and yet went without it Or of Alexander, whose greatness one world would not
suffice, but desired more, yet being dead, lay three days above ground, and no
man so much as vouchsafe to bury him. To say nothing of that great Champion
Bellizarius, after all his Conquests over the Goths and Vandalls, and many a
Victory and Triumph obtained; yet at last driven to so low a condition, that he
was seen, having his eyes put out, fit by the highway side a begging in this
doleful tone, Date obolum Bellizario, an half penny to Bellizarius, an half
penny for God sake to poor Bellizarius. Or of Lotharius the Emperor, brother
to Lodovicus pius, after all his, pomp and greatness, and his life in a poor
Monastery at Ligonia in Italy.

But of all, famous is that one story more, in our own Chronicles of Edward the
second, King of England, who after 19 years reign over this land in a great
height of Plenty, Honor, and abundance; at last, being, (...) captive in
scorn to wards Bristow, by the way his Enemies made him sit down upon a mole
hill, and called a Barber to shave off the hair of his head and beard, thereby
to make him more ridiculous; who coming to him with a little water taken out
of the next ditch, told him scoffingly that his Grace should have had warm
water, but he must be content with that now: Whereupon the King laying deeply
to heart the sad condition he was brought unto, told him he should have warm
water whether he would or no: and so (as the Story says) sell into such an
extremity of weeping, that he helped to fill his Basin with his tears.

How easily I might bring this lower, even to our very Times, he may easily
conceive, whose eyes have seen those strange changes and alterations these few
late years have made, both in King and people, such as his forefathers never
saw, or hundreds of years ever proda^'d the like.

The consideration of this unconstancy in all these sublunary things was that
which made that great Emperor of Persia, viewing his huge Army not to be
numbered, scarce measured, fall a weeping, Quod nemo intra centum annos ex tania
ju^en^^^e superfurunce ^r^s, Just.
because within some few years, scarce one of that mighty Holt would be left
alive or remaining.

And as it is with particular men, so it is with whole Countries, where is now
the glory of Athens? the pomp of Macedon? the privilege of the seven Churches
spoke of in the Revelation? where the pride of Babylon? the vastness of
Nineveh? the luster and beauty of Zion? or yet the honor of Jerusalem?

Jam seges est ubi Troid suit, now grass grows there where Troy Town stood;
those places which once were, now are not; those that now are, God knows how
long they may continue so, and who knows what shall be afterward?

So that what limits Chronologers use to make of States, or Kingdoms,
proportioning the ordinary period to be five hundred years, about which time
(say they) they have the in period, or suffer some great and visible
alteration: I dare not, I cannot affirm always to be true, yet many times it
falls out so, as other uncertain things may do. For instance: from David the
first King that sat on Judahs throne, to Zedekiah the last, were 470 years.
From Ceoro^s the first King of Athens, to Codrus the last, 490 years. From
Lycurgus the Lawgiver of the I (...) demonians, to Alexander the great, that
subverted all, 491 years --. Nay, in our own Land, from the time that Julius
Gesar entered it to that time the Romans quite left it, 500 years: then after,
from the (...) intrusion under their Heptarchy, until the united Monarchy by
King Egbert, were 460 years. Indeed from the last great alteration by Duke
William's Conquest, to these times, are a great deal more, though some would
have it to fall out in the beginning of King, James his Reign, in whose Crown
both York and Lancaster, England and Scotland did so happily meet, which was
likewise from the Norman Conquest, 536 years.

But these Niceties I desire not to insist in or put weight upon. Its the
general only is my aim to show, how sading the beauty of this world is, and
how there is nothing permanent here below. absirut in terra suavit^r ^ventium,
gaudiorum inveniatur Materia, cum tantis alternationibus tota mundi facies
immutetur, ut elevans allidatur and respires allisus, etc. Bern. in sermon. fest.
B. Ma. M.
What present examples I might produce for this, besides what hitherto has
been mentioned, every one may conjecture, that has but heard of the late
desolations of fruitful Germany, the ruins of poor Ireland, and the sad
breaches and distractions made within these four years in this unhappy Kingdom
of England, each one being so many several Monuments of the truth of this. He
insist no longer therefore upon it, but draw up all into some useful
Applications to our selves.

Not to set our hearts too much upon any of these worldly things. Mundus
transit and concupiscentia ejus, Quid vis? utrum amare temporalia and transire
cum tempore, an Christum amare, and in aeternum vivere? Aug. in Joh.

Habnere cuncta quo creabantur; Every thing had its time of beginning; and it
is as true, every thing shall have its time of ending and dissolution. Suppose
thou live now in the height of all plenty and prosperity, thou enjoyest thy
health, thy wealth, thy friends, thy Country; and all thine heart can desire.
O bless God for it, and be not thereby high minded, but rather fear, ever
remembering that of the Apostle; Thou that now stand, take heed least thou
fall: for what is it thine heart so much relies upon on Ecce turbat Mundus and
amatur quid fi tranquillus esset? formoso quomodo hares, qui sic amplectars
foedum flores ejus quomedo colligeres, qui a sp^^is non revocas manum? Aug. in
Psalm.
? Have thou a goodly Kingdom? so had Israel, yet now deprived of all. Have thou
plenty of riches, and all manner of store? so had Job, and yet within some few
hours, become a Proverb for his poverty, while he fits in the dust tuning his
fatal ditty, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I, return
thither again; the Lord gives, and the Lord takes^ blessed be the name of the
Lord. Are thy barnes full of Corn, and thy garners of increase? want thou
room, (with him in the Gospel) to lay up thy Treasure in? O remember withal
what was said unto him; Thou fool, this night may thy soul be taken away from
thee, and then whose are all those thou do passesse? We Israel here, as rich,
as great, as full, as any, yet now spoiled of all, can only sit down in a
strange land and weep, When we remember Zion.

Therefore me thinks it was excellent counsel, that of an ancient Heathen,
always to consider well before hand, what it is thou set thy beart upon,
and so provide before hand, that if it should please God to take that thing
away from thee, thou may not be quite swallowed up of grief and sorrow
(...), etc. Epicteu^^.
(...) (...) etc. Consider (says he) with thy self what kind of thing it is
thou, so much affectest, always beginning from the least. If thou take
delight in a fine pot or curious glass; consider it is but a glass, a brickle
vessel that may be broken; and therefore if it be, be not troubled: so, if
thou dotest upon a Child, or thy Wife, think with thy self they are but flesh
and blood, they may die; therefore if they do, be not troubled: or thou love
a dainty Horse, and prizest him high, consider he may fall lame, or get a
surfeit, or be stolen; therefore if he be, be not troubled: or thy heart is
let upon thy brave Houses and stately Palaces, remember that a spark of fire
may consume them, or enemies plunder or destroy them; therefore if such a thing
happen, be not troubled --, A meditation of an Heathen (I confess) befitting a
Christian, always to stand upon ones guard; and with another Heathen (whose
sobriety and vigilance herein I am afraid shames many a Christian.) When thou
art going to bed, thus to think Dic mihi dormituro, potes non expergisci; dic
experrecto, potes non dormire dic exeanti, potes non redire; dic re deunti,
potes non exire, etc. Sen.
, perhaps I may never awake: up in the morning, perhaps I may never lie down
again; going abroad, perhaps I may never return again; being returned,
perhaps I may never go abroad again: seeing there is such changes in all these
outward things, striving to get an heart In hoc mundo non timere, non dolere,
non laborare, non periclitar^ impossible sed plurimu^^ (...) rest, qua
expectatione, quo animo, quisque patiatur, Aug. ad. Di^^^.
fitted for that change; that when it pleases God thy try all comes, thou
may be able to stand in the day of thy visitation.

Secondly, since all these worldly things are so mutable, let it be thy wisdom
to set thine heart upon those things which are immutable, and cannot be taken
away. Discite in hoc Mundo supra Mun^^m esse, and si corpus geritis, volite^
invobis ales interior. Ambrosil. de Virg.

Pereant haec omnia, and dimi^^an^^s haec van^ and in^^ a, conferamus not ad
solam inquisitition em cor^^ quae (...) non (...), Aug. (...).




There is nothing here below, but it is continually subject to some loss or
change, only here is the comfort of a Christian, some things there are peculiar
unto him, which he cannot be robbed or spoiled of, nor ever taken quite away
from him, peace of Conscience, faith in Christ, assurance of Heaven, the favor
of God, comforts of his Spirit, the merits and mercies of his Savior and
Redeemer; all the World cannot rob a Child of God of these: plunder his Goods,
spoil his house, sequester his Lands, revile his good Name, reproach his
Innocence; and the like, they may: but to rob him totally of his comforts here,
or inheritance hereafter, that is without the reach of malice, or foes to do:
Let these therefore be thy study, thy care to attain. It Is the fault of us
all, with Martha, we are careful, and troubled about many things busy our
selves about the profits and pleasures of this world, which fade in the very
using; meanewhile neglect that one thing that is so needful, (which having
got, we are rich enough) even that good thing that can never be taken away from
us (...), Chrysostom.
. O let it be thy care therefore for the future, to look over all these
changeable, mutable things, and thirst after that, that one thing that is so
needful; Quantumlibet sis avarus, sufficit tibi Deus. Terrum velles possidere?
add and coelum; plus est qui fecit terram and coelum, Aust.
Christum and omnia, get but Christ, and thou have all. O si sapis mi homo,
mundum transire permit cum concupiscentiis suis, cum tempore suo, ne tu ipse
transeas cum tempore mundum: non ama, sed Christum ama, ut possis cum ipso in
aeternum vivere, Aug. tract. 2. in Ep. Jo. Cui Christus incipit dulcescere,
necesse est amarescere mundum, Bern.
Mundum non ama, etc. (with Austin sweetly) If thou be'st wise, if thou love
thy self, love not the world; let it pass, lest thou pass away with it: But
set thy heart rather upon God, that he may be thy portion; upon Christ, that
he may be thy Savior; upon his blessed Spirit, that he may be thy supporter:
in a word; upon Heaven Faelix illa est mutatio, ubi Deum pro mundo accipimus,
pro terra coelum.
, that it may be thine inheritance, and thy treasure may be laid up there,
where neither moth can corrupt, nor thieves break through or steal.

I have insisted longer then I intended upon these persons here; yet I hope not
without some use and benefit. It will make the better way to their passion in
the next words.

And first of the Paena Sensus, which is twofold.

1. Sat down. 2 And wept.
I shall observe three several Circumstances, as so many aggravations of their
grief and sufferings, yielding answerably three several Observations.

Sat down: Israel) why can thou not rise? and walk along the River fide,
solace thy self with the greenness of the meadows, and pleasant gliding of the
streams? These, these to one that has sat too long, or is weary, may refresh
him.

But away from us such miserable Comforters all: here indeed we fit, here our
captive bodies take their place, not of ease or rest, but rather of grief and
tears, while our uncaptived souls meant-while wander abroad, and view the
desolations of our poor Zion. Ah unhappy Zion, what comfort can there be in
these strange Rivers? the remembrance of thy Jordan to us is more pleasant then
either Tigris or Euphrates, or all the Rivers of Babylon How can this strange
Country seem pleasant unto us, Od^^ valde patriam qui sibi been putat quum
peregr inatur, Aug. in Psalm. 93
when we consider our own Land lies waste, overrun with Enemies, and we as
strangers thrust out of it; from our goodly Cities, and rich Possessions; our
seiled Houses, and stately Palaces; our Vineyards, and our Oliveyards; our
Milk, and our Honey; in a word, from our Altars, and our Worship, and our
Temple, and our God and all. O this, this is that which makes us sit down so
sadly here: viz. the serious consideration of our own condition, thrust Tu ver
(...) mea Tellus and genitorum patria vale: uam. viro licei Plurimum malis
obruatur nullum est suavius solum. quam qued nutrivit eum, Eurip. 1.
out of Zion, and deprived of all. Whence Observe: That

To be driven out of Zion (...) Furip. in Aegas.
from ones home, and the House of God, robbed and spoiled of all, is enough to
put any one into a sad posture and condition.
I think I may save a labor of enlarging my self, or adding proofs: I wish,
there be not some who hear me this day, can bear me witness to the truth
thereof, out of their own too dear experience.

If not, that these sad times did not produce too many multitudes of examples
both out of Ireland and England too, who have sealed the truth of this with
their blood as well as with their tears, and with poor Israel here, have no
other employment left to busy themselves withal, but only to sit down and
weep.

Certainly, if ever Isreal's case was verified in any Age, it is in this, when
so many are driven from their houses and their homes; from their Temples and
their Worship; from their comforts, and their own; such as have had large
possessions, and goodly inheritances; such as have flowed with milk and honey,
with all manner of plenty and abundance, and have relieved thousands; yet now,
they themselves forced to wander up and down, not knowing where to get a piece
of bread.

Well, God knows whose case it may be next; the very smoke of his own
Country was sweeter to Ulysses, then all the pleasures of another Non dubia
est Ithaci prudentia sed tamen optat Fumum de pat^^is posse videre focis. Ovid.
l. de Ponto. Nescio quae natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit, and immemores
non sinit esse sui. Ide^. (...), etc. Hom. (...), Hom. Odyss. 1.
.

O let it be so to thee who enjoyest it yet;
Otherwise, should God drive thee out of thine own Zion, amongst thy barbarous
and cruel enemies where it may be thou should not hear a Sermon once in a
twelve month, but in stead of public prayers thou should have a Mass;
instead of a Bible a Crucifix or rope of Beads; in stead of going to Church,
made to go on Procession, or Pilgrimage to some Saint or Relic -- Where thou
should not know where to lie, or whither to go, or what to do. I assure
thee thou would take as little joy in all these, in all their pomp and
outside, as poor Israel does here, who can do nothing now but ^it down and
weep, when they remember Zion.

Secondly, if thou desire still to enjoy thy Zion, and not be cast out and
deprived of all, then take heed of that which will unavoydably cast thee out,
and that is Sin, and unthankfulness to the Lord thy God; Dan. 9.16.
For our sins, and for the iniquities of our Fathers; Jerusalem, and thy people
are become a reproach to all that are round about us, Eam. 1.8.
says the Prophet Daniel: and Jeremy as plainly, Jerusalem has grievously
sinned; therefore she is removed. This, this is that cast Adam out of
Paradise, Israel out of Canaan, and Judab into Captivity: This was that undid
Judab, overthrew Jerusalem, wasted Zion, and will be the destruction of any
people. I say no more but what God himself warnes thee, Levit. 18.25. The Land
is defiled, therefore I do visit the iniquity thereof upon it; and the Land it
self vomiteth out the Inhabitants thereof. Take heed of being defiled, if thou
desire not to be vomited out of the good Land the Lord has given thee.

Where was it they sat down? viz. in Babylon; how ever of it self a pleasant
and goodly Land, yet a Land of Heathens and Idolaters, of profane and
superstitious, of enemies to God, and scoffers at his Ordinances, as Lament.
1.8. Her enemies saw ber, and did mock at her Sabbaths. And thus,

Not only to be deprived of Gods Ordinances, but to be driven out amongst
scoffers and mockers, is a sore Judgment indeed.
But further, it was not in Babylon, not in their Cities and Towns, or under
their houses and coverings; that would have been some comfort unto us, to have
enjoyed the society of men; perhaps some tender heart passing by, would at
least have given us a sigh or groan, or pityed our hard condition. Or if we
might have but had the benefit of their walls only, to shelter us from the
heat by day, or cold by night, we would have been content to have lodged upon
the hard stones, in the middle of their streets, if we might have had so much
favor showed us; the stones perhaps, as they use to do, would have relented
at our misery; which the hard hearts of our enemies will not do. But alas!
we cannoe have so much mercy showed, as to be within their Walls, or in their
Cities; but as though we were unworthy the society of men, even of our very
enemies; we are driven out to wander upon the banks of the Rivers, and such
desolate places, an ordinary habitation for Bitterns and Owls (as Isaiah
speaks) for the Cormorant and the Raven, and the Vulture, these now are our
best companions. Esa. 34.11.
We were driven from our Country before into Babylon, now out of Babylon, to
the Waters of Babylon; and whither they will drive us next, God knows, perhaps
into the Rivers and Waters themselves.

However, happy were it for us if they would drive ue in, then there were an
end of this our misery.

But behold their cruelty, they will not cast us into the Water, for fear they
should dispatch us too soon, and so dying, we should dye but once: Nor yet
into the fire, lest it should turn and devour them, as it did the three
Childrens Enemies. They would not expose us to the mercy of wild beasts, lest
the savage Creatures, as the Lions to Daniel, should show us more favor then
the sons of Men: nor bury us alive in some hole or pit, lest the earth should
not endure the burden, but swallow up them, as it did Corah and his Company;
but they cast us out unto the wide world, to the Rivers brinke, to hunger,
cold, solitude and nakedness, that so not dying, we might continually dye Te
lapis and Montes immotaque ^upibus altis Rob^^a, te sevae pregenuere ferae,
Ovid. Epist. 7. Saevior es tristi Busir i would, saevioillo Qui falswn lent o
torruit igne bove^n, etc. Ovid. 3. Trist. 11. Non tam omnitus ignos^ere est
crudelitas, quam ^ullum modum tenere, Sen.
; whence learn that The tender Mercies of the wicked are cruel.

How hardly is poor Israel used here? and God knows whose turn it may be
next; however, this is that you see must be expected at their hands, unheard of
cruelty and incompassion. Right Honorable and beloved, there is, there is at
this day a Babylon too, a Romish Babylon, into whose hands, if ever God should
give you up, you are like to find as little mercy as Israel does here.

The world has experienced, and we too, what their tender mercies have been;
not to go so far as the Indies, and enquire how they used the poor Natives
there, hanging, killing, burning, roasting some upon spits, bayting others at a
stake with Mastiffes Et Lupus and turpes instant merrentibus ursi, Et
quaecunque utino^ nobilita^^ fera est, Cv.
like Bulls or Bears, burying others up to the neck in the ground, and then
bowling at their heads, in stead of a Jack, until they had knocked out their
brains, with thousands of cruelties more.

Hispaniola a little Island, can give you a Catalogue of ten hundred thousand
Natives murdered there; and the Continent near by, of threescore hundred
thousand in seventeen years space; and in forty years, an hundred and fifty
hundred thousand killed and murdered: and above five times as much ground as
all Spain utterly wasted and depopulated.

And I wish our dear younger sister of Ireland, could not present her
Catalogues too; how, from that time she was circumvented, and caught in an
evil net, since that horrid, and (never to be expressed with terms bad
enough) savage, heathenish, tygerish, hellish Rebellion broke out, (as credibly
has been reported) above four hundred thousand poor Protestants lives (in
little more then four years space) have been made a sacrifice to their rage
and fury.

Neither has our Kingdom of England wanted experience of their tender mercies,
both

Long ago, when our streets ran with blood of Martyrs, and every corner flamed
with Eliahs Pendit, in expleto non fanda piaculo Busto. Cum laceras Aruss
aequataque vulnera membris vidimus, etc. Lucan. 2.
fiery Chariots, carrying scorched souls to Heaven; to say nothing of their
great fire (so near this place) close coucht in the bowels of the earth; ever
blessed be God, their Plot and Powder would not take; or their Racks, their
Gibbets, their Tortures, and what not, in those Marian days, when all was at
their mercy. And

Of late, in this unnatural bloody War now amongst us, a fruit of the former
tree, a spawne of the old Serpent; a War, I am confident, begot in Rome,
hatched in Ireland, and fostered up in England and Scotland by the same Nurses
and Midwives, the Jesuits and their adherents, who were the first Plotters and
contrivers of it.

Right Honorable and Beloved, durst I be so bold, I could name you the man yet
living amongst us, to whom it was confessed, by one very near to the Conclave of
Rome, almost four years before any thing appeared (in Anno 1637.) what should
happen within few years after; the time, the year, the place where it should
begin, whither after it should spread; with other remarkable circumstances, as
he heard it himself plotted at Rome before, and has punctually fallen out both
in Ireland and England since.

O if these, and such like be the tender mercies of the wicked; what then is
their rage and fury? I say no more but what old Jacob said, (Genesis 49.6.) O my
soul come thou not into their secret, and unto their Assembly mine Honor be
thou not united. Cursed be their anger, for it is fierce; and their wrath for
it is cruel.

And the Lord give us all grace to prevent him this day by our timely
repentance and amendment, lest our sins cause him to give us up a prey unto
their rage and fury; and if it be his will, rather take us into his mercy, then
give us up unto theirs: but divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

There is one hint more out of this word sat, continuance of this their
desolate condition.

Sitting in Scripture, usually implies long continuance; (as were easy to
show, if the time would permit) so here, it is not standing, or a spurt and
away, but we sat long by it; the hard ground being our softest cushion, and
open air our warmest Canopy --. Here we sit by the waters side, gazing upon
the swift gliding streams, which as they pass along, put us in mind of our
flitting and momentany condition; the bubling, murmuring brooks, teaching us to
sigh and groan; and the moist watery streams, calling aloud for our watery
tears. Thus day after day, here we sit, and cannot withal but acknowledge
Gods just dealing with us herein.

We were long settled upon our Lees, long sat in our sins, and rebellions
against God before, and now God pays us home in our own kind; Sic pectora
magnis obsessa tralis, ^ctu non sunt ferienda levi, Ser^trag.
Sic pectora magnis, etc. long continued fearful sins, must expect long
continued Judgments, and so usually it falls out that Gods Judgments commonly
are proportioned to man's sin.

God calls, the sinner sits still; he promises, they sit still; threatens,
still they sit; corrects and plagues, sends his Judgments abroad, for all that
they sit still. Some sit all day over their sick healths, their drunken cups,
till (as the Prophet speaks) the wine inflame them In ebriis non ratio ulla,
non ullum vitae gerendae consilium, nec gestorum aut lectionum memoria, etc.
Aug.
; some (with Sampson) sit too long with their Delilahs on their lap, till a
snare Libido velut festuca est cito acce^ditur, prope. consumitur, Amb. Saevus
Criminum stimulus Libido quae nunquam quietum patitur affectum, (...) fervet,
die anhelat, etc. Bern.
enter into their soul: some sit whole days and nights too up at Cards and
Dice, and yet think an hour too long to sit at a Sermon: Others sit in the
seat of scorners, mock and flout at Religion and all goodness; others in the
gate and way of sinners, in places of Rule and Authority, and take advantage
thereby to oppress the poor and ueedy, and pervert Justice and Judgment in
the gate -- Well, let all these take heed, otherwise God can give them sitting
enough whence they shall not easily arise.

There is, there is (my beloved) a day coming when we must all sit -- nay, lie
down in the valleys of the shadow of death (how soon God only knows) when
each one of us must say to corruption, thou art my Father, and to the Worm,
thou art my mother and my sister. O you therefore, who now sit here, and all in
health and peace before God; Job 17.14.
take heed, take heed I say of fitting too long in your sins and wickedness,
lest God quit you in your own kind, and give you sitting enough with Israel
here, even sitting down in wrath, and rising up in sorrow. -- Which brings me
to the other part of this their passion, -- they sat down --, yea they wept
when, etc.

Secondly, Yea, we wept.

Indeed, they that carried us away Captive, required of us a song and melody in
this our heaviness, Sing us one of the songs of Zion, said they scoffingly
unto us. But alas, Qui cautabimus; How shall we sing the Lords song in a
strange Land? Weep, melody in this our beavinesse that is impossible --. Indeed
we have brought our Harps along with us, a good mind we had you see, to
remember Zion in our mirth; but alas, hang them upon the willowes in the
midst thereof: and now to remember it in our tears, no use at all have we of
them now; Non est conveniens luctibus iste sonus, Music and Banishment,
Destruction and Singing, Harpes and weeping suit but ill together.

Other Instruments indeed we have brought along with us will fit the Chorus well,
heavy hearts, and minds oppressed, sighing souls and weeping eyes, these are our
harpes and viols, and organs now, nothing now but sit down and weep.

And therefore lest this Fountain should overflow, give me leave to divide it
into these three Channels, which will contain it all, -- And so consider them
weeping here,

First, Fletu Contritionis, with the tears of sorrow or Contrition for our
sins that have been the cause of all this; We have powered out rivers of
rebellions and wickedness before, and now we are quitted in our own kind,
forced to power out whole rivers of tears. (...).
Naturalists say, no such way to cure a heart tainted with poison, as to weep
extremely; no other way have we to cure these souls of ours tainted with the
poison of so much sin and ungodliness, as now to sit down and weep --.
Recall them we cannot, that is beyond our power being past and gone; or to
undo them again, that is impossible, there is the misery of sin, once done,
it is done for ever; and to satisfy for the least of them, that infinitely
exceeds our ability; for Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Micah 6.6.
(as the Prophet speaks) or bow my self before the most high God? shall I come
with thousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil? shall I give my first
born for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? No, it
cost more to redeem a soul, finite can never satisfy for infinite; We must
let that alone for ever, noely weep we may; and every tear as it comes
trickling from our eyes, puts us in mind from whence came all our misery, even
from our selves, Perditio tua ex te O Israel, our destruction is from our
selves; now we may see whom it is we have to thank for all: not God, no he
deals but justly with us, and according to our deserts. Not the Babylonians,
no they are but Gods Instruments, the rod of his wrath in the hand of the Lord;
and when the Father has done correcting his child, he can soon take the Rod
and cast it into the fire. Not our ill luck or fortune, no we had a fair time
before, and would take no warning at all. But Sin it is, our sins and
rebellions against the Lord our God, has brought all this upon us Malorum
omnium nostrorum Causa est peccatum, etc. Ang.
. And therefore in consideration of this our hard condition, which our selves
have brought our selves into, we can do nothing now but weep: Speaeke we
cannot, our hearts are too full of grief and sorrow to utter our minds; and
pray we dare not, because thou Lord art angry with us; or if we would,
whither shall we direct our prayers? to thine Angels, whom thou have sent
formerly to deliver us? they, neither dare, nor can help us, without commission
from thee: To the Patriarchs and saints of old, for whose sake thou have done
great things for us? yea, Esa. 63.16.
but Abraham is ignorant of us, and Isaac knows us not, there is little help to
be looked for from them. Then to Balaim or Ashteroth, to Chemosh or Milcom, or
some of the Gods of the Heathens? No alas, we have gone too long a whoring
after them, and that has brought us to all this. What then? to thee O thou
preserver of men? But thee it is whom we have offended, and have cast us off,
and art displeased with us; O which way shall we turn us To what distractions
Sin drives a man to at last?

We know not what to do, but only sit down and weep. So that since our
tongues and mouths cannot, (Lord) our eyes only now cry aloud for mercy to
thee.

See, see the unhappy fruit of all lewd and sinful courses.
Quantillae voluptatis causa, as that Emperor said, Plutarchus de Lysimache.
when he had sold his Army and Kingdom for a cup of cold water being athirst,
for how short, how small a pleasure, what an Army, what an Empire have I lost?
So may every foolish Sinner say, For how few hours of fading pleasures here,
do we purchase to our selves days, and months, and years, nay whole Myriads of
grief and pain hereafter.

Noeet empta dolor voluptas, it is but an ill Feast that has so saucy a
reckoning, for an Ounce of joy, to have a Pound of sorrow; for my sinful and
momentany delights Illad solum est Lucrum ubi fructus p^rp^tuus, ubi merces
aterna, Amb. op. 44.
here, (with unhappy Israel) now to have the displeasure of God, the frowns of
my Savior, banishment from my Country, loss of all; and for my reward sit
down and weep.

Use. O think upon this, all you who forget God, remember that after summer
then comes harvest, after sowing follows reaping; and what a man sowes, that
shall he also reap: Gal 6.7.
He that sows unto the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and be that
sows unto the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. He that sows
unto sin, shall reap the reward of sin, and that is death, to iniquity, the
fruit of iniquity, and that is shame and bitterness in the latter end.

When the day-worke once is done, then comes the wages, and a wise Labourer
will count beforehand, what he shall have for all his pains, what it is he
works for, that so he may not lose his labor afterward. A wise Chapman will
consider the price of his Commodity before he carry it home. A Porter will not
carry a burden before he have lifted it, and considered the weight of it, that
he may know whether he be able to carry it or no. O that the sons of men were
so wise in their generations as these are! Did they but seriously consider with
themselves what it is they labor in the ways of sin all their time for, and
what their wages shall be another day: Did they but cast up the price of this
dear Commodity of sin what it comes to, or poise and weigh beforehand, what
the burden will be, of so many thousand Oaths, of so many lustful thoughts;
of so many unclean actions, of so many desperate wilful habituate sins,
against God, and his truth, and Gospel, and all; did they (I say) but
seriously consider, and thus cast up their accounts beforehand; I believe
wisdom would teach them, not hastily to venture upon so ill a bargain.

Pope Leo the tenth was much mistaken (as Popes may be for all their
infallibility) who (as they say) was the first inventer of that Taxa Camarae
Apostolicae, a Rate-book (to be seen this day in the Vatican at Rome)
containing the prices of all sins, so much for a murder, so much for an
Incest, so many Dollars for a Rape, so many Crowns for a Treason, such a sum
for a Blasphemy, etc. (enough to invite any man to sin, when he knows the
price beforehand, and how reasonable a rate he may have it at:) I say he was
much mistaken in these prices of sin, for it cost far more to redeem a
soul. These poor Israelites can tell you a great deal better, and out of
experience too what it cost them: namely, the loss of Gods favor, the
forfeiture of his protection, banishment out of their Country, purchase of
confusion; and after all, fitting down and weeping; thus dear it cost them,
what ever others think.

And did but our lustful Gallant, as he passes by the corner of the street,
in the twilight, in the evening, Prove. 7.9.
in the dark and black night, with the price of Iniquity in his hand,
consider as he goes along, the price he must pay to God too for such a sin; how
many repentant tears he must (with poor Israel here) weep, before ever he
can come to wash off the spots and guilt of such a sin of his soul again.

Or would but our drunken Nabals, as they count their healths, score up
likewise the number of those sighs and groans, this mirth must cost them,
before ever they can come into Gods favor again.

Or our deceiptfull Ballancers, as they put the false weight into one scale,
put the true into the other, the true weight of so many checks of Conscience,
so many horrors of soul, so many gripes and pangs of repentant sorrow it will
cost them afterward, and then observing well, which scale weighs heaviest, let
them say with Demosthenes, whether they will, (...), buy repentance at so dear
a rate.

It was a wild Meditation of one, but proved well in the conclusion; suppose
said he, I should thus say with my self, I Will drink, and I Will swear, and I Will
whore, and I Will cheat; and I Will do what I list. And what then? I Will quarrel, and
I Will kill, and I Will care for no man. And what then? Ah could I say, I Will go to
Heaven too, I Will be saved, I Will have bliss and happiness afterward, it were
something: but then, then I must die, I must come to judgment, and hold up my
hand at the bar of Gods Tribunal, and afterward pay dear for all my short
and momentany pleasures here. O surely (as he said before) I will never
purchase repentance at so dear a rate; Far better (with poor Israel) to
weep unto true contrition and repentance here, Vtinam quis daret Capita meo
aquas, and orulis meis fontem lad rymarum, farte enim non repe^iret ignis
caurens, quod interim stuens Lacrhy ma diluisset, Bern.
then weep in hell hereafter for the want of it, and that without amendment.

Secondly, we wept Fletu Devotionis, with the tears of true devotion; as if
they should thus have said. We cannot but see that God is angry with us, that
the fire of his wrath is gone out against us, and has almost consumed us. All
the Rivers of Babylon, no nor the whole Ocean to boot, is able to quench one
spark of that flame, only our true repentant tears must do it. And
therefore all we can do Tantum paenitendo Lachrymarum bibat, quantum quis a
Deo se meminit amisisse per culpam Grego.
is to sit down and weep, and here in the devotion of our souls to pour them
out before the Lord.

I forbear to mention the strange Encomiums that the ancient Fathers have of
true repentant Tears, that they are, the Spongia peccatorum, Chrysostom. Vinum
Angelorum, Bern. Holocaustum pingue, Greg. Quae rigant caelum Chrysostom. Quod
defendi non potest, ablui potest, Amb. Impossible est, filium tantarum
Lachrymarum perire, Amb.
Sponges to dry up all our sins; the wine of Angels; the bedewers of beaven,
etc. I Will rather turn the stream thus. Why do these Israelites weep thus
extremely? why thus mourn? had they not present comforts and refreshments by
them? present delights and joys to cheer them? what do they weep for then?

Answ. In one word, God is angry, he is displeased with them, and that now is
the true Cause of all their grief, of all their Tears.

Whence Observe,

There can be no true pleasure in any thing in the world so long as God is
angry.

Its a strange thing, can Israel do nothing now but sit down and weep? What
though they be driven from their own Country; yet now let them make the best
of it they can, Levius fit, etc. Patience makes that light, Levius fit
patientia quiequid corrigere est nefas.
which cannot otherwise be helped: Was not Babylon a pleasant land, situate
upon so many waters, near (as most Geographers think) to the Garden of Eden,
the Paradise of God; but alas, what is all this to the purpose? Eden is no
Eden, so long as God is angry; and Paradise it self's an Quicquid praeter Deum
est, dulce non est, quicquid mihi vult dare Dominus meus, auferat toturn, and
se mihi det. Aug. supr. Psalm. 26.
Hell, so long as God's not there.

Si mihi Scribis, etc. (says Bernard) if you write unto me, if I do not find
the name Jesus in your Letters, I care not for them: if you discourse or talk
unto me, if it be not of Christ, of my Savior and Redeemer, I heed it not. So
may I say, you may follow your pleasures, if God be not with you in them; you
may go about your business, if God go not with you; you may please your
selves with all the delights of the sons of Men, if God be angry, Inquieturn
est Cor nostrum donec requiescat in te Domine, Aug. Cons.
if he be displeased and frown upon you, all is nothing, but will prove in the
end a continual torment, a continual hell.

Inquietum est Cor nostrum, etc. you know whose speech it was; as the point of
the needle trembles continually till it point just north; so our souls can
never be at quiet till it rest in thee O God Platonici dicunt, beatum esse
Hominem fruentem Deo, non sicut Corpore, vel scipso fruitur Animus, aut sicut
Amicus Amico, sed sicut Luce Oculus, Aug. l. 8. de Civ. Dei.
.

As the Ancient Fathers were wont to say of an ill Conscience, it was like a
scolding wife; a man (say they) may go about his business, and solace
himself all the day long, with drinking, and his merry companions, but when he
thinks he must go home at night, to his vexation, that damps all his mirth,
and quite marrs and spoils all: so is it here, men may solace themselves in
sinful pleasures, and take their swing in all mirth and jollity; but when they
consider that all this while God is angry and night will come, their last long
night of death, when they must go home, Non est quo fugias a Deo itate, nisi
ad De^^n placatum Ille totus Oculus, quta omnia videt; totus Manus, quia o^n^^
operatur, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 74. and Ps. 120.
and come unto an account, for all their sins and offenses against this God;
this, this is enough to cool and damp all.

And this very thing was that which makes them sit down and take no pleasure in
any thing but only to weep. It Is true, the loss of their goods was much, the
loss of friends more, the loss of Zion more then either, but the loss of
God, that he is angry and displeased, that is the vexation and grief of all.

O therefore think upon this all you who enjoy this worlds good, and do what
you lust; you who solace your selves in unlawful gains and pleasures, and yet
say no eye shall see you; who wallow in all manner of sin and wickedness, and
sport your selves in iniquity; yet never consider all the while that God is
angry and displeased with you --. O be persuaded betimes to make God your
friend, do not continue in his anger and displeasure, but get into his favor
again, else I assure you all the pleasures of Babylon, will be no pleasures;
all the delights in the world will be but bitterness in the latter end.

Rather with Israel weep, for offending this good God with true devotion and
affection, and trust in Christ here. Otherwise I can tell you of another place,
where you shall be forced to weep whether you will or no, and all too late In
Infer no nulla est Redemptio, quonium nec pater ibi potest adjuvare filium, nec
filius patrem, ibi non invenitur Amimicus, etc. vide Aug. in Sermon. ad Erem. --
Et postea, Vnde miscri prae nimia doloris amaritudine amarissime flentes, and
prae angustia spiritus gementes, dicent in Inferne, etc.
, even in that proper place of Weeping and wayling, and gnashing of teeth.

O how much better therefore, far better to weep a flood of tears here,
rather then be drowned in a sea of wrath hereafter!

Thirdly, we wept Fletu Compassionis, with the tears of pity and Compassion;
which brings in the last part, and another Aggravation of their grief. And
that is,

Paena Damni, the punishment of loss, loss of Friends, of Kindred, of Houses,
of Country, of God, the loss of Zion includes all.

Suppose we had lost our goods, yet if we might have enjoyed our houses, or our
Towns and Cities, the matter had been the less: or if we had lost these, if we
might have but enjoyed our Canaan, the promised Land, there had been some
comfort in that: or if we had been driven out of Zion, yet might we have
enjoyed the God of Zion, had we had his favorable countenance to shine upon
us, all had been nothing: but to be deprived of goods, and houses, and Towns,
and Country, and God and all; O this, this makes us we cannot choose but weep,
when thus we remember Zion.

And here I shall confine this remembrance of Zion unto two heads; namely, in
statu quo Nune. in statu quo Prius.


First, they remember Zion, in statu quo prius, in her former condition, when
she was in the height of all plenty and proserity, when she enjoyed both
riches and peace, and honor, and abundance, and all: had this people never had
these things, the trouble had been the less, because they could not know the
want of them; but to enjoy them so many years together, and with such a full
hand too, and now after all this, to be thrust out of all, this makes them
recount and ponder them the more. Besides their plenty, prosperity, and peace,
they remember their Sabbaths which once they had; they remember their glorious
Temple, which once they enjoyed; they remember their God, whom once they
worshipped; their Redeemer, who had formerly defended them; in a word, they
remember their Zion in prosperity and glory, as once it was, and all the
pleasant things they had in the days of old.

But to come a little closer, both Nemo recordatur nisi quod in praesentia non
est positum, Aug.
S. Austin, and Aquin.
Philosophers tell us, that ad Reminiscentiam semper requiritur praecedent
oblivio, Remembrance always is of such a thing as is forgot: therefore in that
it is said here, we remembered Zion, it must needs denote out unto us these 2
Things;

1. That they had forgot, in their prosperity, they little heeded or regarded
Zion then.

2 Now in banishment being driven out, now they remember.

First, it necessarily implies they had forgot, else how could they now
remember? in their peace and plenty they had but little regard of Zion then. It
faring with them as usually it does with the outer senses of the body, you know
it is an Axiom in Philosophy, Omne sensibile pasitum supra sentum, impedit
sensati^nem.
Any object not kept at a distance, but laid close unto the Organ of Sense,
quite dulls and hinders the sense it self: as for example, the finger held
close to the eye quite blinds it; a great sound near the ear quite deafes it;
like those Catadupi (a people dwelling near the fall of Nilus) who by
continual hearing of those Cataracts or downfall of the waters, hear nothing
at all. So this people, while they were in their own Country, compassed close
with the rich mercies and blessings of their God, neither see, nor heard, nor
regarded Zion then, these blessings were too near and common with them, and
therefore they so little regarded them then.

And I would this were Isreal's case alone, and that mutato nomine, it were not
true of England likewise, as well as of Israel; and that God has not just
cause to take up the same complaint against us, that a great man did against
one in another case, to whom he had showed many favors, and he con'd him but
little thanks again. Quantum, Quantum ego dedi, and quantillum recepi?
etc. how many favors have I showed to him, how ill has he required me? So God
to us, Quantum ego dedi, how many blessings, how many favors, how many
deliverances have I wrought for them; and quantillum recepi; how little
thanks, what poor obedience, have they returned? how ill have they requited
me? nay, I pray God it be never said upon us for a Curse, that our heedlesnesse
and forgetfulness of both former, and late benefits, do not hinder new
favors and mercies from us. And I am verily persuaded it is not one of the
least arguments the accuser of mankind has to make God angry with us, that we
do not remember and prize our present Zion so as we should.

Things are common and ordinary with us, we go to bed at night, and sleep
well; and rise in the morning, Mos est oblivlsei Hominibus, neque novisse cujus
nihil sit faciunda gratia Plaut. in Cap. Job. 7.
and go about our business; sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play,
and at night go to rest again; and never heed or regard these mercies more.

Whereas, should we lie down upon our sick beds, and toss up and down (with
Job) waking and weary to the dawning of the day; or (with him and many of Gods
dear Children now a days) should our skin cleave unto our bones by reason of
hunger; and our tongues for thirst, Job. 19.20.
unto the rooses of our mouth; an hours rest then, or the worst morsel that
now we throw unto the dogs; how pleasant and sweet would it taste, if once we
Luxurieso frugal^^as paena est, pigro supplicij loco Labor est, Delicatus
miseretur Industrii, desidioso studere, torqueri est. Eodem modo ad quae omnes
imbecilles sumus, dura atque intoleranda credimus, obliti quam multis tormentum
sit aut vino carere aut prima luce excitari etc. Seneca lib. 2. Epist. 72.
wanted it?

Prope ad te Deus est, intus est, etc. (says St. Austin sweetly) God be
merciful to us in this one thing, I am afraid we are all too faulty in it, God
is ever by us; he is always about us, there is not a moment that we can live
without God and his good Mercies toward us, and yet this God, and these
Mercies daily, and hourly we forget.

Give a child a Rattle or a Counter to play withal, and he will forget Father
and Mother, and dinner, and supper, and all to play with his Counter. Ah
foolish babes that we are, that the toys and fooleries of this present world
should affect us so, that we forget our Maker, our good Zion, and these
present comforts we enjoy.

Suppose God should leave us in our own kind, and (but for one moment) forget
us, as we daily and hourly forget him; Lord, what would become of all our
Rattles and Counters, and Bables then! Irsrael here, all the time of their
prosperity forgot the good things of their Zion, now being carried away Captive
and deprived of them, they now remember all --, which brings me to the second
thing.

Now in their Captivity they remember Zion. Quasi Ebrius expergefactus fentit
unde ceciderat: Calv.
Quasi ebrius expergefactus, (says Calvin) they were just like a drunken man
that is filled with wine, sleeps securely all night, hears nothing, feels
nothing, or regards nothing, but awak't in the morning, begins to bethink
himself of every passage the night before, how he had abused himself, and
his friends, and the good Creatures of God; and if he have any spark of
ingenuity or grace, is exceeding troubled Bona illa est ebrietas, quae infundit
laetitiam, non affert confusionem, Amb.
at it. So Israel here, filled, nay drunk with the rich mercies of their God
before, fall asleep in the dark night of forgetfulness, are quite senseless
of all former favors toward them, but now by afflictions and banishment being
awak't, do recall the passages of former times, what they enjoyed, what
mercies they had, and how they abused them all, themselves, and their peace,
and their God and all.

It was but an odd opinion of Plato, that all knowledge was but only
remembrance Tantum scimus quantum memoria tenemus, Cic. 2. de unib. Omnis
Disciplina memoria constat frustraque docemur, si quicquid audimus
praeterstuat, Quint. l. 11.
, and yet it holds true in poor Israel here, all the knowledge of their Zion
is but only a bare remembrance; before (as you heard) it was forgetfulness,
and perhaps they could wish it might be so again (with Themistocles, who when
one offered to teach him the art of Memory, desired rather to learn the art of
Forgetfulness) that now being deprived of their Zion, for ever they might be
deprived of the remembrance likewise of that they have lost, which is indeed
the cause of all their sorrow, and of all their tears.

Had they done thus before, and with that Potter (that the Story goes of) who
once by the election of the people coming to be a King, caused every day to
be set upon his Royal Cup-board half Plate, and half Earthen Vessels; the
one to put him in mind what he is, the other what he was: So had this people
formerly been but mindful what they were, Potters, nay worse; toylers in brick
and clay in Egypt, and now come to that height to be head and Queen of the
Nations, they had never been driven to this perplexity now; but now being
thrown down into the mire and clay of afflictions again, now too late they
remember all, though with sighs and tears.

Geographers relate a strange thing of one part of the Earth, where moisture
begets dryness, and drought maistuce, and yet it is so here, the moist gliding
streams of prosperity, beget dry barren forgetfulness, and the hot scorching
flames of affliction and persecution, moist fruitful remembrance (...), Chrysostom.
. Israel were wicked in their own holy Land, now they are grown godly in the
profane Country of their enemies.

In Zion, when they were near their God, then they were far from him; now in
Babylon, when they are driven from his presence, they creep close unto him;
this is the work of God, and it is marvailous in our eyes; when gentle
corrections, Funieuli Adam, the bonds of love cannot draw us, Abenea juga and
flagella aculeata, iron yoakes and stinging Scorpions, shall drive us whether
we will or no.

Use. And I would to God, we would but at last take out this lesson from them,
and play our after-game as well as they: That we have all of us been too
forgetful of the good mercies of our God, Pacile meminimus quae volumus, at
non licet oblivisci quae volumus, Cic. desi I.
both our own Consciences, and these present distempers that are amongst us,
witness sufficiently to our face. O that we were but so wise, now afterward
to remember, how we have offended this God, abused these mercies; and in
conclusion wronged and ruined our selves thereby; these Meditations even now at
last (though late) may do us a great deal of good, which had they been
thought on in time, might have prevented much of that mischief which has long
ly'en so heavy upon us, and without the mercy of God is ready to overwhelme us.

I shall never forget that dying speech of Cardinal Woolsey, who being
apprehended and arraigned of Treason, broke out into this passionate complaint,
O si Deo meo, etc. O had I been but as careful to please my God, as I was to
please my King, this misery had never befaln me.

So may I say, certainly had we in our plenty and abundance, in our former
peace and quiet, been as careful to please our God, as we were to please our
selves, and our lusts, and our sinful pleasures and delights, these Wars,
and bloodshed, and distractions had never thus strangely overtaken us.

Well, let it be our wisdom now at last, though late, very late God knows,
with Israel here, to remember both God and our selves; if not, how clear
soever the Heavens seem now in regard of thy particular, yet know, the day may
overcast Oprima quaeq. dies miseris mortalibus aevi prima fagit, subeunt morbi,
trist ^sq se nectus and Labot, and curae, etc Virg. 3. Geor. Meliora
praetervolant, deteriora^uccedunt, Sen. Ep
, and God may be as far off, as now he is near at band. O what then will thou
do? when God thy guide, thy Pilot, the rock and stay of thy soul has forsaken
thee? then it may be thou wilt remember, when it is too late (as Israel here) not
with joy, but with sorrow, all the pleasant things which thou had in the
days of old Lam. 1.7.
.

Secondly, they remember Zion, in statu quo nunc, or as they left it, all
ruined, spoiled, ransacked and destroyed.

And here, Avertite oculos, turn aside your eyes, all you that pass by, from
beholding that which our eyes saw, lest your hearts also break out into tears
as well as ours. An unhappy Zion! watered with blood, as well as tears, the
fitting object of our pity, but past our help.

Remember thee we may, but for our tongues to utter what our eyes did see, may
unlessen thy pains, but not our grief. Yet if we must needs sing one of the
Songs of Zion, where shall we first begin? but it is no matter where; Confusion
best befits the description of that, where we saw nothing else, and of that
Land wherein we are, whose very name is so.

Well, we wept then, Jerem. 4.19.
when we remembered the sound of the Trumpet, and Alarm to war, the prancing
of their Horses, and fury of their mighty ones; how like a mighty tempest they
came thundering down the Mountains, and like an overflowing Torrent broke out
from a far over-spreading all the Land.

When we remember, how they begirt our City round, Lam. 5.
so that we gat our bread with the peril of our lives, and our skins were
black like an even, because of the terrible famine (...), Menand.
. How the tongue of the suckling clave to the roose of its mouth for thirst;
and the young children asked bread, and no man brake it to them. Nay, how the
hands of the pitiful Women sod their own Children, and they were their meat,
in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

And yet these were but the beginnings of sorrow.

But further, when we remember how furiously they brake down the walls of our
City, and madly ranged about our streets, Qualis per arva Leo, Qualis per arva
Leo fulvam minari front concutiens jubam, Sen. Trag.
etc. like mad untamed Bears or Lions wasting and spoiling all, if we stayed
within our doors they fired our houses about our ears, and sadly made them
our urnes or geaves to bury us in; if we step out, O what dreadful speetacles
there we see!

On the right hand husbands Arma non servant medu^, nec tempera^ facile, nec
reprimi potest stricti Ensis Ira, Bella delectat cruor, Sen. in Herc. fur.
and Parents and Children ( Asahel like) wallowing, and tumbling in blood; on
the left our Wives and Virgins ravished before our eyes; if we look before us,
nothing but fire and sword, rage and fury, horror and contusion: if behind
us, all see their naked swords and spears points, how near they are to runius
through. It blove in, sinoke and none, darkness and amazement; ^^der, Children
and Sucklings, aged Parents and Kindre^^ rolling in their goare, under our very
feet: Ah Cord is be sunt, non oculorum Lachryma.

And now as we flee away, see, see our glorious Temple where it stands, he joy
or the whole earth, that wherein we put our trust, now all on a flaming fire;
see how furiously they rage about it, as if happy he who can pull down the
first stone; how rudely they throw down our Altars, dig up our Fathers
Sepulchers, and Tombs of Kings and Prophets, throwing their sacred ashes about
the streets?

See what heaps of dying bodies lie gasping here, and there, Perfurit and to
tum misce: Mars impius orbem, heu diro inventa est ab Jove tanta lues.
hundreds of sculls, and legs, and arms, with mangled carcasses every where,
ike that Emperor at the siege of Damascus, that filled all the ditches about
the City with dead bodies, and built three great Towers with the very skulls of
those that were destroyed in the siege of it.

If one professed that he could not forbear weeping while he did but read the
description of it; can you blame poor Israel, who both saw and felt all this,
and a great deal more; if they sit down and weep at the remembrance of it?

But I Will gaul your eyes no longer with this tragical description of poor
Isreal's case; turn them but inwards a little into the bowels of your own
Country, and perhaps you will see England (God be thanked) not altogether yet
in so bad a case as Israel was here, yet basting on apace, yea even in such a
case already, as may justly make you likewise sit down, yea and weep too;
when you remember England. and that

In Isreal's twofold Condition, both what it was, and what it is.

First, he that had looked upon the face of England seven years ago, and seen
how smooth, how amiable, how beautiful it was -- and should view it again, how
worn; how old, how wrinkled and weather-beaten it is now, would scarce ever
own it to be the same face, the same England that it was before.

O blessed God! how soon have thou made us know what all the pomp and glory
of this world is! even lighter then vanity itself.

As in water (says the Wise man) face answers unto face; so (in the water of
your tears) let face a little answer unto face, and view this Land what not
long since it was, and what now it is.

Look but on the State in general as sormerly you have known it, how rich,
how strong, how quiet, O pax serenitas. Mentis, sranquillitas animi, vit culum
amoris, Consor tium Charitatis, cunctis placida, etc. vid. Aug. de verb. Dom.
how peaceable it was, a man might have rid from one end of England to the
other, and not meet with an enemy, not seen a sword drawn, or hear the sound
of a Drum or Trumpet in a twelvemonth --. And to have the news brought of a man
killed, Monstrum horrendum! it rang as a prodigy, or some strange thing all
the Kingdom over.

And look upon it now, how exhaust, how cheated, and confined by those many
Underofficers whom it trusts, how feeble it is grown, and weakened by its own
strength, what wars, what stirs, what tumults, what plundering and
oppression, what rapine and bloodshed, what cruelties, and prodigious villainies
are done every where; whole thousands now slain at a time, and scarce any
notice taken of it, or one tear shed for it.

And for the Church in regard of outward, you know the common complaint was,
Churchmen were too high, and that made them so Causa Ruinae Ecclesiae faftus
and superbia Ecclesiasticorum, Gerson Paris.
ambitious --. Well, I think they are low enough now; and if ever that heavy
curse of God against the Priests ( Malachy 2 -- v. 3.9.) I will cast dung upon
their faces; and make them base and contemptible before all the people;) was
verifyed of late, it is in these our days: God has indeed cast dirt upon their
faces, and made them base and contemptible before all the people. Great talk
there was of the Clergies being too rich, which made them so proud and haughty;
and its true, many indeed were so. But I believe some of them are poor enough
now: nay, I assure you (Right Honorable) such a course is taken in the
Country, not by just and equal (that would cheerfully be undergone) but by
Omnis iniquitas and oppressio and injustitia Judicium sanguinis est. Et licet
gladio non occidas, voluntate tamen interficis, Hieron, in Isa.
unjust, unequal, and unconscionable Taxes; taking the advantage of these
times, to lay load upon them, the better to ease themselves; and this not upon
the idle, lazy, or disaffected, but upon the most painful, most pious, most
conscientious and best deserving Ministers, such as have stood out in the
hardest times, and born the heat and burden of the day; nay, usually upon them,
rather then others, the more to discourage and dishearten them, that unless
your goodness and Wisdoms prevent it in time, inevitably it must come to
pass, that (if not they) yet their wives and children must of necessity be
forced after a while, to come a begging to your doors. And I humbly beseech
your Honors in the name of thousands of the best deserving, and faithfullest
pious Ministers, and others in England, that you will be pleased to set down
a Rule whereby such unjust exorbitances may be remedyed, and they not left to
the arbitrary power and will of those, who neither wish well to them nor you.

And in regard of inwards, it is true, the corruptions in the Church before were
very great: but are they lessened now? are they not in another kind grown far
greater, and more desperate? the hedge of all Discipline quite broken down; ah
how do the foxes, wolves, and bears, and all the wild beasts of the field now
rage and domineere? such variety of abominable Heresies, Haeresis Graece ab
Electione dicitur, quod seilicet eam sibi unusquisque eligat disciplinam quam
patat esse milicrem, etc. vide Hicron. in Epist ad Gat. and 24. q. 3. Haeres.
Quid iniquius est quam impia sapere, and sapientioribus doctioribusque non
credere! sed in hanc insipientiam cadunt, qui cwn ad cognoscendum veritatem
aliquo impediantur obscuro, non ad propheticas voces non ad Apostolicas
literas, non ad Evangelicas Authoritates, sed ad semet ipsos recurrunt: et ideo
Magistr. Erroris existunt, quia veritatis discipuli non fuerunt, Leo.
Sects, and Schisms; such monstrous, horrid, blasphemous Opinions; walking up
and down with open face, to the dishonor of God, and the disgrace of the
Protestant Religion; as the very Names of such Sects or Sectaries before these
days were scarce ever known or heard of before.

In a word, to look upon the face of the whole Land, and to consider what it
was, so rich, so populous, so overflowing with milk and honey, like the garden
of Eden, the Paradise of God; and to see now what it is, so poor, so bare, so
wasted; here one Country quite harrast through; there another forraged and
plundered; here such a goodly Town burnt and spoiled; there another pillaged
and undone; here one rich Family shattered and dissolved; there another beggerd
and broke to pieces; almost no place but full of fears, frights Turbine
magnospes sollicitae, urbibus errant, tree pidique Metus, Sen. in Her. sur.
, and terrors, every where complaining of wrong and injury, of unjustice and
oppression, strange unheard of oppressions and vexation; so that a man cannot
come almost into any company, or three friends meet together for an hour, but
either some bitter Gratae sunt contentiones hominibus, and contradreendo
quacunque re proposita, vincendi desiderium praeter omnem ratienem inexplebile,
Srob.
contention happens concerning the times, rising usually to such an height,
even among familiar acquaintance; and leaving such a sting behind it, as makes
them look shy at one another for a long while after, or else causes such a
breach of Charity, as is not easy to be made up again.

Or if not so, yet such sad, such tragical, such lamentable stories are
related from one and other, as would make ones very heart to bleed, and damps
all the comfort of friends meeting, or society whatsoever. He I say therefore
that does but remember the former freedom and happiness before, and the
slaverie and miseries that are now; cannot I think choose but with Israel here,
sit down and weep when he remembers Zion.

I Will leave the more particular view of these things, to your private
Meditations at home, and will close all with a fourefold view or useful
Remembrance of Zion once more; and then commit you to God.

First, remember Zion in both these states, and then withal take notice of the
true effects of sin, which has caused all this; Dan 9.6.
for our sins (says the Prophet Daniel) and for the iniquity of our
forefathers, Jerusalem and thy people are made a reproach to all that are
round about us; so may we likewise say, it is for our sins, etc. It was a good
answer one of our Countrymen gave to one at the last losing of Callis in
France asking him scoffingly, where is the valor of your English now? when will
you win Callis again? O Sir said he, when your sins are grown greater then
ours, then shall we conquer you. Piously intimating thereby that sin is the
cause of all our losses (...), etc. Medicus non est causa Incisionis, sed
Morbus, sic and Civitatum dissipationes ex peccantium immodestia ortum habent,
Chrysostom.
, of all our heavy changes and distractions.

And withal remember them likewise unto true and unfeigned repentance and
amendment, mourn for thine own sins, and the sins of the Land, which have
provoked God to be so angry with us; strive to amend thine own life, and as
much as in thee lies to amend others, wish, and pray, and endeavor a through
Reformation both of thy self, and those with whom thou have to deal, and all
this speedily ere the day be gone Nunc est tempus audrendi quando ille non
assumpsit Tempus Judicandi-qui loquitur modo tacebit, Aug.
, and then thou be'st forced to remember both thy Zion, and them in another
place, when with Israel here it will be too late (...), Chrysostom. Hieron. (...)
etc. Impossible est et seire afflictiones afflicterum qui experimentum
afflictionis non habuit, Chrysostom.
.

Secondly, remember this thy Zion, in these parts of the Kingdom, so strangely
kept hitherto, so miraculously preserved both from plague, and forain forces
and devastation, and then with thankfulness learn to prize thine own happiness.

Qui non aegrotat nescit quantum valet sanitas, says Hierom, He that never was
sick, knows not how to prize health: He that never was lame, knows not how to
value his limbs: whereas if thou would know the price of an eye, thou must
ask the blindman; if of an ear, ask the deaf; if of meat, ask the hungry; if
of liberty, ask him that has been long in Prison, and they will tell you out of
woeful experience of their own wants and losses; so if you would know the true
value and price of peace, of plenty and abundance, of the freedom of Gods word
and Ordinances, go to Germany or Ireland, or some parts here in England, and
they will tell you by sad experience, God be merciful to them. I prosesse it
damps my Spirits sometimes to see what little regard there is of the
afflictions Faeliciter supit qui alieno periculo sapit, Plant.
of Joseph; how securely men go on in their sins, please and glut themselves in
all manner of excess riot, and intemperance, in oppressing of their poor
brethren, and all manner of injustice and wrong; so long as things go well
with them, whether right or wrong, all is one, they are as little moved with
others miseries, as thankful for their own happiness.

O my Beloved, this, this Incassu n. munita sunt caetera, quum lec^s unus de
quo Hesti pate: aditus, non est munitus, Greg.
is that which threatens a sad change Saepe queen tentationis, Certamen
superare, non valuit sua deterius securitas stravit, Gre. in Moral.
, even with us also. Did but others enjoy half of those blessings you slight
or neglect, such abundance of peace, and plenty, and freedom, and ease, such
frequent use of Gods Word and Sacraments such overflowing of all manner of good
things. Faelices nimium bona si sua norint: A People, a City too happy, did
they but know their own happiness; did but others (I say) enjoy half of that
which you do, how happy would they count themselves if only it were but to
gather up the Crumbs that fall under your Table. Well ( Right Honorable and
Beloved) give me leave to tell you that I am afraid an heavy account and
reckoning is yet behind. O remember that quickening speech of our blessed
Savior, Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be
required, and to whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.
God has given you (you cannot deny it) a greater measure of his blessings, then
he has done to others: O strive to be answerable in a proportionable measure
of duty and thankfulness again; lest he take them away from you, and give
them to those will bring forth better fruits then you do, the loss then will
be the heavier, as your sin before was the greater.

Thirdly, remember Gods distressed Zion once more, and then learn to
sympathize Tanto quisque perfectior est, quanto perfectius sentit dolores
alienos; Greg Mor. l. 19
with thy poor brethren, and to pity them on whom this heavy lot has fallen, it
might have been thine, Quod cuiquam contingit posset euilibet, that which
happens to one, might befall another, and its Gods Mercy only, that puts the
difference, in smiting others, and sparing thee; O at least pity those Cujus
pictus tam ferreum, cujus Cor tam lapideum ut gemt tus non exprimat Dachrymas
non effundat cum proximi vel amici Morbum vel interitum intuesur? ut patienti
non compatiatur, and dolentibus non condolear, etc. Jun. 1 Cor. 12.27. Romans
12.15, 16
who are in worse condition then thy self. How can it be well with the head,
when the heart is sick; how with the hands, when the feet are ill; with one
member, when another is pained? Ye are members in particular says the Apostle;
therefore be of the same mind one with another; weep with those that weep, and
mourn with those that mourn.

Many Israelites, many of Gods Zion may you find every where, some in prison,
some in want, some in banishment, some plundered, some wounded, some maimed. O
remember these; Remember them,

First, with thy Charity Semper habet undo det, cui plenum est pectus
Charitatis, Aug. in Psalm. 36.
, spare some of thy overflowing Cups, to quench their thirst; some of thy
superfluous dishes to satisfy their hunger; some of thy cast clothes to cover
their nakedness; some of thy plenty and abundance to relieve their wants:
Remember them thus, and their souls will bless thee another day.

Secondly, remember them in your Prayers too: this is opus Diei in die suo; the
proper duty and employment of the day, to desire God in his due time to be
favorable and gracious unto Zion. Be earnest with God therefore; Prece^ quae
attente a puro animo s^u^duntur, a Domino reportant quod pe^unt, Bern.
what know thou whether thy prayers (as Hezekiah's did the Sun in the
Firmament) may not make the Sun of Righteousness to turn back from what it is
gone down; or (as Josuah's) to stand still, and go down no further, before he
have mercy Oration Deum lenit, sed lachryma cogit, Hieron. in Isa.
on thee. We fare better for the Churches, and other godly Men's prayers; good
reason they likewise should fare the better for ours Impossible est ut Deus
fideliter precantibus, usquam suum neger Oraculum, Bern.
; O pray then for the peace of Zion; they shall prosper that love it.

Thirdly, remember it likewise with thy Tears;

Both 1. of Contrition Lachrymae paenitentium cadunt in c^nspectu Domini, Aug.
Flevit Petrus amare ut lachrymae lavarent delictum, tu similiter lachrymis
dilue Culpam, Id.
for thine own sins, and the sins of the Land which are the causes of all our
woe.

2. Of Devotion, bewayling that thou have offended so good a God, begging
mercy, and trusting in Christ, and Christ alone for help and succor.

And 3. of Compassion Illas lachrymas vere in vinum mutari dixerim, quae
Compassionis affectu in fervorem prodcant Charitatis, etc. Bern.
, for those heavy breaches that God has made upon the Church and Nation,
endeavoring what thou art able to repair them, and earnestly desiring God in
his due time to make up the breaches of his Zion, and to build up the walls of
his decayed Jerusalem.

Lastly, remember Zion once more Allegorically with St. Austin thus;

We are all Israelites in this world, strangers (...), Chrysostom.
and pilgrims here; and Heaven is our home, our Zion which is above. Now as
those Israelites sat down by the waters of Babylon, and wept when they
remembered their Zion; so should we in this our Babylon of this wicked and
unconstant world (a true land of Confusion indeed) where we are Captives to
sin, to Satan, to the world and men; even sit down and weep when we remember
our heavenly Zion, Multi flent fletu Babylonico, and gaudent gaudto Babylonico,
gaudent lucris and flent damnis Temporalibus, Aust. Ecce in Babylone pulchra
sunt quae te tenent, sed non te teneant (mi homo) aliud est Solatium
Captivorum, aliud gaudium liberorum, Aust. O pax illa quam Zione videbimus apud
Deum Illa sancta aequalitas Ange lorum, illa Visio and spectaculum pulchrum,
etc. Aust. Hoc est quod nos laetificat in omnibus laboribus and periculis vitae
hujus, Amor noster in Deum, and pium studium, and certa spes, and fervor
spiritus, Aug. in Joh.
out of which our sins have excluded us, and from whence as yet we are debarred
from going to so happy a place.

Multi flent, etc. many of us weep too much with Babylons Tears, and rejoice
with Babylons joy, rejoice at worldly gains, and weep for worldly losses; but
who weeps (says he) for the loss of heaven; that Zion of ours which yet we
want? Ecce in Babylone, etc. behold many goodly shows there are which may take
thine eyes here; yea, but be not taken with them (says the good Father) for
there is a great deal of difference between the joy of Captives in this World,
and the joy of children with God in that world that is to come.

O pax illa, etc. O the blessed peace which there we shall see in Zion with
our God, no more wars, or fightings, or frights, or fears, or losses, or
crosses there, but all peace, all joy, all tranquillity and quiet, comfort, and
happiness there.

O remember this Zion too, and then let the thought of this Zion above stay thy
mind, and cheer thy drooping spirits, midst all the miseries and calamities
here below.

And when they that carry thee away Captive require of thee a song in thy
heaviness, when any Crosses or afflictions of this life press upon thee sore,
solace thy self with the remembrance of this, and say, Well, yet my comfort
is, the evening will come when I shall receive my penny; this warfare will be
accomplished, when I shall obtain the Victory; this race of my life at last
will be run, when I shall get the goal; this pilgrimage will be finished, when
I shall come to my home: in a word, all these distractions, In aeterna vita
nullum habebimus, adversarium, nulla erit diabolicae fiaudis impugnatio, nullum
Haeretiaae pravitatis dogma, nulla, etc. Greg. in Ps. 7.
troubles and miseries will cease, when once I come to Zion, my Zion which is
above, and there fit down in the bosom of my sweet Savior, my God, and my
Redeemer, in whose Praemium est videre Deum, vivere cum Deo, vivere de Deo,
esse cum Deo, esse in Deo, qui erit omnia in omnibus, etc. Bern. de praem.
patr. Cael.
presence is the fullness of joy; and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore. And so having brought you to the glimpse of a better Zion; there
I leave you, not knowing where to leave you in a better place.

Soli Deo sit Gloria.

