TO HIS HONORED FRIEND Captain THOMAS KINGERBIE.
SIR,
THis Paper seems to challenge your Acceptance under a twofold reason, as it
endeavors to rescue your Friend, and as it propounds a Supersedeas for your
Tribe; in all times it is best to dedicate to a Friend, in these times to a
Soldier, in you I find a concurrence of both: if I look upon you as a Friend,
you have an Antitype; if as a Soldier, a Mercury: If you think it not worthy
to be admitted in the former way, let it be in the latter, and receive it as
your Scout: If you please to own it, in either sense, or in any sense, you
reach the expectation, and desire of your

obliged Kinsman, I. W.

To the Reader.
THere is a paper lately printed, entitled, The Rise, Reign, and Ruin, etc.
upon which I had (in regard of the importunity of some friends, together with
the expectation of many others, looking at the task as almost necessarily
imposed upon me) presumed to observe, and indeed I protracted not for want of
time; but in hope some of the family, or at least, through their direction,
some of their friends, would have applied themselves to it, which when I see
not, I resolved upon it (as upon) (in regard of the premises) an Indispensable
Act, not out of any affection to be seen in Print, but out of a pity, which I
had on Innocence, (unless by this means) remedilesly to be oppressed under
Insolence and Malice, as appears in the forenamed discourse.

Where we meet first with some Apologeticall passages, one of which, is the
perfecting of a book lately come forth out of the Press, to which, he says,
he was pressed by diverse; wherein perhaps he intends, to be Rhetorical, but
what is the Result of this pressing, to extract (forsooth) the quintessence and
spirits of the Author: in what? Inperfecting the History; which term perhaps
he uses secretly to excuse the Incompleatnesse of his Notions for those things
which are perfective, of another especially per modum formae supervenientis
materiae, (Such at his are pretended) use to be Incomplete: But what perfection
does he intend? what degree of actus perfectivi will this man give, such as the
first Act gives? No, that's being, or entity merely, which it seems it had
before, or such as the second Act adds, that's a form, formality, this surely he
would confer, which he has done poorly, as appears; or will he go higher,
and bestow the perfection of the third Act upon the second existence; and draw
it extra causas, that he has done, Extra Ideales ac primordiales in some
places, but by this means he has brought it within the compass, of hic and
nune, which I am glad of, that I may Answer it: But how will he perfect it? He
tells us how, by laying down the sense and order of the story: What have we
here? a mythologie? Real Histories use to carry their own sense, matters of
fact need no comment, fictions have their senses, Fables their Morals. Did his
zeal of sending one mite toward the prostration of these Opinionists pitch his
thoughts, impatient of story, and examining the matter upon gloss and
invective? or shall we construe it as a fatal dash of his pen, practically
pointing out to us the sequel? Or did the man lay down his own sense, when he
resolved to lay down the sense of the story? Order, perhaps the other used
Syntheticall, and began with Mrs. Hutchinson whom he calls the head of the
faction, this man will use Analyticall and conclude with her; the first its
likely was some simple Theorist, this an Actor in the business, I warrant you,
let him be what he will, he would seem a good Methodist, not in martial
affairs though, for he sets Mrs. Hutchinson whom he calls, as before, the
Captain in the rear, which seems to be an error unless as afraid of a combat
he would put his back into a posture of retreat, which it may be he intends;
and so I will follow him. Here is much pretense of conformity to heavens
proceedings, whilst he says, What God has pardoned in heaven he would not
renew on earth: But he would be excused this correspondence three ways. First,
by declaring this was in print before he meddled with it. But observe Reader, he
is guilty of the Order and sense of it. Secondly, by saying Gods great works
must be made known: it seems his works mediately by them are greater then his
immediate acts. Thirdly, by that ordinary pretense the necessity of State, the
times call for his writing, he says, he would be thought an Oracle of
Imperial depths; A considerable penman, upon whom States depend, and whose
writings the exigences of Kingdoms expect. Upon which supposition I wonder he
took no more pains, for he would make us believe, he wanted time, which I
cannot think, unless by his expression a strait of time, he mean in allusion
to straits of land, a part of time intercepted twixt two other parts, which
might so be a year, avd is most likely: Or unless he mean in regard of the
pretended seasonablenesse of his discourse, (...) the opportunity of time; or
unless that the matter of his book were so blameless as that in charity, we
might conceive he did intueri verbum when he writ it, and so was in a higher
measure of his Action then time. But whatsoever may be allowed him in patria,
if that will not be granted him in via, if he did make use of time, I am sure
he bad a competencie of it at the least, for though he be (I will not detract)
one of the higher sphaeres, yet (in which he is higher too) in his discourses,
especially polemick, he affects the pace of Saturn, under whose planetary
hour he was born; but if this content him not, but he will (that he may hurry
all after his opinion) needs be styled primum mobile, let him be so; and I in
respect of, and reverence to his grave, and regular motion will be circumvolved
a little with him, only he must give me leave in the nature of an Orb as well
as he, though a lower one, to have a proper motion of mine own, wherein though
I thwart him, I may perform my own course by which I hope to have some
influence upon thee unprejudiced and qualified Reader; which obtained makes the
period, and revolution of thy Mercury,

John Wheelwright.

ALthough my Intentions be to apply my thoughts to those things which do
expressly concern Mr. Wheelwright, yet seeing I have undertaken to vindicate
him, I must likewise engage my self in those things which are of remoter and
more implicit concernment; wherein he is by way of involution, and as the
construction of people ignorant of matters may proceed after a more eminent way
disgraced, viz. in his being put promiscuously amongst those whom they call
Antinomians, Libertines, etc. and being equally entitled to the erroneous
positions subsequent: a gross abuse, not only to him, but to some others, who
are brought upon the stage, that they should be thus indiscriminately charged
as they are in his Preface, which begins thus. After we had escaped the hands
of the persecuting Prelates, etc. Yes, then you began to be prelaticall your
selves, else why did not you admit those men, who left Bishops as well as ye,
to a freedom of spirit, and conscience which they came for? or at the least,
why did you not protract their censures, and give them leave to recover, and
recollect themselves after they were out of the hands of those Prelates? you
might have considered, that it was their good opinion of you, and the
reformation amongst you, which scrued their meditations in way of preparation
for your society, to a sublimation in doctrine, as well as discipline; and
there might be some dispositions to errors at the first, which would neves
have advanced so much, had not the Antiperistasis of your vehement prosecution
forced them into a habit; you might have been pleased to have looked at them as
men transported, through the fancy of practical liberty to be enjoyed, into
some doctrines of Libertinisme, and so have allowed something to imagination:
which is the main, you might have reviewed your former condition, wherein (as
you say your selves) you were in exposed to the malice of your Diocesans;
diverse ways, me thinks, there are whereby you might have taken up your selves
in more moderate deportment toward your brethren, then in fining, confining,
imprisoning, disfranchising, banishing, and as much as in you lay, killing.

The infection which the Churches caught by these errors swells into three
heads, How they have prevailed, how they reigned, and how they were ruined.
Here is their (...), and (...), and here I must needs prosecute that which I
before named, viz. the unequal (and yet too equal) implication of some
parties, hereafter named in the (...), all which to my certain knowledge, and,
I believe, to some of theirs even to the Author of the book, are disavowed by
some of these supposed Libertines, by name, (for seeing thse tenants were
attributed to all, yet not univocally but Analogically, I must apply my self ad
principale Analogatum) Mr. Wheelwright who has openly protested against them,
witness Mount Wolloston, where they know, and our Author tells us, that one of
his own Scholars told him, He set up Antichrist because he did not complie with
him; a heavy charge, which surely he would never have put upon Mr.
Wheelwright, to whose Doctrine he ever before assented, had there been so near
an agreement twixt them as this perfecter tells us, whose words are these, after
he had named the opinions of this Scholar of his as he calls him; Now (faith he)
these things were, so gross that M Wheelwright could not but contradict them,
yet so tenderly as showed a near agreement with him in these points. And says
moreover, that they are necessary consequences which he gathered from his
doctrine, Where there are diverse indignities put upon Mr. Wheelwright, First,
that he should large unsound principles. And secondly, not know their
coniectaries as well as an illiterate man, I can scarce for bear to break my
order, and fall upon him now, but I shall come at length more fitly to it, and
shall try how well our Author is skilled in consequences: in the mean time, I
use this now to let the Reader see the injustice of this Medley of his; if the
heat which inspires his paper, were true zeal, it would Congregare hemogenea,
and segregare heterogenea.

There are others too as well as Mr. Wheelwright, who are not affected with
these paradoxes, as Captain Underhill a gentleman, who did good service against
the Pequits, as it is well known in New England, which their Emissary might
have requited better then to have mustered him among a troop of Enthusiasts
under Mrs. Hutchinson their Captain, as he calls her. Admit he erred, yet shall
every little error touching Divinity in military men, whose stirred humors
may easily attenuate the spirits, when they so apply themselves, and refine
them into a nicety, be heightened into herefie, and presently seen in print? He
urged the liberty allowed to Soldiers, instanced in the freedom of speech he
had to Count Nassau. But my Authors reason for setting out his book was
pretended for his censure, viz. the necessity of State, and so the Captain was
degraded.

Another mentioned in his Catalogue is Mr. Edward Hutchinson; I wonder that he
is amongst the crowde, when as he did not use to be factious or opinionate.
Indeed the geri^s of that family has not much inclined to subtilties, scarce
any of the Hutchinsons have been Sectaries, unless a latere, and indirectly,
by reason of which, me thinks, he might have been placed (if it must needs be)
more obliquely in this predicament of Familisme, etc. then he is. This man said
in the Court (which through Christian liberty he thought he might very well
say) that If the Court took away his means, he should not be able to maintain
his wife and children. Now the Court when they propounded his Fine, might
think, (supposing him to be Enthusiastique) that he would not have looked at
means as necessary, but rather in a holy triumph have prostituted all, and
expected immediate influence: in which he deceived the awful and serious
expectation of the Court, which accessory contempt committed him, and
reinforced his prepared censures; which might be hastened the rather by this
reason too, the Governor comparing the intended Fine with his estate, might see
disproportion, which he thought might be called Contempt in Naturalis, though
not elicitus; Or whether they looking at him as apprehensive of want suspected
him; that conceit promoted too by a late imagination of the crime, as likely to
be seditious. However it was, the man was fined forty pound, and disfranchized.

Another is Mr Sam^ Hutchinson who (as I remember) upon dislike of some
proceedings in Court out of a pang of zeal, though otherwise no great Crittick,
asked a question of them in way of seruple, whereupon he was censured guilty of
contempt, and (I think) sedition too, and so was banished. But observe the
wisdom of the Court, they perceiving, in that he did but merely ask a question,
that there were in him some sparks of truth, and ingenuity, sent him to a place
called, The Isle of Errors, that by the circumobsistence of corrupt opinions,
that little good which he had might be united and fortified, and he at length
reduced into an hability of cohabitation; which effect it seems it had: for, as
I hear since, he is resumed into their precincts. And this I must say for the
Court, they were so courteous to him besides, (rare lenity!) as that they
allowed him liberty to come to them to Boston once a month, even during his
expulsion; I suppose in the waning of the Moon, when his hotter sits (as they
conceived them) were over, thinking that in some competent time, he might be
perfectly cured of the Lunacie, which they supposed possessed him.

The next are Mr. Cogshall, and Mr. Aspinall, which latter for his dislike of
some proceedings of Court was banished, and Mr. Cogshall Deputy, presuming
liberty to dissent from the major part, through reluctation of his conscience,
and reflection upon his privilege, broke forth into this expression: That if
he could not be heard, he must: whereat he stopped, which might have been well
interpreted; for being incensed by reason of the severe dealing with his
brethren before him, per Imperium voluntatis, and out of brotherly love, he
thought he must do something, although his reason (for the present charmed by
the Magic of the Court so powerfully exercised upon those that were sentenced
before him) could not tell him what, whereupon he stopped at the word must: for
which aposiopesis he was disfranchized, as one that through such eloquence
might become a pestilent fellow; but since he has lived peaceably, resolving
never to discover more Rhetoric lest he should be banished.

The next in his book is Tho: Marshall, the Ferrie-man, as he calls him; this
good man was occupied in a River called Charles River, directly betwixt Boston,
the place of these Opinionists, and Charles Town, and other Towns, where his
spirits being predisposed by the roughness of winds and waves, and agitated by
the Counterbuffes of Divinity, which the respective passengers vented, he
might (you will say) easily be inflamed; Put as long as he kept his watery
Element he had an allay: which when he left, and went to the Court, whether he
did (as referring to the premises, you may conceive possible) rudely enter
into the Court, or whether his fever beat so to his singers ends, as it urged
him to subscribe to a Petition; however it was, he was pronounced guilty (which
indeed is common with watermen) of contempt. Hereupon displaced, since which
time, for want of that employment, he is grown so poor, that he will not be
able to pay the indispensable halfpeny to Charon for his passage.

The next is one Tho: Grydley, an honest poor man, (as the Pamphleter calls
him) yet (as he says) too busy in things above his reach; alas good man he
never knew that quae supranos nihil adnos, but the Court cured him of his
pragmaticalnesse very well; for they took from him his employment, and censured
him an abettor of contempt, and sedition, which terms he never hearing before,
nor not knowing what they might mean, did so amaze, and masquer him, that ever
since, in an admiring speculation of, and gazing upon them, he has stood as in
a rapture or ecstasy, not finding leisure for new action.

There is one more, viz. Mr. Dyer, he was charged with contempt too, though I
think only disfranchised, that his brain might move in a less compass,
whereupon the good man was united into an ability to deliver his mind
concerning an opinion of his in the Church, which our Author says he did
weakly too. In such cases as these me thinks that of the Apostle might have
place: If any one be over-taken with an error, ye that are spiritual restore
ye such a one in the spirit of meekness.

The first amongst the women is Mrs. Hutchinson. This is she who he says had
at once thirty conceptions, some bigger, some lesser, some of one shape, some
of another: and this he assures us, saying, That he has learned otherwise
(blessed be his Name) then to delude the world with untruths. I question not
his learning, etc. but I admire his certainty, or rather impudence: did the man
obtestricate? We know (as he says of himself, he sometimes hangs up brats
against the Sun, but surely he meddled not with these, reserved I suppose, etc.
unless he had it from him who is so eccentricke in his motion (as one says of
him.) But what if he had it from any then present? will that suffice to make
him so confident, as thereupon to take occasion to engage, and magnify Divine
direction, and derive this not known by him to be a truth, from the God of
truth? If any of the men he calls Familists, etc. had done so, would it not have
been accounted irreligious? relishing of profanenes? etc. would not my Authors
softest exposition have called it unsavourie?

As for his Analogy, which he observes betwixt her productions and opinions,
That as she held thirty of the one, so she brought forth thirty of the other;
Gods wisdom (he says) fitting those to these: It is a monstrous conception of
his brain, a spurious issue of his intellect, acted upon by a sweatish and
Feverish zeal, which indeed beats almost in every line; and resolves his in
themselves imperfect sometimes, if not felgned facts into phanatique
meditations. For first the proportion is not exact, for he reckons not 30.
opinions which he calls, Mrs. Hutchinsons, and those many of them coincident
too, made more I suppose to prepare for his conceit. Secondly, but admit it
were, yet his Notion is impertinent, for he brings in defects of Nature,
amongst defects of Manners. All he can say (if he were so acute) is, that those
are these reductive, and as they are effects of sin. A poor plea, by the same
reason he may under the same title discover all the weaknesses and natural
imperfections either of man or woman, and fix a kind of morality upon them: But
he will say perhaps, that this birth was an extraordinary defect: It avails
nothing, unless he will either raise it to a miracle, or at the least prove a
supernatural remission of the formative virtue in her. That will require a
most accurate physical inspection which I think his learning will not reach,
although (for ought I can see) his modesty might: for he tells us of women
purging and vomiting, what if the distemper we usually call Cholera did for the
present oppress those women? must it needs be proclaimed? must it needs be in
print?

As for Mrs. Hutchinson, she was a woman of a good wit, and not only so, which
is all he will allow her, but naturally of a good judgment too, as appeared in
her civil occasions; In spirituals indeed she gave her understanding over into
the power of suggestion and immediate dictates, by reason of which she had many
strange fancies, and erroneous tenants possessed her, especially during her
confinement, where she might feel some effect too from the quality of humors,
together with the advantage the devil took of her condition attended with
melancholy. In a word, as guilty of most of these errors, and for a pretended
revelation of the destruction of the Court, she was expelled the Bay of
Massachusetts.

The next is Mrs. Dyer, the wife of Mr. Dyer aforenamed, she was devoted to
Mrs. Hutchinsons fancies; this is she, who (he says) had the monster: whether
the conceptions of her brain had influence upon the conceptions of her womb,
or these of the womb upon those of the brain, I will not discuss. This
discoverer inclines to the former, I think he might by a deeper search have
reached the natural cause whilst he in his Method telling us her penalty,
judges her for her errors immediately sentenced from heaven: in which passage,
as in many other in his book, a spirit of censure and malice is pregnant.

The other he speaks of is one good wife Hunkins, who, he says, is a witch; a
poor filly woman, yet having so much wit, as perceiving Mrs. Hutchin:
ambitious of proselytes, to supply her wants, she attended on her weekly
Lecture, (as it is called) where when Mrs. Hutchinson broached any new
doctrine, she would be the first would taste of it: And being demanded whether
it were not clear to her, though she understood it not, yet would say, Oh yes
very clear. By which means she got, through Mrs. Hutchinsons affection to her,
some good victuals, insomuch that some said she followed Christ for loaves; Now
seeing those things were so, me thinks our Author need not have been so rigid
in his opinion of her. Alas, Ars illae sua census erat, surely a little less
gall would (as concerning others, so her) have done better in his ink, when, as
it appears, she complied with her patroness, not so much out of love to her
positions as possets, being guilty I think of no other sorcerie, unless it
were conjuring the spirit of Error into a Cordial.

Thus having given you an account of these persons, and passages, I cannot but
observe these things.

First, the Reasons which all these men might propound to themselves, for doing
and saying what they did. Alas, we must look at them as men who had left their
estates, friends, pleasures of their native soil, spiritual Chemists,
extracting the sweetness of all into freedom of conscience, doubting not but
they might find all in that Elixar; but as no Chemist yet got it, so they were
many of them deceived; which when they surveyed, and see the result, it might
trouble the weaker, and through melancholy fumes dispose them to strange
fancies in Divinity.

Secondly, the verdict of the Court upon them all, contempt, which surely must
proceed from the strong impression that the supposed contempt of Mr.
Wheelwright made in the fancy of the Governor; by reason of which
prepossession he could conceive no other crime, else it cannot but seem
strange, that there should be such a sympathy, that so many men and women too,
whose sex may inequalize and difference much, should all run into the same
praemwrire, Such a continuity of spirits as this consent of theirs must
suppose, would be a good principle of the Art of the Weapon-salve. I give this
watchword to you all, that you are disgraced in omni gradu naturae
intellectivae ac practicae: he goes first from practicks, then to doctrinals,
then again to practicks; thus he runs in a circle of abuse. In the
understanding he weakens you two ways, by an inordination of things, and
terms; of things, in the errors; of terms, in the unsavory speeches (as he
calls them;) in practice, by all the possible differences of exorbitancie,
pride, boldness, insolence, deceit, contempt, sedition, schism; all which are
indifferently, and indistinctly charged upon you in the Preface, so that indeed
who reads it would think you all equally guilty: and had I any premises of the
same nature, concerning some of you, as I have concerning Mr. Wheelwright, I
should vindicate you, as I do him. But seeing I have not, I must apply my self
to him particularly, and free him from those errors and unsavory speeches,
wherein I do but proceed according to the Rule of Art which attends principale
analogatum, which by his own saying in his 31. page is Mr. Wheelwright; Now,
says he, all these, except Mr. Wh: were but young branches, etc.

The way whereby I must vindicate Mr. Wheelwright is from my Authors own lines
in his 42. page, where he tells us of the opinions which he ( viz. Mr. Wh:)
opposed being these.

First, That there are immediate revelations without the Word. Secondly, That
the child of God is dead, not acting at all, but as Christ acts in him.
Thirdly, that there is no inherent righteousness in the Saints. Fourthly, that
the Commandment is a dead letter. Now if Mr. Wheelwright (as the Author gives
us) do abhor these positions, let right reason, and the strength of consequence
judge whether he can be justly entitled either to the unsavourie speeches, or
to any of the errors; And first for the unsavonry speeches. If Mr. Wheelwright
oppugn the opinion of immediate revelations, how can he say that evidencing
justification by sanctification savours of Rome? For if he deny immediate, he
must grant mediate: And that mediante verbo, either in an absolute, (as he
grants at the first) or in a conditional promise, as he holds at the second
evidence; And many can witness who have heard him approve evidence of
justification by sanctification, but what need of that? does it not appear in
the principles, they themselves do happily give me?

How can he hold, he is never the worse for being unholy, nor the better for
being holy, when he grants evidence from holiness?

Or how can he say, if Christ will let me sin, let him; when as he holds
Christians have life in themselves, a principle from which they act. Surely M.
Wheelwright has so much Logic, as to know frustra fit potentia quae non
reducitur in actum.

Or how can he say, I seek not grace but Christ, if it be meant in contempt of
graces? would any man neglect his evidences? unless he mean thus? I seek not
graces ultimate and resolutive, not as the supreme but subordinate end, not as
principium imperativum, but directivum, not as quod, but as quo, not to rest in
them, but to move by them to the place of rest: which if he mean, it is not
unsavory, but savours of sublimated purity and grace.

Or how can he say, [I know I am Christ's, not because I do crucify the flesh,
but because I do not;] when he expects testimony of salvation by such acts of
crucifying?

Or this, If Christ be my sanctification, what need I look for any thing to
evidence my justification, when as it is of the same nature with the former,
and lies exposed to the same inconsistence?

Now I come to the first number of errors, wherein although many things be
coincident with the former unsavory speeches, and with the latter number, yet
I shall give you an exact account of the particulars: and as for the first of
them which is, That the preaching of the Law is of no use to drive a man to
Christ: How can he hold it, when as he says, Faith comes by hearing the Word?
Now if he allow the Word in Actu completivo, in the completure and (...) of a
Christians mind, much more in some preparatorie and dispositive acts, as is
drawing to Christ; know, that reason gives that a dispositive to which it will
not give a completive power, as to cold in generation, as the Philosophers say;
surely where completion is allowed, much more disposition.

Or the second, That a man is united to Christ without faith, yea from
eternity: if it be meant respecting Gods decree, it is true; but if actually,
how can Mr. Wheelwright hold it, when as he grants there is something on man's
part to receive Christ?

Or the third, viz. That faith is not a man's receiving of Christ, but a man's
perceiving it: this is true if de reflexo actu; false, if de directo actu: what
matter in this? This is a mere equivocation, you might have spared this, but
you must fill up the Number.

For the fourth, That a man is united to Christ without any act of his: it is
the same with the second, and may receive the same answer.

For the fifth, which is, That a man has never effectually Christ till he has
assurance: it is the same with the third, and is true if meant de certitudine
objecti: but if subjecti, how can Mr. Wh: hold it, when as he holds the use of
signs, to confirm faith in the regenerate? Which must needs allow it some
latitude, and not limit it to a mere plerophory; and surely one man never held
the fourth opinion and this too; that saying, that a man is united to Christ
without any act of his, this, that a man cannot be Christ's till he have acted,
viz. reflected; these were not so considerately jumbled together, especially
being one factions brood, as he says. I wonder that having such opportunity to
hang these brats up against the Sun, he did not hang these further one off the
other. For the fixed, which is, that the witness of the Spirit is merely
immediate, without any respect to the Word, how can Mr. Wh: hold it when as he
opposed the opinion of immediate revelation?

The seventh is, When a man has the witness of the Spirit he never doubts
more: How can Mr. Wh: hold this if he know what doubt means, being motus super
^tramque partem contradictionis: when as he grants preventives of the motion or
deviation betwixt these two terms; in granting confirmation, which is a supply
of a defect, or an accessory to a principal exposed to some degree of doubt?

For the ninth, it falls the same with this former, and being in the same
conclusion, only differenced by a supposed case or occasion, it will not call
for a special answer.

The tenth is, Sanctification can be to evidence of a man's good estate; How can
Mr. Wh: hold this when as he oppugnes immediate revelations without the word?
Why then he must grant mediate; and why may not that word refer to sanctity?

The 12, viz. No comfort can be lead from any conditional promise: How can it
be asserted by him, who grants evidence from Sanctification, which evidence
must needs ran in the Channel of some conditional promise, if not so
formally, yet vertually and by way of resolution.

The 12. is, that to see I have no grace at all, is true poverty of spirit, and
it comes to the same with some of the former.

The 13 is, That the graces of Saints and hypocrites differ not: How can there
be evidence from them unless they differ? It may be this is the meaning, they
differ not by any positive thing superadded, but praecisely in their own
Natures, and are not so properly called different as diverse; but this is a
mere nicetie.

The 14 A hypocrite may have Adams graces which he had in his innocence: it
comes to the same sense with the former.

The 15 is this, All graces are in Christ as in the subject, and so in us as
Christ is in us, and no otherways; which cannot be attributed to Mr. Wh. when
as he holds (as before we said) evidence from graces, which could not be,
unless they were in us, as in the primary and immediate subject; neither did he
ever make Christ the formal principle of such actions, as believing and
repenting, which this tenent concludes.

The 16, which is this, Christ is the new creature; how can Mr. Wh. hold it,
when he grants evidence from the new creation of graces in us?

The 17. God loves a man never the better for being holy, nor the worse for
being unboly: how can he defend it? who grants manifestation of Gods favor in
the way of holiness?

The 18. Sin in a child of God must never trouble bine, which opinion is
apparently reducible.

The 19. is, Trouble in conscience for sin, shows a man to be under a
Covenant of works; how can he hold it, when as he makes account, trouble for
sin in the Nature of a grace, proportionally shows a man to be under a
Covenant of grace?

The 20. A Christian is not bound to the Law: how can he think it, who expects
comfort in a way of sanctity the Ectype of the Law?

For the 21. All Covenants made to God in words are Legal; how can he be
guilty of it, who holds Religion and Piety requifite in the Saints? which
surely must needs discover it self, in some godly vows and resolutions;
unless we will restrain it ad actum primum, which were absurd: Perhaps this
was in oppofition to Mr. Wels his strict Covenant; never to break Subbath more,
never to think idle thought more, etc.

The 22. A Christian is not bound to pray except the Spirit move him; how can
Mr. Wh. hold it, when (as before) he commits his life to the rectory of the
Law, which bids him pray continually? what need he stay till the Spirit mover
any further, when as he grants the Spirit moves only in the word? what need he
exspect the antecedent motion of the Spirit, who says, he must begin to pray
that he may have the concomitant? why should he suspend this holy action for an
Imenediate dictate, when as he grants Christians have a principle of life, from
which they can act? how can the man so sound in the premises think himself not
bound to pray, but when the Spirit moves him?

The 23. is this, A man who has not this new light, is not able to edify
others who have it: I suppose they mean another, quatenus another, and so the
position is true in formali, for nil dat quod non habet, but then, the word
quatenus must be taken reduplicative, and not specificative, unless by the
tear me they attend the respective entitle, in regard of which it must be
denied directly and per se only too, not per accidens; in these senses, the
assertion is true: but if we consider the materiale, and so they account the
praecedent errors light, I deny it to be truth, for such light (which I
shadow Mr. Wh. from) is indeed darkness, and tho light which our Author would
praeferre to shame Mr. Wh. is very dull, as will appear; and in the mean
time, I must apply that saying both to this Opinionist, and to my Author, If
the light that is in you be darkness, how great is that darkness?

The 24. is, That the whole Letter of the Scripture bolds forth a Covenant of
works; it is true in some sense: xample, Christ bids the young man keep the
Commandments in order to eternal life; This in the letter pretends to a
Covenant Legal, whilst in its Anagoge it intends Christ the Author of
sufficiency, and so pitches upon the Covenant of grace; but that the whole
Letter does so, cannot be Mr. Wh. assertion, when he applies him self to the
Law as a competent Directory, which he could not do if he did look at it, as
pitching upon a Covenant of works?

The 25. is this, No Christian must be pressed to duties of bolinesse, which in
regard of the good expected by Mr. Wh. from holiness, cannot be his doctrine.

The 26. No Christian must be exhorted to Faith, Love, etc. admits the same
answer.

The 27. is, A Man may have all graces and yet want Christ; Indeed he may have
representations of them, graces aequivoce, but not true graces; and if true,
not as Synonymous to saving, but as opposed to fained; but in the evil sense,
how can Mr. Wh. hold it, when as he attributes unto graces, power to evidence
Christ?

The 28. is, A beleivers Activity is only to act to sin; This pofition
implies Christ the formal principle of virtuous Acts; which conceit we before
excused Mr. Wh. from. Indeed, how can it be ascribed to him who (as our Author
tells us) opposed this tenent (viz.) that a Christian is, (that is his phrase) a
dead lump not acting at all?

Thus I have run through the unsavory speeches, and the first scroule of
errors; I come to the other scroule, being 82. Why might not all these
positions have been put in one Number, as well as in so many? I should think,
were he not a New-Englandman, that he intended some mystery in the Number of 3,
which he so often prefers, first in his Title, Rise, Reign, Ruin, Familists,
Libertines, Antinomians, censures of Church, proceedings of Court, Judgments of
heaven upon them, and here with his three parcels; but surely the good man is
no Pythagorist, but a Platonist rather, which his separato Ideae, contempt, and
sedition, not properties of the men to whom he attributes them, Chimeraes only
of his restless brain, declare him; but howsoever if he did purpose a
Numerary spell, seeing thereby he does many times repeat, I shall conjure him
down with mere Figures sometimes: my meaning is, that in regard of the
recidence, not in sense only, but words many of them into the former, I would
be excused though I do not give you a Particular account, as before, for
although our Author has lavishly tautologized, which perhaps may be Natural
to him, and so scarce admit a Criticisme, yet I will not trace him, unwilling
to oppress the Reader, and draw my self into the same height of babbling; Nor
let any think I hereby seek elusion, verbum sat sapienti, let such examine.

For the first ten they are eafily reducible.

The 11. is, As Christ was once made flesh, so is he in us ere we be carried to
perfection; This proposition, as many other we shall meet withal, is wrapped in
such myslicall terms, as it scarce falls under the common rules of
construction; but if this tenet intends Hypostaticallunion, how can Mr. Wh.
approve it, when as by the Authors confession he opposed that Doctrine which
says; Beleivers act not at all, but Christ acts in them, and does (as before
named) formally believe and formally repent, which Mr. Wh. could not rationally
contradict, if he patronized this notion; which being granted, a believer
should not proximately believe and repent, but Christ must obtain rationem
formalis principii in him.

For the 12 13.14.15.16. to the 24. they are in the categorie of those before
pretermitted, as reducible to the former.

The 24. is this, That he who has the Seal of the Spirit may judge of an
elect person; According to this Assertion, one Seal must at once make two
Characters: which opinion I must tell mine Author plainly, his principles, and
his parties, rather lead to then Mr. Wh. for a respective impression, in order
to graces inherent, (such as theirs is pretended) may in all reason sooner by
the same virtue whereby it shows to one his own Election, show to him the
Election of another in whom the same perfections may be apparent, then an
Irrespective and absolute impression, such as Mr. Wh. is accounted, as will be
seen in their opinions concerning evidence of salvation; however, how can Mr.
Wh. own this, unless he either think Gods eternal Decree attends some
quality, the Symbolicalnesse of which might direct him in his censure? or
unless he hold Immediate revelations without the Word, within it there being
no such pertintous? Or unless he presume to look in specula Trinitatis? Which
Mr. Welds seems to do, whilst he tells us what God bath pardoned in heaven, and
to whom he purposes his immediate punishments on earth.

By our Reason of caincidence we pass to the 28, which is the first we can
find challenging a particular answer, and that scarcely too; it is this: To
affirm, there must be faith on man's part, to receive Christ, it to undermine
Christ: this is nothing, but an efflux of the formen fancy of hypostatioall
union; the use of faith is to apprehend Christ sub eonceptu formali: the effect
of which is a spiritual union, not at all in that which may be more physically
looked at, viz. the hypostaticall: The next considerable is the 33, which is
this, To act by virtue of a command is legal. This is Mr. Wh: which taken cum
grano salis, will be savoury enough. Let us know to act legally may be taken
two ways: Vel non attendendo principium effecti^um action is, vel formale sive
exemplare. In the first Reason, they act legally who think to do things in
their own strength formally. In the second, they act legally who think to do so
constructive, and by way of interpretation, such as the Gospels young man, who
did fulfill the Commandments sub ratione particulari, In which act he expected
virtue from Christ, and so in the first sense acted not legally. But he did
not, sub ratiane magis universali, and eminentiori, and therefore he acted
legally in my second sense. In his Acoesse to the Law under its typical and
immediate pretense, was his (...) in his recesse from it under its reflexive
intention, and true Evangelicall Tropologie was his (...). To act legally is to
recede from the virtue, by which one is to act; which virtue of Christ is vel
Christi tanquam officientis, vel tanquant Ideae. To act by virtue of a command,
that is immediately from it, is, Vel immediatione virtueis, vel suppositi: they
who act by strength of a command in this first sense, attend not Christ either
in the reason of an efficient or Ideae, and so must needs act legally both
ways. For the command has a twofold habitude, directive and objective, he who
acts immediately from the directive order of the Law, acts legally, non
attingendo Christum ut Ideam: he who acts immediately from the objective, acts
legally, Non attingendo Christum, ut efficientem. And thus its true, to act by
virtue of a command is legal; but if it be meant immediatione suppositi (not
that I think a command has properly suppositalitie, but only aliquid
Analog^yn, which reaches my notion and intent) it is not true, that to act by
virtue of a command is legal.

The next considerable is the 41. which is this: There be distinct seasons of
the workings of the persons in the sacred Trinity, so that a man may be said to
be thus long under the work of the Father, and thus long under the work of the
Son, and thus long under the work of the holy Ghost. If by this, we are so long
under the Father, he intended only an exclusion of the Son in some eminence,
and degree of attribution. It is not against that received maxim, Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa: and the general opinion of Divines excuses
it from a paradox; For what more common then to attribute redemption to the
Son? consolation to the holy Ghost? What more usual then to say, the Father
humbles, the Son raises up, the holy Ghost comforts? Touching which, I thus
conceive: that the very same individed essence as it does put on diverse reasons
or notions (as the Schoolmen speak) is said to perform diverse actions not by a
simple exclusion of the Attributes of any of them in this or that Act, but
only secundum quid, Notionally, as we may conceive, according to the common
quidditie. The Father is in himself, and so produces a Son of comfort, by
reflection, he loves that issue, and so educeth illumination; in this sense,
Opera ad extra sunt divisa, for from the division ad intra, why may there not
follow a proportional division ad extra too? seeing the relations of those
divided acts are real, and extra intellectum, which would otherwise plead
Reason for their limitation; I say why may they not have some effect upon the
acts ad extra too? and make them in some sense divisa? And if it be improper to
say, Deus est trium personarum, but only essentia est trium, etc. why may
there not be some impropriety to say (I mean in opposition to the abovenamed
Doctrine) that, Deus est trium Actuam respectively, when as these acts do in
the common opinion attend those relations? But if an absolute and simple
division be intended, Mr. Wh. cannot hold it; when (as it is very absurd in it
self, so) his doctrine of evidence by sanctification, where there must be
Christ's attractive, and the Spirits illuminative power, and of signs which
require a concurrence, proclaims.

The next is this, Conditional promises are legal: If it be meant that they
are in a legal form, its true, whether causaliter or consequative; But if it
be meant that they are legal virtually, and so not to be made use of in the
time of the Gospel, how can Mr. Wh: hold it, when as he grants evidence from
graces, conditional promises being the current wherein such evidences pass?

The next considerable is this: to lay the Brethren under a covenant of works
hurts not at all, but tends to much good. What did I say considerable? a
position strangely produced as it were in an indifference twixt truth and
error: if it be presented as an error, we must needs by reason of the
indefinitenes of the phrase suppose all Brethren to be under a covenane of
grace. If it be a truth, what does it among errors? to make even number? What
shall we say? its neither true nor false, but stands in a pure precision; he
imagined though perhaps that the confinity of errors (wherein observe how his
malice multiplies heresies upon them) would determine its neutrality, and
hereupon ingages at once all his Metaphysics to effect an abstraction which he
might have reserved till an exigence, and in the mean while have referred this
Janus to the unsavory speeches with which it most symbolizes. But he was
afraid, lest it so easily seasonable either way, should have seasoned them,
which he prefers to disrelish the appetite of the Reader, to the parties
concerned in his Narration. But he says, if it be good to lay the Brethren
under a Covenant of works, then it is good to bite one another: which argument
is much like one of his brats he hangs up against the Sun.

The next is this: Faith justifies an unbeleever. If the sense be, that the
faith subjected in Christ justifies me in whom there is not any, its false: if
you take it in sensu composito, it is so, if in diviso, its true. I wonder such
grave discursists (as my Author by his style seems) should with these poor
subtilties put us upon such elementary distinctions, in resolving which Simths
Logic will claim a principal share. But perhaps he did it to evade a more
solid reply, thinking no Eagle would catch such flies. Which way of his is in
the mean time my advantage, whilst by meddling only in my sphere I cannot be
said to presume, which incourages me yet to tell him that this opinion is a
consectarie of theirs, who deny graces in the Saints, not of Mr. Wh: doctrine
who grants them.

The rest of the Assertions are either coincident, or such as concern Church
Discipline, wherein disagreement is not pretended.

Thus we have done with his pretended errors. Now we come to his pretended
Crimes, viz. contempt and sedition; which the Court picked out of a Sermon of
his, he preached upon a Fast Day designed for peace, the substance whereof was
this: Christ's absence is a main cause of fasting, therefore labor for him
revealed in the Covenant of grace; peace is to be sought in such a drawing near
the God of peace; and oppose those by contending for the faith, but
spiritually, who go the way of the Covenant of works (as in that thing)
(wherein indeed they are opposite to the end of the day) as enemies to grace,
and in that respect persecuters of Christ, as (which word I suppose is, sieut
qualitatis only) Herod, Pilus, and the Jews. This is the doctrine wherein the
spirit of sedition and contempt breathes according to their opinion; I will
therefore briefly leaving the fuller discussion to Statists, (by some of which
Mr. Wh: has been already cleared,) examine.

Contemptus est ex hoc quod aliquis rennit subjici legi bonae; confer, the
Magistrates publish a Fast in order to peace, whether this publication have the
complete Nature of a Law, let others determine. But admit, Mr. Wh: whilst he
tells them, peace is the most easily attainable in Christ, to whom they must
apply themselves in a Covenant of grace, twharts not their Law, unless it had
expressed the method which the Minister must use, or unless Mr. Wh: had done
that, the contrary of which it did necessarily imply; But there is no such
matter, for in his general term, a Covenant of grace, he could not be
inordinate, but admit explication, though it might render suspicion of
unsoundnesse in doctrine; yet not suspicion, much less apparency of
disobedience to civil discipline, therefore what neglect of Authority was
here, when neither the expression nor constructive intention of their Mandate
was crossed? Or, if it had been, yet not the primary end, and so could not
constitute such an offense: As for finis operantis, the ends they themselves
reserved, how could he attend? unless we either suppose a coincidence, or
unless they think it requisite, Clergymen should study Mysteries of State,
or unless (which they seem to abhor) he should have expected immediate
revelation of them? [Renuit] he will not; that presupposes admonition, and
supposes contumacie, Mr. Wh: had no such preparatories; If he had reiterated
the discourse, though innocent, there had been more pretense. But grant further
he had, yet a mere repetition makes not frequency; But admit, yet frequentia
peccati non facit peccatum ex contemptu, sed disponit ad hoc: according to
Aquinas. It is far then from contempt, which is not so much as a bare
disposition toward it? what if he did (this as a supposition, only) decline
the next purpose of the day? yet if he did reach it more eminently by setting
up Christ, whose absence he told them was the cause of fasting, must he have
these crimes attributed to him, because he did so concisely complete their
desires? might they not have taken up themselves twixt his supposed recesse,
and relapse before they proceeded to censure? But our Author says, ( page 52.
wherein he intends aggravation) whereas Mr. Cotton urged peace, Mr. Wh:
contention in the afternoon: Yes, but it was spiritual, and for a Covenant of
grace too: the way of peace, as in that generality, cannot be denied. The
spirits of men in Winter (as it was then) have too much asperity in the morning
to be trusted with zealotismes, which in the afternoon their more mollified
dispositions may admit: but more seriously: what would this man have by this
circumstance? where is the sense of it? or how aggravates it? would he have had
Mr. Wh: Text to have been imposed by the Court? were not that to limit the
Spirit? or would he have had him betwixt forenoon and evening Exercise, not
being half an hours space, by reason of the directive Sermon, to have purisied
his meditations into such a complexion? Or would he have had him seeing there
was no time, to change his text, or his Notions, to have defisted before his
paroxysme? Alas! so the Church as well as the State might have apprehended
contempt. Or if he had in such an Auditory adventured upon an extemporarie
discourse, would not your Moderatsts construction have pitched upon neglect?
But what need of all this? Mr. Cotton and He agreed in the main, both their
labors directed to the same scope, ( viz. to bring men to Christ, the
difference of precision, and degrees of heat allowed: so that if his Sermon
offered violence to the day, yet where is that which is pretended to the State?
Admit incongruity, yet where is the contempt? If it had been any thing, it had
rather been indiscretion then contempt; and rather indisposition then
indiscretion.

But they say, By those under a covenant of works, he meant them, some
Magistrates and some Ministers; and that he knew they went the way which he
described to be a covenant of works. Admit, yet his expressions from the Pulpit
in the common Rules of construction can have no such reference: Or suppose they
might have reference, yet not of causality but connection only, which would
give no advantage to secular power, or Ecclesiastical either. But further,
grant a reference of causality, that may be concerned in the Authority of the
keys, not of the Court.

He instances in that difference of Protestants and Papists, sub una and sub
utraque, as a parallel case; but it is not, for those terms did denote upon
the free acknowledgement of the right of their respective attributions: it is
not so in this matter, where the phrase Under the Covenant of works, is not
confessed by the Magistrates, etc. as their condition; therefore to say under a
convenant of works, and under a covenant of grace, is not as much as to say,
Magistrates, etc. and some others, there being much distance twixt this
occasion and the former.

He would at length puzzle the people with subtilties, whilst he talks of
designation to common intendments, saying, That which designs a man to common
intendments does as much as if it should name the men; Which phrase if applied
must presume, that the Magistrates and Ministers he pleads for, are by that
member of the division under a Covenant of works: commonly intended, A pretty
piece of work, wherein to give you his upshot, first he contradicts himself,
secondly, totally excuses Mr. Wh. thirdly, he accuses his own party more then
ever any did. A brave Champion, first he contradicts himself in saying, these
things were never heard of before Mr. Wh. came into the Courtry; p. 24. whereas
it seems it was vox pepuli before, for he was then but newly arrived, and this
the first time he thewed himself in that public way.

Secondly, he excuses Mr. Wh. for when to stopp his mouth, we had half
allowed him indiscretion in that Sermon of Mr. Wh. yet he will needs clear him
from it by implying that through the common rumor of Magistrates etc. walking
the way of the Covenant of works, there might be occasion ministered unto him,
and need for such a discourse.

Thirdly, he accuserh both the Magistrates and Ministers, more then any yet
did, by intimating a precedent continued, and manifest addiction of theirs to
Legalisme, whilst he declares them commonly intended by that expression, under
a Covenant of works. and by the general opinion of the people wrapped in it.

This was a great oversight, unless by a check of his conscience suggesting
Mr. Wh. innocence, he was moved to vindicate him secretly from crime, and
therefore would mystically do it in the word Intendment, to purge his heart
from malignity of opinion.

And whereas he says, p. 25. The former Magistrates and Ministers had great
disrespect after Mr. Wh. his Sermon, which he says, was the cause of it.

I answer, First, It is not known that ever they had any notable neglect.

Secondly, Admit, yet his inference may entitle the Gospel to sedition.

Thirdly, The inequality of observance did not proceed from any effect Mr. Wh.
Sermon had upon them; as in that instance of the Halberds, the former Governor
having more carried before him then his successor; and in the expeditions
against the Pequeds, but from the affection which some designed to those
offices, bore to the then Governor Sr. He: Vain, who by his noble, affable and
discret carriage, engaged their utmost attendance; where observe the edge of
Malice, which when it dare not suppressed by fear, openly, yet secretly it will
fix, though he do not inroll Sr. Henry amongst Familists, etc. Though he will
not say, he was such a Sectary, yet whilst he talks of his preferment above the
following Governor, as an Issue of Mr. Wh: Sermon, upon his own premises, he
necessarily inferrs it.

And whereas he says, That before Mr. Wh. came over, all things were peaceable,
after his arrival, nothing but division. I answer: First, he contradicts
himself, for he tells us Mrs. Hutchinson vented her Opinions in the ship as she
came over, pa. 31. he tells us, she drew many to her, pa. 32. he tells us, she
procured countenance from eminent persons, pa. 33. hence (says he) was the
trouble to the Pastor of Boston, etc. hence, says he, Mr. Wh: took courage to
inveigh in his Sermon, etc. It seems then there was Divisions before Mr. Wh:
Sermon, and that it was an effect of them rather then a cause. Secondly, there
was a company in the Bay before he came, who upon supposition of 2 parties, one
under the Covenant of works, the other themselves under the Covenant of grace,
had resolved upon schism, expecting only a beck from the Pulpit; which when
by reason of Mr. Wh: naming a Covenant of works and of grace, (though not with
any such pertinence, their prepared phansies, thought they had) they took this
Idol of their own brains, for a providence of heaven, and hereupon sacrificed
their premeditated endeavors to it; as it had been the Image which fell down
from Jupiter; which doing of theirs Mr. Wh: was not accessory to, their
pretended Covenant of grace being composed of errors, his covenant of grace
which to decline legalisme he preferred, being free from them, carrying along
with it the grace of the covenant. He tells us, pa. 26. of a writing which much
concerned Mr. Wh: to read, that might be; it may be it was our Authors, for all
his (as he says of his book) are necessary for States, much more for private
persons: but it seems Mr. Wh: was so dull as not to conceive the necessity, for
he did not read it, as we are told; what then? perhaps he was otherwise
employed; But what says the man? Which did argue (says he) the height and
pride of his spirit: what need these synonyma? were not pride enough? this
argues my Authors malice and virulencie; but is he not ashamed to talk still of
arguing, when his Independent brain has bewrayed such inconsequence? Let him
never think hereafter with any judicious Reader to be reputed for a syllogist:
but if he think he shall hide his talent unless he employ the Press, let him
rather (as one said) write mere history, and such too where in partial
respects may not byasse him to error. Which way (as though he presaged dislike
of his controversall discourses) he has already taken in his book, now at the
Press, called, A Narration of the proctise of N. E. wherein he may do (as in
things that fall under his sense) much better, then in polemicall Essays,
where he does but lose himself, and over-ballace his muddy intellectuals.

Nay so vast is my Author in his apprehension of pernicious effects from Mr.
Wh: Sermon, that he would make people believe, it not only moved all Societies
on the Land, but that it had its influence upon vessels at Sea (that's his
phrase) How, says he, did it hinder all affairs in Courts, in Towns, in
Families, in vessels at Sea? pa. 58. As though it had been like that commotion
of the earth lately there, which Ships at a great distance felt; as though Mr.
Wh: had made an Earthquake amongst them. Whereas (which I hope the Reader will
conceive) it was nothing but a Trepidation of the spheres in that New Heaven,
etc.

Another pretended crime of his, is sedition, which is thus defined: Seditio
est praeparatio ad impugnationem corporalem; A preparation to a bodily fight:
now how did Mr. Wh: Sermon prepare for such a fight? He bids them indeed in the
Apostles expression contend for the faith, etc. but he designs (as before we
showed) no parties. Or if he had, it was to a spiritual conflict, as he
explained himself, which respects not civil unity, or unitatem-Juris, as
sedition does, but Ecclesiastique; and so at the most it could be but schism;
and not that neither, unless his doctrine be proved contra utilitatem, and so
be error. Nay, that is not enough neither, unless it were in fundamentals,
and so might be called heresy; for schisma always sibi aliquam confingat
haeresin, schism is ever attended with heresy, in the opinion of the learned:
nor is all this sufficient to bring it under the censure of the Church it self,
unless it be per se intentum: for that which is per aceidens, no more in
morals then in Naturals, can constitute a species, such as sacred Authority
must proceed upon; as I said before of contempt, so of this, if it had been any
thing it had rather been faction then sedition, and rather schism then
faction. Before my Author propound his reasons whereby he would fasten these
crimes upon Mr. Wh: he wisely premises thus; says he, p. 52. Such as would
receive satisfaction may, if they will read that which follows, etc. carrying
this along with them, that the acts, etc. He says true in this, such as come
prejudicate and presuming necessity of justice from N. E. may satisfy
themselves in his Apology; but as for others, let them attend his descriptions,
and it will appear they do as little fit Mr. Wh: practice as his examples.
Seditiosus (says he) est qui facit dissensionem animorum: good in it self, but
applied rudiori Minerva, if it be taken rightly, viz. Dissension in ordine ad
civilem unitatem: lest sedition and schism be confounded, and the word facit
be so qualified as to exclude accidental, occasional, and perisiaticall
action upon men's minds, it concerns not Mr. Wh: case, it being necessary too,
(which I may add) that it be not only motu praevio, but concomitativo, which
is most intrinsic, and of the formal reason of velleitie which must be
supposed at the least in such a crime, his other descriptions, cum saevit
populus, etc. and cum eunt alii in aliud, call for the same restrictions, and
refer to the first.

He exemplifies to as little purpose, as in Demetrius his sedition, and Corah
with his accomplices: this is much like his sub una and sub utraque, as little
parallel where he intends, Demetrius named the man, This Paul, etc. And so did
Korah particularize, Mr. Wh: nothing so, he only spoke in thesi, the
Hypothesis was their own, the application was theirs: My Author cannot make it
appear their cases are alike, unless he resume his sublime Notion of
Designiation to common intendments, etc. by which he might salve the
Phenomenon; but we have tried that before.

That which he says, viz. my Author, of Mr. Wh: vehemency of spirit, and
voice in proclaiming them persecuters, and Antichristian, who walk the way of a
covenant of works, it must be reckoned amongst his impertinences, seeing the
degree does not vary the kind; let him be as urgent as he pleases.
Salvaratione fidei, salva specie, whilst he keeps within that universality
against those which are Legalists which he did and only did, let me use my
Authors main Argument, which we meet with presently. Put the case in a Reversed
Frame, if my Author had flamed in zeal never so much against Mr. Wh: Sermon, or
some of the Opinionists, would he have admitted that as a topicke of Sedition?
In such a particularization which is more then he can fix upon Mr. Wh: would
not the equity of his cause have been his plea? Does he not therefore rove a
little in this discourse? if vehemency of spirit and voice infer sedition, it
will be dangerous to have good Lungs; let my Author take heed he entrench not
upon his Divinity tenure, and inscribe that to crime which intitles him to the
Pulpit. But Mr. Wh: his vehemency made him not exorbitant, he mist not the
cushiou, nor was he so fierce as my Author was when he said, Lie with him
Devil, sleep with him Devil, etc. Mr. Wh: promoted a Covenant of grace by a
spiritual prostration of its opposites. And this in general too, this is all
he did: what, Pretenders to so much charity, Reformation, Christian liberty?
etc. A new Heaven and a new Earth (as some said of them) and so, (...)
celestial, arraign, sentence, imprison, banish a man of their Church too? And
as though this were not enough, Instare morienti to fame him an Heretic,
Antinomian, seditious person, what not? and this in print, with all possible
disgrace and diminution; and that after he had repented too (as is confessed)
one upon whom he says he would not reflect any thing, his meaning is, I
suppose, that the rays of his malice should fall directly upon Mr. Wh: and all
this for so small a matter? Tanta fallacia? etc. May I not retort, Tantaene
animis coelestibus irae? His following discourse is a Panegyric of discretion,
which he by his usual clapping together of Scriptures magnifies the more,
because he conceives it wanting in Mr. Wh. But how comes it in here under his
title, viz. a Proof of Sedition and contempt? surely he does not think that
indiscretion involveth contempt. What does this curious Impertinent mean? I
should think that there were a secret and energeticall subsidence of all into
this vice, and that in his opinion too, if he had not (as we before showed)
cleared Mr. Wh. from such offense. See how confused the man is, he would
convict him of contempt, and yet vindicates him from indiscretion, as though
that could be without this, what he means by discretion I know not. But. if it
be that which is usually called spiritual discerning, my Author did use to
annex it to the tribe, etc.

His last and main stratagem whereby he will prevail upon the most prejudicate,
and scrupulous spirits, is to put the case (as he says) in a reversed frame,
his words are these: p. 57. But if any shall yet pretend want of satisfaction,
etc. put the case in a reversed frame if some others had taught it, etc. would
not Mr. Wh: and, etc. have looked at themselves as intended? Yes surely, for a
proper adjunct may design a particular company, as well as names, as Judas by
the sop. This is an excellent devise: A conjecture what Mr. Wh: and the other
party would have said upon the like invective: I know not what they would have
said, etc. nor do I know what to say to this his masterpiece of putting the
case, etc. unless I should put it into the case. Quid dignum tanto? etc. Shall
we neglect it? No, the necessity of the times may call for it, it is the very
distilled quintessence of his brain, his Catholicon. We will (if we can)
squeeze some sense out of it, or at the least leave it in a capacity; if it
have any force for the present, we must pose our Author knows, per species
concreat^: But I would not reflect upon him, (as he of Mr. Wh:) as though he
had no more wit then he was born with: But what if he knew what they would say,
shall their practice, or speech, which may (as they are men) proceed from
passion direct yours? If they should take offense at a little forwardness,
freeness, and irrespectivenesse of discourse, and beat it out as you have done
into sedition and contempt, shall that be your Apology? Are a company of
Familists, Libertines, etc. so authentic? If it must be so, let Mr. Wh: or
some others send word what they would say, So a^^^ cou^^ in N^^^^
and this great oration of my Authors, even tota haec Roma ruit cum viribus
si^s: of all his coixcidences, impertinences, folecismes, fruitless and weak
chullitions, this is the worst, for those may be acted upon, and refined by
wit. But as for this, it may stand eternally before it can receive a good
construction, all the color, and appearance of reason it can admit, must be
expected in a message from New England, declaring what they would say, etc. My
Author might do well, to compass Seato make a Proselite, to go himself thither
and procure an express, but I doubt he will not, his mind does so run upon the
sop: where I leave him; And in the mean time I leave this high strain of his,
if the winds and seas favor in a possibility of being clothed with a little
kind of sense, or the best kind of nonsense: Alas! poor argument. The case in
a reversed Frame might better have been kept in the case then dut into the
Frame.

He concludes this discourse thus; That to lay those under a Covenant of works,
who have suffered as much as himself, savours not of a brotherly spirit, p. 58.
This can be looked at no otherwise then as an impertinence too, if the Apostle
speak truth: If I give my body to be burnt, etc. I do not engage my self in the
dispute, etc. only I say utcunque his conclusion is not conclusive: he makes
had premises, and worse conclusion.

Seeing these things are so, that there is so little ground for these pretended
crimes, seeing there can be no contempt found in Mr. Wh: Sermon, we will rather
impute the undeserved censures to some other cause then to the meet malice of
the Court, which some uncharitably do.

Whether it were a strong imagination of the then Deputy upon Mr. Wh: which by
the power annexed to fancy produced some contemptuous behavior in him while
he was before them?

Or whether it were that he, viz. the Deputy, being then occasionally in
contemplation of contempt, and presuming of the infallibility of his science,
being (as he thought it) not simplicis intelligentiae (which is more likely)
but visionis, which in that reason must have aliquid externum de facto
representative of it, thereupon pitched on contempt, as Mr. Wh: delinquencie.

Or whether it were (which is probable, in the despicablenesse of the State,
and especially of the then Deputy, late Governor, and in regard of the
affection of the people, and that deservedly) to that worthy gentleman then
Governor, Sir Hen: Vain, unlikely to return into that preferment speedily; I
say, whether in regard of his condition, his melancholy temper, seconded, as
observed, by a sullen constellation then predominant, he did absolutely
determine he was contemned, some way, or other, and so cum nemini obtrudi
potuit, he charged it upon Mr. Wh: And so sedition, by way of concomitance;
Sedition and contempt being twins, as he used to say; howsoever Mr. Wh: was
sentenced guilty of the faults, and thereupon banished, imprisoned first: upon
request indeed dismissed to his family, not to stay though above twelve days
upon pain of strictest censure, although in a remote place, where they could
not fear any effect from the pretended vices, etc. And although in so cold a
season of the year, wherein I think, had he had the very extracted spirits of
sedition, and contempt, they would have been frozen up, and indisposd for
Action.

Thus says my Author, p. 43. it pleased the Lord to hear his poor people,
whose souls had wept in secret, for the reproach, etc. I desire to know of Mr.
Welds what he means by pleasing of the Lord? whether ratione voluntatis
Determinantis, vel determinatae? In the mean while, let the Reader judge
whether he have not cause to weep not only in secret, but openly for the
reproaches which he has cast upon some. He goes on thus: It is the Lords
doings, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Mr. Wh. is gone to Pascal, etc. what
then? it was neither contra, nor praeter, nor supra naturam, for Mr. Wh: to go
to Pascal: where is the wonder? I confess it was mavelous he got thither at
that time, when they expelled him, by reason of the deep snow in which he might
have perished. Whether my Author profane not Scripture in this, I will refer it
to those whom in the same page he speaks of, viz. his dear and beloved Brethren.

FINIS.

