The state of DUBLIN, As it stood the 27. of December, And of other parts of
Ireland. BEING The Copy of a Letter sent from a good hand to an Alderman of
this City. By reading which You will find the vanity and falsehood of those
vain foolish Pamphlets invented and published of late. With a strange and
unheard of flocking together of several kind of Birds over the City of Dublin
on Christmas Eve last.

Printed at London for Nath. Butter. 1642.

The copy of a Letter sent from Dublin December. 27. 1641. by Tristrum Witcome, a
Factor there for a worthy Alderman of this City, declaring in what state the
City there stands. With the strange and sudden departure of two Aldermen from
thence: and strange sight on CHRISTMAS Eve.
SIR:
OUr miseries are great, our fears more, if speedy relief do not suddenly
arrive, hunger will certainly be more plentiful with us then bread; for the
Rebels who daily increase have blocked up all passage two ways unto the City,
so that Southward from Doungarvil, and Northeast from Clannoroe, no provision
of victual can come at us; neither can the present Garrison here be spired to
clear those parts. It stands far worse with this City (God knows) then the
world with you will believe, otherwise they would not be so slow of their
succors, as to our woes we find they are. For the Rebels grow strong, and
withal so daring, that they attempt the blocking up of the very harbor of
Dublin, and to that end are building two Sconces at the Havens mouth, out of
the command of the Castle, whereupon they have already mounted twelve iron
Pieces, howsoever they came by them: so that it they be not prevented, and that
with seasonable opportunity, (which God in his mercy grant) they will not only
stop and hinder, all our Posts and Missengers for England, but likewise be able
to debarse and affront what succors should come from thence to us.

The English not without just ground are in exceeding great jealousy and
suspicion of the Irish inhabitants of the City, who although they make us fair
countenance, as whole visage and habits sort with ours, yet their hearts and
good wishes it is to be feared are with the Rebels. Apparences are good proofs:
Upon the Eve of Saint Thomas December. 20. two of the Aldermen of Dublin, Mr.
Dominick Rooch, and Mr. Patrick Copinger fled but of Dublin, with their wives,
children, and whole families, whither God knows, but surely all is not well;
their houses being observed to stand shut up for the space of two days
together, without ingresse or egress of any either master, servant, or
neighbor; notice being thereof taken at last report being there of made unto
the two Justices, it was thought fit by them to send officers and soldiers who
upon command to open, and none answering, forced the doors; but being entered
found nothing within considerable, in respect of their estates and qualities,
which gives great cause of jealousy unto the said Justices, and to all loyal
English, that these Aldermen are not only fled and stolen away to the Rebels,
but further have discovered whatsoever may be advantageous unto them, as
touching the state of the said City: as likewise of carrying a heedfull and
watchful eye over the rest: for it is greatly to be suspected that the Rebels
have more intelligence in this City, then stands for our profit; seeing that
they make daily approaches toward us, sometimes in lesser bodies, sometimes in
greater; sometime on horseback, sometime only with their foot; now staying
longer, now retiring sooner; now drawing nearer the City, now retiring farther
off, as they that looked for some sign or token of advantage to be showed out
of the City: and which increases our fears the more, is that the two great
Rebels that have the command of these rebellious troops that now are nearest
the City, are Mack Odonnel and Charles Mack Cartie, who have but too great
alliance, kindred, cousin germans, friends, foster fathers or foster mothers, or
foster brethren in this City.

I am heartily sorry of what you writ me the last week, that the King and the
Parliament disagreeing about the pressing of men for Ireland; for I am much
afraid that if the Parliament will have no men to be pressed for that service,
but what come hither to come voluntary, I am afraid that our help will come
too late, if any come at all. Although it be true that there has been diverse
skirmishes in the Country, wherein (God be praised) our people have had the
better, yet we have lost men likewise, and some brave and worthy Commanders;
and although we be weakened through victory, yet weakened we are by reason
that we have no supply, and are but few in respect of the enemy, and their
number daily increase.

A strange and wonderful thing by Fowls.
A Most strange and unwonted accident happened in Dublin on Christmas Eve, as
ever was heard of the Crows, Ravens, and Sea Gulls, about four of the clock
in the afternoon, being duske, assembled in such a numerous manner, hovering,
pewling and croaking in such a strange unheard of wise over the City, that it
amazed and affrighted all the inhabitants; especially they continuing without
departing in this sort until six of the said evening; a strange time of night
for such roll to be abroad at, at such a time of the year. And which is more
strange, that could not be frighted nor scared away with all the reports of
muskets, and some great Pieces out of the Castle that were shot off for that
purpose. What this strange accident means or portends is not for me to
divine: but surely by the knowledge of the oldest men in Dublin, either English
or Irish, never the like was seen.

Concerning other matter of trade, it behooveth rather to think of calling in,
if we can, then of sending any thing else over. Which if I can in any
reasonable way accomplish, you shall by Gods permission shortly see me in
London: till then, desiring you and all our friends to implore the assistance
of Heaven for us here, I rest,

Your Servant, T.W.

FINIS.

