TEXN-POLIGAA: OR, THE MARRIAGE OF ARMS and ARTS, JULY 12. 1651.

Being an Account of the ACT at OXON. to a Friend.

By R. W.

Quae sequitur manca est numero sensuque Propago. ACADEMIA OXONIENSIS
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for R. Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane. 1651.

Authori Male feriato quae sequuntur.
SArcinulam hanc quicunque vides, digitoque flagellas,
Si vis Vulcano mittere, quin and emis?
Ut cineres volutent, (sursum leve) at anguis in urna,
Qui Te (si Tu nos) sibilet, Ardelio.
Pone supercilium, leget haec Nemo Hercule? Nemo?
Cedo aurem; -- effectum des, and is (...) eris:
Si subitos casus vel adhuc damnaveris, audi, --
Scire Tuum nihil est, dicito scire meum.
Txne-polomagama: OR, The Marriage of Arms and Arts, etc.
NOw! are ye not all Infidels that thought
The long-expected Act would come to naught?
As if Mars still were Heathen, had to do
With Venus, and not with Minerva too:
As if such terms as these were opposite,
The Sword and the Word, Attlas and the Stagirite;
Terms merely Identicall, by Grammar Law,
S^ suae Protestatis littera;
So Ars and Mars by an Aphaeresis
Become the very same, (shake hands and kiss;)
As if the Gown were awed by the Commander
Or Aristotle at odds with Alexander;
As if the Snake about the knowledge Tree
Still had his Sting, still his Malignity.
Arts now and Arms United, their Protector
Is no fictitious George, but Real Hector.
In him old Authors all do acquiesce
(Unless Don Scotus be again in the press)
But Zanchius, Dan Sennert: and all the Maps
May chink within their Chain nor fear Mishaps;
Euclid was never in esteem more high
Since Luc. Flo. li. 1.
Romulus began to fortify;
When he (the Proto-Leveller) had thrown
(Impregnable!) three mole-hills into one.
But misty Scotus speaks as far from True
As Bonnet from Square-caps, as Black from Blew;
Or Case from Fiddle, as a Groom or Page
From high and Mighty Bajasets in the Cage.
He Is knotty and obscure, (so fare him well)
An other speaks more in a syllable;
It could not sink of late into our thoughts
Will: Cartwright would go off for 13. groats;
Since whom 'twas blazed that Pegasus was dead
Of The staggers, or a Dyzinesse in the Head,
But since his hoof was picked and pared, it is found,
He sets his foot more firmly on the ground.
Judgments the Traitor, Phant'sie is allowed,
She Is above all, but never in a Clowd;
Or if she be obfuscate, Phoebus will
Enlighten her, and sometimes guide the Quill;
But where the Clowd upon the Brow appears,
The Bitten Lipp, the blewnesse of the Ears;
Starting and gazing North in stead of East,
These are the Characters, beware the beast.
But Poets, (poor May blossoms) know not how
To be disloyal, or to knit the Brow;
If they offend it is on some pleasing theames
(I hope no arraigning Phantsie for her Dreams,)
They never hold up hands but when they see
Lex Talionis, or some Prodigy:
They have no Iron- mittons, socks indeed
Or Buskins they can lend you for a need;
But here is no Rollo, no pale Vmbra -- No,
Others have had too much of that, and so
This leads me to the Act, where does appear
A Jubilee in the one and fiftieth year.
Room then; but yet no Amphitheater
(The Caledonian Bore may fight elsewhere;)
No Captain Otto with Bull Bear and Horse,
Or what may fright the female gender worse:
No Melancholy scene of Dumpish Love
Brought in a Maze, or Cupid from above:
No Porcupine, no Dancing on the Rope,
No nipping Cardinal, or cramping Pope:
No Roscius, no Tailor on the stage,
No Cane, nor Timothy (to please the Page)
Though none of these, though plays are out of date
And exits formidable grown of late;
Though neither Mimick fond, nor satyr rough
To make the Maddam leave behind her Muff;
Yet somewhat was presented by the Arts
Of higher Nature, and as many (...).
Parts
Besides Trojani Ludi and Florales,
And (to prevent ill luck) Live. li. 5. Dec. 3
Apollinares;
And you will confess this Rolling eye so clear,
More spectacles had been Pleonasmes here.
Now for a stand 5. crowns, -- the Devil is
Over Lincoln -- Brazen nose is not amiss;
Jove's Semele.
Phaenix, and our Brother Phaeton
Forbid too near approaches to the Sun.
Break out the worlds bright Eye! see how they muster
Like Autumn grapes in one entire Ripe Cluster!
Their full-fraught Sable Gowns so large and wide
Demonstrate they can Sail against wind and Tide.
Thus Zephyrus brings his offering, that the sweat
Of either fex added to July's heat
(Corrected) might such Atoms get, such Men,
(By Plato's rule) as Oedipus again.
We Will side with him in this, (nor care who know it)
So he will allow the Commonwealth a Poet.
(The Musick-Lecturer if he had put on
All his Platonic Ladies, they had got one.)
Those Vestall Virgins that came up to light
Their fire extinct at Phoebus ere 'twas night,
Here I could break Times hower-glasse that run
The day away before it was begun.
Some say, Sol took fresh horses that could fly,
And that he borrowed two of The Oxford Carrier.
Edgerly:
When shining in his face, he got's good will,
(And then young Hercules he called him still)
And told him if denied, he would make him pass
For the Sarazan through a Multiplying-glasse:
And so, by consequence, against his will,
Be the The Sarazans head his Inn.
Sign and Carrier too upon Snow-hill.
Help here ye water-Nymphs, and give a word
With gloss enough to set out Oxen-ford;
Would I were now in the sell with Timon, he
Once out of Athens had his Privacy;
But O the Dinne! now-now-that Rampant hum
Has put me clean by an Exordium;
Where shall I now begin, or rally up
The scattered nine, unless I had a Cup
Of Helicon -- it is so -- well thought upon,
I Will steal to Aristotle's Well alone,
And find 'um there -- hold, Father -- I Will ha'none,
-- No Sugar -- keep the horn to for --
-- A Synagogue here to! -- would I were in the stocks
At Heddenton, for here my Tinder-box
Is not a place secure enough to keep
Its anxious Master from the vulgar peep.
This Act -- (I Will rest my Grandsiers bones if I
Am not distracted into Drollery,
And know not how to help it) I say this Act
Was well performed de Jure and de fact;
No Muse assizes here, ( nequam eget)
Hark! the Echo prompts the Malefactor, Legit.
Here Is Munus, but no Bustuarii, (Tricks,
Of The Romans that would fight the condemned to Styx)
By Inspiration of this very place
He finds his Neck-verse, and an Act of Grace.
Free grace (as some will have it) but the wise
Allow (though not of the Ropes) yet Exercise.
And such there was in the Roman Idiom
(Yet Barklays style) that all was hush and Mum.
And (as it is famed of Jupiter) their Ear
Chained up to Terrae filius his Chair.
(Besides some subtle questians pro and con
Encouragement for youth to bring it on)
Sarcasmes fly about, and now they itch
Till Terrae filius give the Chain a Twitch,
And then they rail at Barkley, say he got
Philoclea with child, and was a Scott.
Which to define aright (they were so bold)
They said he was a lowse of nine years old.
But this was Taylers talk, (to right our Mother)
I mean not Water-Iohn, nor yet that other,
Not (...), but by Profession
(Of these in each new pocket there was one)
These make not Ipsa Deum fertur genetrix Berecynthia. Virgil.
Berecynthia's Wedding-Gowne,
She Will have the Make and Spinning of her own,
Not loose, as ready still to fall to the ground,
Nor yet of the newest fashion, pinioned;
But in the middle way (the Golden Rule
Of Mediocrity is in her School)
And yet by one of her seven Sons she hopes
To have it lined with Bays, and set with Tropes.
Now Orpheus Junior mounts, (begin the Dance)
The Ladies please themselves into a Trance.
To Cato's brood he whispers in their ear,
That the scornful Lady is forbidden here,
Who with her queamish stomach cries -- amiss,
Because (forsooth) she would get out --
It works, it works; which to prevent, while he
Division runs, they crosse-legg'd Lo: La: Mi:
Like Randall's meek A. B. ^. in the Muses Looking glass.
Aorgus -- O for him
To help me out with matter filled to the brim.
Look how the Swallows, darting to and fro
St. Mary's, imitate the Roman Lucky.
Crow:
And the Suns bright flame-colour'd beams that come
Upon the Prophets heads, the A yellow veil used in the Roman Nuptials.
Flammeum.
The Rostrum, and Subsellia, and Men
Speak Marcus Cicero alive again:
But that the Judges by their smiles portend
Here was no Catiline that did offend.
Who then forbids the Nuptials of the Nine?
Duke Humphrey never afforded better Wine:
A pittance too of Nepotia*
Venison to the Sack,
Enough to prove us sons of Isaac.
The Musick-men will sit and nod all night,
And keep time with their heads till it be light.
Nay one of them, I heard him tell his fellows,
Would play to please us, though upon the Gallows.
Some say Sir Thomas Bodly through a cleft
Of our old dry Nurse (Earth) looked up, and left
This testimony, that if he were sent
Hither again, he never would repent.
Who then forbids the Banes? Speak, Shadow, say;
(And vanish) was it not a glorious day?
If nothing be objected, right or wrong,
We Will celebrate these Nuptials with a Song.
SONG.
OFF with thy Gauntlet, Mars, and yield
The Bucklers, and resign thy shield,
The Muses judged it fit:
Not to deprive thee of thy right,
But they desire to scowre 'em bright
That on Parnassus sit.
See how the Book expanded lies,
With Wisdom put before our eyes,
And after- happiness; The University Arms.

A Crown for a reward is set
In Gold, as the letters are in Jett
That never knew the Press.
Philosophers shall study more
For the hidden Stone than heretofore,
And Alcumists blow faster:
And when poor B. J. his Alcumist.
Lungs is worn away,
'Twill be enough for him to say
He did it for his Master.
CHORUS.
Then fear we not those
With Rhinoceros Nose,
Nor the venomous tooth to bite us;
Let us dance out the Rushes
In spite of their Tushes,
For the Goddesses all will right us.
Then let Flora bring Roses,
To make us all Poses,
Sing Talassio, Caius, and Caia;
Let none dare to grin
Till the Dog-dayes begin,
Nor yet stamp, for the Muses will pay-a.
Juno, Diana, Suadula, Venus, Jove,
Crown what is acted here below, above.
THE END.

