Die Mercurij, May 28. 1645.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that M. Whitaker, who
preached this day before the Lords in Parliament, is hereby thanked for the
great pains he took in his Sermon, and is desired by their Lordships to print
and publish the same, which is not to be printed or reprinted by any, but by
authority under his own hand.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

July 15. 1645.
I appoint John Bellamy to print this Sermon.

Jeremiah Whitaker.

THE CHRISTIANS HOPE TRIVMPHING In these glorious Truths; 1. That Christ the
ground of hope, is God, and not mere man, against the Arians, and other
unbelieving Christians. 2. That Christ is the true Messiah, against the
unbelieving Jews. 3. That there is another life besides this, against the
gross Atheist. 4. That the soul of man is immortal, and does not sleep till
the day of Resurrection, against the error of some seeming semi-Atheists. 5.
How the hope of Heaven should be attained, whilst we are on earth, against the
carnal worldlings. 6. How this hope may be discerned where it is, and attained
where it is not, for the comfort of every poor Christian.


All which Truths are briesly pointed out and cleared, In a Sermon preached
before the Right Honorable House of LORDS in the Abby-Church at Westminster on
Wednesday, May 28. being the day appointed for solemn and public Humiliation.

By Jeremiah Whitaker.

Published by Order of the House of Peers,

LONDON, Printed by G. Miller for John Bellamy at the Sign of the three
golden-Lions in Cornhill near the Royall-Exchange, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The HOUSE of PEERS.
Right Honorable,
Atheism is the great sin of the world, dogmaticall among the Pagans, and
practical among those Christians, Tit. 1.16.
who profess they know God, and yet in works deny him. Satan cares not much
what is our profession, so be may rule in our conversation; he knows where
opinions have not strength to better practice; there ill fractice, by degrees,
Quid prodesse nebis praerog ariva Christiani nominis potest, quod nos fideles
esse jactamus, quod Gothos ac Uvandalos hareticos despicimus, cum ipsi
^^eretica pravitate vivamur? Salv. de Gub. l 7.
will weaken the best opinions; and what advantage is it for us to have the
face of Christians, and the hearts and heads of Pagans? that our rule is
straight, and our lives crooked? Lex bona, muneris est Christi: vita autem non
bona, criminis nostri. Salv l. 4.
That God has made our light clearer, it is Gods free goodness: that our lives
are darker, it is our own vileness.

It was his sad complaint, that lived in such doleful days as these, when the
Goths, Hunns and Vandalls over ran the world, and all Christendom put into a
burning flame, that the lives of Christians fell short of the Romans, and did
equal the worst of the Barbarians. It is no wonder, that when our unbeleife
questions the deity of Christ, the verity of Scriptures, the mortality of the
soul, and so shakes the pillars of Heaven, that the Lord has a strong
controversy with the world, and causes all the foundations of the earth to
shake, and to be out of order.

The way to cure the bleeding distempers of Christendom, is for all men to
endeavor to get inward persuasions answerable to their outward professions;
for as these main principles are more or less believed; so is the heart and
life of man better, or worse ordered. When the soul is once fully persuaded,
that Christ is God, that he is the true Messiah, that there is another life
besides this, that the Lord Christ is ready to come to judgment, and his
reward is with him; then the soul begins to seek and beg an interest in Christ,
to flee from wrath to come, to assure the hopes of Heaven, whilst we are on
earth: and this hope, when once truly attained, carries the soul far above
the comforts of life, and beyond the fears of death, and makes men see no life
to be so comfortable, as that life which is most serviceable.

Your birth (Right Honorable) has made you above other men, this hope will
make you above your selves, and this communion with the great God will make
daily additions to your greatness. Then are men highborn indeed, when they
are born again of the most high God: and then are the sons of Nobles truly
great, when there are added inward supernatural principles of spiritual
greatness. Its the observation of one ( Chrysostom. in Epist. ad 1. Cor. c. 1.
Hom 1. (...). etc.
no mean man) That some naturally are of a high stature; others, that are low,
have shoes and pantables, to heighten them to a seeming greatness; which of
these will you call truly high or great? He that is so by an adventitiall
separable addition, or he that is so by a growth that's natural? It is one
thing to be highly esteemed of others, another to have a mind worthy of esteem
in it self. One man thinks clay to be clay, and despises it; another thinks
clay to be gold, and admires it: which of these two is high? Is it not he that
despises a piece of earth? and who is vile and abject, but he that adores a
piece of earth, and spends his soul to load himself with thick clay? Hab. 2.6.
that man who in the height of outward greatness accounts himself but dust and
ashes; his mind is full of inward excellency: he that admires and adores
himself, will not look upon himself as gilded clay, is of an abject mind, and
much deluded in the midst of all outward eminency: to have high thoughts of
things most mean, and mean thoughts of things most high, infallibly argues the
mind to be full of weakness, others say, to be full of baseness. Chrysostom. ibid.
He spoke like a Noble man indeed, that said, Let their honor and wealth
perish, that think all greatness in the world like one days communion with
the great God.

To clear up these great principles has been the aim of these weak
endeavors. It Is the arm of the mighty God that alone can rebuke the spirit of
unbelief: therefore that the great God, Genesis 9.27.
who persuades Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem may imprint these eternal
characters upon your hearts, and lift you up to sit in heavenly places with
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1 6. Luke 10.20.
that your names may be written in heaven, 1 Samuel 2.8.
and that you may for ever inherit the thrones of glory, is the earnest prayer
of

Your Lordships humble Servant in the Lord, Jeremiah Whitaker.

A SERMON Preached at a late Fast, before the Right Honorable the House of
PEERS.
1 COR. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.


Right Honorable and Beloved,
GOD has raised many of you up to be higher then your brethren, as Saul was
higher then the people from the shoulders upward, and set you as Cedars in
Lebanon, and Oaks in Bashan, and caused the mountains to pour down fatness
upon you, and the hills rivers of oil; and though you could not but come into
the world as others, clothed with common humane frailty, yet the Lord has laid
a foundation of greatness for you in the womb, and prepared honors for you
from the breasts: he has placed you in Eden the garden of the Lord, and has
made every precious stone to become your covering, the Topaz, Diamond, Ezekiel.
28.13, 14.
Beryl, Onyx and the Jasper, and you are as the anointed Cherub that covers:
what ever God has been to others, certainly he has been no hard Master unto
you, he has caused you to be the head of the Families, that you might be the
stay of the tribes thereof, that you might be the repairers of breaches, and
the restorers of waste places to dwell in. Now he that has done these great
things for you, expects great things from you. It is a certain principle,
not only in Scripture, but according to the light of nature, That to whom much
is given, Luke 12.28.
of them much is required, and though this be so equal that none can deny it,
yet the heart of man is so corrupt, that few walk by the light of this
principle, in making it their great design to return unto God according to
the mercies which they have recelved from God. 2 Chronicles 32.
I know it is difficult when God has made any great in the eyes of others, not
to be great in their own eyes; and when the world brings them up into the
bed of love, not to be overcome with those embraces: where the danger is so
great, vigilancie should be the greater, that it may never be said of any of
you, as of Tire, Ezck. 28.17.
Thy heart was lifted up because of thine own beauty, and thou have corrupted
thy wisdom, thine eyes have been dazeled with looking upon thine own
brightness: ver 18.
Therefore I will cast thee to the ground, ver. 19.
I will bring thee to ashes on the earth: All that know thee amongst the people
shall be astonished at thee: and thou shall be a terror, and never shall thou
be any more. To prevent this sin and misery, that so this eternal breach may
never be upon you, and your families, I have read this Text as a sovereign
Antidote, as a strong preservative against all this evil. If this one
Consideration might dwell on the hearts of great men, That all they have is
from the great God, and all they have in hand is nothing to that they may have
in hope; and that the greatest estate in possession, is nothing to that which
may be in reversio^: and that all the good things they enjoy, (if ten thousand
times more) are not able to make them happy; Eccles. 6.6 9.8.
and that if a man could live a thousand years twice told, and rejoice in them
all, yet all that comes is but vanity, and that at the end of this life there
must be an end of all these comforts, and all this brightness must go under a
dark cloud; Surely then no wise man but in this life would provide for a
better; and not only make it his design, but his delight to lay up for
himself a good foundation against the time to come, and so for a moment use
these temporalls, that he might for ever enjoy eternals: he that has once got
sight of Heaven, tasted effectually the powers of the world to come, seen the
vanity and emptiness of all conditions here below, considered what it is to
enjoy God to all Eternity, would not for all the world have his portion in this
life, but would say with the Apostle, If in this life only we had hope, we
were of all men the most miserable.

The scope of the Apostle in this Chapter is, to prove the resurrection from
the dead, against that wicked opinion of the Sadduces, amongst the Jews, Who
said there were no resurrection, nor Angel, nor Spirit, Act. 23.8. and against
the erroneous assertion of some seduced Christians, Hymeneus and Philetus, who
as concerning the truth erred, confessing a resurrection, but saying it was
passed already, and so over threw the faith of some: which opinion began, like
an ulcerous Canker, to spread it self in the minds of many, 2 Timothy 2.18. The
Apostle that he might strangle these monsters in the birth, proves that there
shall be a resurrection, by many unanswerable Arguments.

First, From the resurrection of Christ, If Christ the head be risen up above
the waters, then the members united to the head cannot perish -- ver. 12.

Secondly, From the many absurdities that will follow, viz. That all that are
asleep are perished, ver. 18, 19. and that then there should be more venom in
the first Adam to induce destruction, then virtue in the second Adam to produce
restoration, ver. 20, 21, 22.

Thirdly, He proves it from the perfection of Christ's kingdom, He must reign
till he have put all under his feet. The last enemy that shall be subdued, is
death, ver, 25, 26.

Fourthly, From the practice of Christians, who in baptising, professed
willingness to die for Christ, ver. 29.

Fifthly, From the great sufferings of the Apostle in this life, in jeopardie
every haur, dying daily, fighting with beast at Ephesus, ver. 30, 31, 32.

Sixthly, From the absurd practice of the Epicures of those times, which the
light of nature cannot but condemn, who drowned their souls in their bodies,
and their bodies in lusts, who would have no time to live longer then they have
time to sin, and when there is an end of sinning, wish there might be an end
of being, saying, Let us eat and drinks, for to morrow we shall die, ver. 32.

Amongst these Arguments the words of my Text are one, proving, there must be a
resurrection from the dead: otherwise the worst men should be the most happy,
and the best men the most miserable: which is so absurd, against, not only the
light of Scripture, but the light of nature, that the very naming of it is
reputed by the Apostle a sufficient confutation of it, for if we had hopes
only in this life, etc.

There are four parts considerable in the Text.

First, the foundation of all the comfort we do enjoy, or can expect, the Lord
Jesus Christ.

Secondly, a Christians resting upon this foundation.

Thirdly, the Extent of this hope, not only in this life, but in the life to
come.

Fourthly, the reason of that Extent, for if this hope did not look beyond the
grave and judgment to Eternity, then of all men the best men were the most
miserable.

From these four parts there arise four Observations.

First, that the Lord Jesus, the foundation of all the comforts we enjoy, or
can expect, is the Christ.

Secondly, that those that look on him as Christ, and would have benefit by
him, must be united to him, they must be taken off from themselves and the
creature, and settle their hopes on him.

Thirdly, those that would have their hopes in Christ, must be fully persuaded,
that there is another life besides this life; and that it is their duty in this
life to get the hope of a better.

Fourthly, the hopes of another life is that only which makes one happy in
this life, and the want of it most miserable: if hope were confined only to
this life, man then were more miserable then beasts, and Christians that
adventure most for Christ, were more miserable then other men: which absurdity
is so gross against the light of Nature without, and conscience within, that
the Apostle adds no argument to refell it. For the first.

That the Lord Jesus, the foundation of the comforts we enjoy, or can expect,
is the Christ the Messiah, the seed of the woman, promised to Adam, that should
break the Serpents head.

You heard in the forenoon, that he is a great King, and that his laws are
most equal, his subjects happiest, having no other tax laid on them then love
and fear, and to provide for themselves by laying up a good foundation against
the time to come. My Text holds him out, not only as a great King, but as a
great God; before whom the Kings and all the kingdoms of the World are but as
the dust of the balance, Isa. 40.15.
and the small drops of a bucket, he is the Christ, whom the Prophets called
Messiah. Dan. 9. ver. 25, 26. The Messiah the Prince shall be slain, and the
Messiah shall be cut off, and in the 2 Psalm. 2. ver. compared with Luke 2.26.
(...)
in one place he is called the Lords Messiah, in the other, the Lord Christ,
the Greek interpreters render it Messiah, Solent in peregrin^s vecabulis Graeci
ultimam consenantem in (...) mutare, sie (...) ex Chaldaico (...)
The Jews in all ages, but more especially, when the fulness of time was come,
were raised in their expectations of him; Simeon waited for the consolation of
Israel, Luke 2.26. And Anna spoke of him to all that looked for redemption in
Israel, ver. 38. And not only the Jews, but the Samaritans also were lifted
up with expectation of this great Messiah. Joh. 4.25. I know, said the
Samaritan woman, that the Messiah comes, which is called Christ: and when he
is come, (...) Goliath, (...) ex Annibal Drus. Obser. l. 9. c. 9. Glass. page 138.
he will tell us all things; and when Andrew had found him, he came to Peter,
and told him that he had found the Messiah, which being interpreted, is the
Christ: the one is Greek, the other Hebrew, both signifying, anointed; and if
you ask what this anointing is? I answer, not only the plenitude of gifts,
whereby he was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm.
45.7. but the fulness of the Godhead. God gave him the spirit without measure,
Joh. 3.34. And as Peter in his Sermon to Cornelius and other Gentiles, tells
how God preached peace by Christ Jesus, who is Lord over all, ver. 36. And how
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power: and as it is
said in the 2 Col. 9. The fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily. This
anointing intimates both his Natures, that he was both God and man, and in
both these Natures he was designed and anointed by the Father, to be King,
Priest, and Prophet, to be Mediator of an everlasting Covenant.

The Uses of this point are:



One, of the Arians and Socinians, who so look on his condescension when he
became man, that they deny him to be God, as if he left to be what he was, when
he took the nature he had not: it would be well if this error were buried in
everlasting darkness, never to be mentioned, but that many men blow these
coals, to set not only this kingdom, but the kingdom of Christ in a flame.
The soul that believes not this, that Christ is not only a great King, but a
great God, is under the power of Satan, led caption according to his will.
Satan may suggest, that it is a disparagement to God the Father, to look on
Christ as God: but know that it is the delight of God the Father, that Christ
should be known, not only to be a great King, but to be a great God; the
Father calls him so, thy throne a God is for ever and ever, and herein is the
Father glorified, Heb. 1.8.
that men glorify the Son. There are sour arguments I will lay down to
fortify you against this error.

The first Argument is taken from the peculiar names and titles that are
appropriated to Christ, he is called God, 1 Timothy 3.19. God manifest in the
flesh, and in the 2 Phil. 6. though he were found in the form of a Servant,
yet he thought it no robbery to be equal with God.

Exodus 7.1. Psalm. 82.6.
God says to Moses, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and God says of
Princes and Nobles, I have said ye are gods.

Meses, Exodus 7.1. I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, not a God to thy self,
but to be instead of a god to Pharaoh, as he was to Aaron, Exodus 4.16. Aaron
shall be to thee thy mouth, and thou shall be to him in stead of God; or else
it is given with restrictive diminutions, as Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are
gods, but ye shall die like men: but when Christ is called God, it is without any
expression that implies the least diminution, but all additions serve for
admirations: he is called not only God, but first, the great God, looking for
that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, 2 Tit. 13. not
only great, but secondly, mighty God, Isa. 9.6. not only mighty, but thirdly,
almighty God, Revel. 4.8. compared with Rev. 5.9. Yea fourthly, God blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5. fifthly, the God of truth, 1 John 5.20. Yea that great title
Jehovah, which the Jews hold Fecit bujus nominis majestas, ut a priscis Iudeis
pro (...) haberetur: qui ab ^ju^ pronu^tiatione reverentiae ergo abstinuerunt:
and legerunt pro eo Adonaj. Glassi^ (...) page 15. (...)
is not to be given to any mere creature, and which the Scripture sets
down, as the name of God alone, Psalm. 83.18. is frequently given to Christ,
this is the name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our righteousness, or Jer.
33 16.
Jehovah ^^^ righteousness, Jer. 23.6. If then the titles of the Father be given
to Christ, it is no diminution of the Fathers glory, to acknowledge Christ God
equal with the Father.

Secondly, consider the attributes of Christ, and you shall find the
incommunicable accributes of God, which cannot be given to any mere creature,
given to Christ.

First, he is eternal, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
before ever the Earth was, before he prepared the world, Prove. 8.22. Surely
none can be eternal but God; Psalm. 50.1.
from everlasting to everlasting thou art God; but the Lord Jesus Christ he is
eternal, Out of Bethlchem Ephrata shall come out to me he that is to be ruler
in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, Mic.
5.2. Compared with, Matthew. 2.6. and therefore, when Christ had finished the
work of our Redemption, he prayed that the Father would glorify him with
himself, with the glory which he had with him, before the beginning of the
world, Joh. 17.5.

Secondly, he is not only eternal, but immutable, the fame yesterday, to day,
and for ever, Heb. 13.8.

Thirdly he is omnipresent, and surely he that fills the Heavens and the
Earth, must needs be God: but Christ was in Heaven, while he was on Earth: The
Son of man which is in Heaven, Joh. 3.13. he is with his people in all ages,
in all places, to the end of the world. Math. 28.10. I am with you to the end
of the world, he Gal. 2.10.
lives in them, 2 Cor. 13.3.
speaks in them, 2 Cor. 6.16.
walks in them, Ephesians. 3.17.
dwells in them, Ephesians. 1.23.
fills them all in all, therefore surely he must needs be God.

Fourthly, he is omnipotent, the Lord God omnipotent, so called, Rev. 19.6.
Rev. 11.17. and Christ speaking of himself, says, I am the Alpha and Omega,
etc. which is, and which was, Rev. 1.8.
and which is to come, the Almighty.

Fifthly, he is omniscient, he is the wisdom of God, in him are all treasures
of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3. he knows all things, Joh. last 20.
Seatcheth all things, Jer. 17.10. compated with Joh. 2. last, he needed not
that any man should testify of man, for he knew what was in man: he
foretells all the changes which shall come upon the sons of men, Isa.
45.11. compared with Joh. 13.19. I have told you, before it come to pass; that
when it comes to pass, ye may believe that I am he, you can name no other
essential Attribute of God, but it is given unto Christ.

Thirdly, look on the works of Christ, and these prove him to be God, it was
his argument to the Jaws, when they asked him, How long will thou make us to
doubts tell us plainly if thou be the Christ: Joh. 10.24.25
he answered, The works that I have done in my fathers name, they testify of
me, and believe me, for the very works sake, Joh. 14.11.

Consider amongst the works of God:

First, the works of creation: surely he that laid the foundation of the
earth, and stretched out the heaven like a curtain, must needs be God, for the
gods that have not made the Heaven and the Earth, Jer. 10.11.
even they shall perish from the Earth, and from under Heaven: It is God that
made the Earth by his own power, and stablished the World by his own wisdom;
now all things were created by him, that are in Heaven and Earth, visible and
invisible, etc. Col. 1.16. and not only by him, but for him, and without him
was nothing made of all that was made: Joh. 1.3.
and surely, power to create being infinite, is so proper to the Creator, that
it is incommunicable to any creature, for no finite creature can be capable of
an infinite power.

Secondly, Consider his works of sustaining all things, all this glorious
world would be turned into a Chaos, were it not that Christ sustaineth all
things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. and he was not only before all
things, Col. 1.17. Joh. 5.17.
but by him all things consist; my Father, says Christ, works hitherto, and
I work.

Thirdly, Consider the works of miracles in the days of his flesh, Psalm.
86.10. thou art great, and do wondrous things, thou art God alone; the seas
and winds obeyed him, the spirits came out of the possessed, and though the
Apostles did great miracles, yet it was not in their own name, as themselves
confessed, Act. 3.12. and 4.10. and by this Argument Christ satisfied John's
Disciples, Go tell what things ye hear and see, the blind receive their
sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf heart, and the
dead are raised, etc. and stopped the mouth of the Jews, If I had not done
amongst them those works that no man had done, they had not had sinnne, Joh.
15.24.

Fourthly, Consider the works of Christ as Mediator, he that renews the
heart of man, Job. 14.4.
and brings a clean thing, out of an unclean, and darkness out of light, he
that can circumcise the heart, and purify to himself a peculiar people, must
needs be God, he that pardons iniquity, sin and transgression, must needs
be God, for who can forgive sins but God? Mark. 2.5, 7. he that was the Son
of man, had power on Earth to forgive sins, and therefore must needs be God,
Math 9.6. and the lamb of God that takes a way the sins of the world; he
that is the captain of our Salvation, that redeemeth his people from death and
Hell, and has destroyed him that had power over death, must needs be more then
mere man, for no man can redeem his brother from death, but only Christ, who
has the keys of hell and death, Rev. 1.18.

The fourth Argument is taken from the great prerogatives and preheminences
proper to God, God is a jealous God, and will not give his glory to any
creature, Isa. 42.8. and 48.11. but all glory that belongs unto God the
Father, the Father has commanded us to give it unto the Son, that all men
might honor the Son, as they honor the Father: he that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father, Joh. 5.23. We are baptized into the name of
the Father, and so are we into the name of the Son, and not into the name of
any creature: we are bound to pray to God the Father, Psalm. 50.15. Joel. 2.32.
and so are we bound to pray unto God the Son, Stephen called upon the name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 7.59. Act. 9.13. compared with ver. 21.
and the Saints are described to be such, as call upon the name of Jesus: we
are bound to believe in the name of the Son, as well as in the name of the
Father, Joh. 14 1. we are commanded to glory in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.30. compared
with Jer. 9.23. all acts of worship that are proper to the Father, are given to
the Son, and when he brings his first begotten into the world, he bids
all the Angels worship him, Heb. 1.6. now, worship is only proper to God: we
are bound to love Christ above all, to swear by him, and not by any creature:
now if all the titles, all the attributes of God, all the peculiar works, and
incommunicable privileges of the Father, be communicated to the Son, we may
be confident that Jesus Christ is not only the Son of man, but the Son of
God, yea God himself blessed for ever more.

The second Error we are to be established against, is that of the Jews, who
having slain the Lord of Glory, and the Prince of life, are still expecting the
Messiah, denying Jesus the Son of Mary to be that promised seed: it is good,
not only to know their error, but to be established against it, and to know
him who we do believe, that he is the Messiah, able to save to the utmost: to
this end consider these Arguments.

when the Scepter was departed from Judah, when the expectation of the Jews
was raised, Genesis 49.10.
in looking for the redemption, and consolation in Israel, in those mournful
days, wherein Rachel was weeping for her children, it was after that Elijah
was come, and as a messenger went before his face, it was after the
determination of the 70. weeks, viz. the 490. years determined upon the people,
till the Messiah should be slain, all this proves that he came in that moment
and juncture of time, wherein he was promised by the Prophets.

Bethlehem of Judah, Mic. 5.1. compared with Mat. 26.6. the place whither he
was driven after his birth, to Egypt, the place where he dwelt after his
return from Egypt, at Nazareth, Math. 2.22. the Jews rejected him upon this
ground, because he lived in Galilee, they said, shall Christ come out of
Galilee? Joh. 7.41. and were so confident, that they bad Nicodemus search and
look, Joh. 7.52.
for out of Galilee arises no Prophet, whereas the express prophecies run,
that by the way of the Sea beyond Jordan in Galilee of the Gentiles, the people
that walked in darkness, have seen a great light, Isa. 9.1. compared with Matthew.
4.14.

nor lift up his voice, nor cause it to be heard in the streets? Isa. 42.2. and
Zech. 9.9. God points the Church there to the Messiah, Behold thy king comes
unto thee, meek and lowly, having Salvation, riding upon an ass, and the foal
of an ass, compared with Math. 21.8. do you therefore reject him, because he
was not honored of men? Isa. 53.3.
therefore the rather acknowledge him to be the Messiah, who is despised and
rejected of men, for thus says the Lord of him whom man despises, unto him
whom the Nation abhors. Isa. 49.7.


(...)
had his body crucified? and upon this mistake, the Jews blaspheme the name of
the Lord Jesus in their Synagogues, under the name of one that is Patibulo
affixue interijte Quid istud ad causam? vid. Arnob. l. 1.
hanged, and this also was the stumbling block of the heathen: but all these
are Arguments to convince us, that he is the Messiah, Ought not Christ first to
suffer these things, and then to enter into his glory? was not he the stone
which the builders refused? did not God foretell us of him? I will smite the
shepherd, and the flock shall be scattered, and that the Jews should smite the
Judge of Israel with a rod upon his cheek, Mic. 5.1. does not the Messiah say,
I gave my back to the smiters, and I hid not my self from shame and spitting?
have ye not read that they pierced my hands and feet, Isa. 5.
and upon my vesture they cast lots? Psalm. 22.19. it is written, that it pleased
the Lord to bruise him, and put him to grief, when thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, he shall see the travel of his
soul, and shall be satifyed.

5 Arg. Fifthly, Consider his Resurrection, for he was declared mightily to be
the Son of God, by the resurrection from the dead, Math. 26.42.
Romans 1.4. the Jews, when he hung on the cross, said, let him come down from
the cross, and we will believe him, it is Jeroms observation: Fran dulenta
promissio, quid est plue, de cruce ad bue viventem descendere, an de sepulchro
mortuum resurgare? Hieron in Math 26.
this promise of theirs was fraudulent, for whether was it more to come down
from the cross when he was alive, or to rise from the grave when he was dead?
yet he arose and they believed him not, and when he was in the Sepulcher, they
said, This deceiver said he would rise, but we will make the Sepulcher sure,
but it were impossible for him to be held of death.

Sixthly, Consider even the confessions. of his adversaries, Pilat who
condemned him, could not but acknowledge he found nothing worthy of death in
him, Non possum digne admirari pro rei magnitudine, quod redemptis pre. tio
falsit testib^^, and ad seditionem populo concitato, rullam aliam invenerint
causa^ intersectionts ejus, nisequod Rex Iudaeorum esset. Illi sorsanilludentes
hoc fecerint, sed Pilaius etiam nolentibue responder, Quod scripsi, scripsi.
Hieron ibid.
It was admirable when all false witness were hired, and the people stirred up
with indignation, and yet the Judge that is drawn to condemn him, could not
be drawn to give any other reason of his condemnation, then that he was the
king of the Jews, and his passion was accompanied with that terror, darkness
covered the Earth, the veil was torn asunder, and the Rocks rent, the Graves
opened, and the sun so darkened, that one of the heathen cried out, Either the
God of nature now suffers, or the fabric of the world will presently be
dissolved; and the Centurion, and those that were with him watching Jesus, saw
the Earthquake, and those things that were done, and feared greatly, saying,
Truly this was the Son of God: it is a wonder that the Centurion, even before
the Cross, when he was under the scandal of his passion, should confess him
to be God, and that any Christians after his Resurrection, should affirm him
to be mere man.

Seventhly, Consider the judgments that are come upon the Jews: M. Fox his
Sermon
it was an argument that convinced one Jew here in England about 80. years
since; they said, his blood be on us, and on our seed, and what they wished
wantonly, God has poured out upon them extremely, for these 1600. years they
have been a scattered people, God has kept them a distinct people, and called
his people by anothe name: in times of their other judgments, God gave them
Prophets, Moses in Egypt, Ezra, Nehemiah, etc. in the Captivity: but since
they have had no Prophet, no vision, and the reason why God keeps them a
distinct people, since their dispersion, whereas other ations, when they have
been scattered, have been so mixed, that their originalls has been scarce
distinguishable, is, that as their curse and confusion is remarkable, so their
conversion might be distinct and admirable, when the Lord Jesus shall take to
himself his great power, and rule gloriously; and their bringing in will be
such a clear conviction to the Nations, that they shall come into the brightness
of Christ's rising.

I might add in the eighth place, the carrying on the Gospel by the weakest
means, against the mightiest opposition: other Religions are carried on by an
arm of flesh, and humane policy: but God in the spreading the Gospel, set
folly to contend with wefedome, and weakness with strength, that the excellency
of the power might be of God, 1 Cor. 4.7.
and not of men, and when all the kings of the Earth would have crushed it in
its infancy, and strangled it in the womb, there being nothing for three
hundred years, but rackings, tortures, fire and faggot, yet the blood of the
Martyrs was the seed of the Church, and the more they were lopt, Plures
efficimur, quoties metimur. Terrul. Apol. Zach. 4.6.
the more they grew, and there were never more glorious Saints then in those
times of darkness, to make it appear, that the Kingdom of Christ was not
carried on by power, nor by might, but by the spirit of the Lord of Hosts.

Secondly, Is Jesus Christ the great God, Use 2 of Exhortation.
then be exhorted first to study the excellency of Jesus Christ, how
transcendenlty admirable is he? surely, all the Kings and Kingdoms of the
world are to him but as the drop of a bucket, and the dust of the balance: Isa.
40.15.
did you but see the Sun of Righteousness, no star else would appear: it
would be happy if men and women that profess Christ, were taken with the
admiration of Jesus Christ: did they but once know what Christ is, they would
count all loss to win him: the reason why many things seem so great to our
thoughts, is because Christ seems little, if Christ were really apprehended of
us, it would seem a small thing to us to be jadged of men.

Secondly, Be willing to close with Christ, to accept of him: Shall he be
willing to come from Heaven, to take your nature upon him? and are ye unwilling
to come out of sin and Hell, to partake of his divine nature? this unwillingnes
for Christ is the great condemning sin of the world: can any of you answer the
slighting the Lord Jesus, that he should be willing to take your shame on him,
and you not willing to partake of his grace and glory? The Jew would have a
Messiah, for temporal ends, to break the Roman power: and the carnal
Christian for a carnal end, that he might sin with immunity, and commit sin
without fear, and turn the grace of God into wantonness. Has Christ come to
deliver you from the power of Satan, and will you yet be under the power of
your own lusts?

Thirdly, If Christ be this great Messiah, exalt him,

First, In your opinions of him, have not mean thoughts of the God of Glory,
count his arguments the stongest, his precepts to be the purest, his comforts
to be the sweetest, his rewards to be the highest, his people to be the
happiest, that you may be able to justify the ways of Christ, against all the
arguments of corrupt nature, and the temptations of this present evil world.

Secondly, Exalt him in your affections, let the desires of your soul be to
him, and to the remembrance of his name, that you may say, and say truly, Lord,
whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none in Earth that I desire
besides thee, let him be the beloved of you souls, that you may say, my belove
is mine, and I am his, set him up as the joy and rejoicing of your hearts, that
you may say, Psalm 43.
Unto God will I go, even unto God, the gladness of my joy: Bs.8.13.
magnify him in your hearts, and let him be your fear and your dread, and if
he be God blessed for ever, make him the God of your confidence, never be
ashamed of him, in whom you do believe; Heb. 7.25.
and if he be God, be then fully persuaded that he is able to save them to the
utmost that come unto God through him, and make him the God of your hope and
expectation, pour out your souls before him, and say, God is our hope: and
this leads me to the second Observation.

All those that would have benefit by Jesus Christ, 2 Doct.
must be united unto him, and set their hopes upon him. Our hopes are not in
our selves, nor in the creature, in vain is salvation hoped for from the
hills, Jet. 3.23.
and from the multitude of mountains, truly the Lord God is our hope, and the
salvation of Israel, and happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help,
whose hope is in the Lord his God, Psalm. 146.5. the Doctrine needs not so
much explication to clear the Judgment, as application to better our practice.

works, Psalm. 78.7.
that you might set your hopes upon him, and of the good things he has
revealed to you in his word, Romans 15.4.
that through the Scriptures you might have hope, and not only have it, ver.
13.
but have it in abundance, that you might abound in hope, through the power of
the Holy ghost: this is the great privilege God bestows on them that are
good in his sight, thou art my hope in the day of evil, Jer. 17.17. this hope
is to the soul, as the Helmet is to the soldier, 1 These. 5.8.
to cover his head in the day of battle, and as an Anchor to the ship in a
mighty storm, Heb. 6.19.
it is our hiding place, our City, and our rock of refuge, and they alone have
strong consolation, who flee for refuge to the hope st before them, and by this
hope enter within the veil, whither the forerunner is before entered: that this
might dwell upon your hearts, give me leave to propound a few motives.



First, No man can live contentedly, ask your own souls, do you think that
any of you can live either rationally as men, or usefully as Magistrates, or
spiritually as Christians?

First, Do you think that any can live rationally, as men, without hope: life
without hope may be sensual, like to the life of beasts. made to be taken and
to be destroyed, but it cannot be rational, for reason teaches us so to use
things temporal, as to provide for things eternal. What content can there be
to a man of reason, without hope, when he considers either the deficiency of
the good he enjoys, or the eminency of the evil he fears?

First, for the deficiency of good, look on the sons of men, that seem to
themselves and others the happiest under the sun, and you shall easily perceive
this truth, first, that no condition of men is so completely good, as to be
without a mixture of evil: there are some grains of gall and wormwood, to
allay the sweetness of the most delightful potion; and though this beitternes
for a few moments may be concealed from sense, yet it is clear to reason,
whenn man reflecteth inwardly, and communeth with his own heart. Solomon when
he returned to himself, judged the comfort that before seemed most admitable,
to be most contemptible, crying out, Vanity of vanities, allthings underthe
sun were butvanitie, Ecccles. 1.8.
full of labor, that man could not utter it: the eye being not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing: therefore all the good things of this world,
being in themselves incomplete, can never give to the soul complete
contentment; for nothing can act above its one sphere.

Secondly, Suppose the condition of some on man of ten thousand, to be so good,
as to be free from any considerable mixture of evil; yet no-condition here
below, but is capable of a melioration: it is not so good, but it may be
better: so hope is still needful, that all fruitions might be heightened by
expectations.

Thirdly, If the condition be such, that thy soul does not wish it to be
better, yet thy heart may justly fear it may be worse, and so there is ever
need of hope, if not for a new addition of some good you have not, yet for the
continuance of all the good you have, otherwise when you say your mountain is
the strongest, then desolation may be the nearest; and when there is the
highest lifting up, then you may meet with the saddest casting down: when
Nebuchadnezzar said, Is not this great Babel which I have built for my self?
etc. then came there a voice from Heaven, saying, thy kingdom is departed from
thee, Dan. 4 31.
etc. and when the rich man in the Gospel began to feed upon sense, without
hope, and said, Soul take thine ease: he had that sad answer returned, fool,
this night shall thy soul be taken from thee. Luke 12.20.


Secondly, Consider the eminency of evil: besides that there is a mixture of
evil for the present, with allgood: whereby it comes to pasle, that all your
comforts laid in the balance, can scarcely equal your diseomforts; yet
consider, all the evil you feel for the present, is nothing to what you may
fear for the future; and it is not so ill to day, but it may grow worse to
morrow: we had need to remember our Creator in out best time, before the evil
days come in which we shall say, we have no pleasure in them, and when after
all storms and tempest still, the clouds shall return after the rain.
Eccles. 12.2.


Thirdly, Consider the sadness of these days: the Lord has made the glory of
our Jacob thin, Isa. 17.4.
and the fatnes of his flesh to wax lean, and a great fire is kindled under
all our glory. How are the estates of many great men emptied? how many Naomies
out of every Country, that say, Call me not Naomi, but Marah? how is the
greatness of men diminished? how are their honors overclouded? the day of the
Lord of Hosts is not only on the Briars and Bushes, buton all the Cedars of
Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of Bashan, Isa, 2.13.
upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up; God
calls upon all the sons of men, Enter into the rock, and hide your selves
in the dust, for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his Majesty, when he
arises to shalke terribly the the Earth; when had never more terrors without,
God raineth down upon us fears and snares, and an horrible tempest, and
therefore we had never more need of hopes within.

Secondly, Without hope great men cannot live usefully, as Magistrates: when
God has made any of the sons of men great, it is hard not to be great in
their own eyes: this aslure your self of, that though you are greater, yet
your corruptions are not thereby fewer: Original sin is in all men equal:
your diversions for the most part are greater: you have so much company of
others, as that you have little time to commune with your own hearts: your
temptations are stronger: the greater you are, Satanoweth you the greater
spite: few have been made better by greatness: how many men do all ages tell us
of, who have been made worse? there are many flatterers, and but few
admonishers. It was Solomon's unhappines in the midst of all his glory, Eccles.
7.28.
that he found scarce one man in a thousand faithful; add to this, that your
engagements to God are greater; your falls, if you miscarrie, more exemplary;
your account unto the great God, more dreadful; you have I known, says God,
above all the people of the Earth, therefore you will I punish for your
iniquities.

Thirdly, No man can live spiritually, as a Christian, without hope, every
Christian besides the combats he must meet with, as man. has other combats he
must undergo, as a Christian; his spiritual combat is stronger, not only
with temptations without, but with corruptions within: his thoughts are higher,
his fears are larger, his care is not only how to be secure in man's day, but
how he may be delivered from sin, and death and hell, how he may stand fast
in the day of evil. What is it that can make a poor sonle enter into this
combat, continue in this conflict, despise this world, deny himself, run
through all straits, triumph over all difficulties, but only hope? which
causes us to see, that the light affliction of this world, which is but for a
moment, Works for us a far more excellent, and eternal weight of glory:
whilst we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things that are not
seen: for the things that are seen, are temporal, but the things that are not
seen, are eternal, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

Secondly, As no man can live contentedly, Secondly, no man can dicomfortably
without hope.
so no man can die comfortably without hope. Who can expresle the darkness of
that soul that lives without fear, and dies without hope? when all joy is
darkened, and all glory goes down under a dark cloud, and all comforts end in
a storm, which never blows over; when you must leave the condition you know,
for a condition which you know not; when you must leave a certainty for to go
upon a contigency; when the poor wandering trembling soul, is unable to stay in,
and unwilling to go out, when the soul goes upon eternity, not knowing
whither; when the body must go to ly under the slimic valley, that before lay
upon beds of lvorie; and the eyes that saw the glory of the world, must never
see light any more; and the ears which before heard delightful music, must
now be for ever stopped: better never to have come into the world, then to go
out of it without hope: a Roman may die patiently, and harden his heart against
sorrow; but only a Christian, through hope, can die triumphantly, crying out
Oh death where is thy sting, Oh grave where is thy victory, 1 Cor. 15.55.
etc?

no sulsistonce, and without Christ hope cannot subsist: if you must hope,
where will you place this hope? you cannot rationally settle this hope, either
in your self, or in any other creature: not in your self: for what is there in
your self, that can be a rational ground of hope? not your parts, though never
so great, they may be soon blasted, are often greatly poisoned, and if they
continue in their greatest luster, they may be overpow'rd: Hushai goes beyound
Achitophel, and the wisest of men have found the steps of their own strength
straightened, Job. 18.7.
and their own counsels to cast them down: this hope cannot be in your
estates, they are not so full, but they may be soon empty: Pro. 23.5.
will thou set thine eyes on that which is not? riches take to themselves
wings, and stee away: and surely their wings were never longer, nor their
slight swifter, then in these days: Psa. 62.10.
trust not in oppression, become not vain in robbery: if riches increase, set
not your hearts upon them; hope not in your names, they may be overclouded: God
in a moment can stain the glory and pride of all flesh, abhor the excellency
of Jacob, he leads counselors away spoiled, Job. 11.27,
and overthrows the mighty, he takes away the understanding of the aged, he
pours contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the strength of the mighty: he
increases the Nations, and destroys them, he enlarges the nations and
straitneth them again, he takes away the hearts of the chief of the people
of the Earth, and causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way,
so they grope in the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger like a
drunken man: and as there is no ground of hope in your self, so there is no
ground of hope in the creature: has not God disappointed many of us of our
hopes? do we notroare like bears, and mourn like doves; do we not grope for
the wall like blind men, Isa. 59.10, 11.
groping as if we had no eyes? have we not often looked for salvation, but it
is not? Consider the mind of man is variable, we change our counsels as sick
men change their beds, imputing all our disappointments, rather to any one then
to our selves: and as the mind of man is variable, so the strength of
crentures is expugnable, so that the whole frame of nature is a bed too narrow
for one to stretch himself upon it, Isa. 28.20.
and a covering too narrow for one to wrap himself in it: all things under the
sun are but vanity; Job. 15.31.
and let not him that is deceived trust in vanity, for vanity shall be his
recompense: we may faltter out selves to our ruin, under these seduced hopes;
but all these hopes in the issue will prove but as a siders web, Psalm. 8.14 and
11.20. and 18.14. and 27.8.
and as the giving up of the Ghost, and all humane confidence will bring th
soul to the king of terrors, and what hope can a bypocrite have, when God
takes away his soul?

allsufficiency of Christ; there is this vast difference betwixt hope in
Christ, and hope in the Creature: from the creature you cannot expect so
little, but you shall find less then you do expect: from Christ you cannot
expect so much, but you shall receive more then you do expect: Ephesians. 3.20.
He is able to do abundantly, above all that we are albe to ask or think: all
spiritual blessings are in him alone, he it is alone that can say, I will make
you free from your lusts and temptations, from death and hell, he alone can
say, I will pardon your iniquities, cure your diseases, take the stony heart
out os you, I will write my law in you, Ezekiel. 36.26. etc. 1 Cor. 2.9.
and ye shall all be taught of God: I will bestow my Heaven on you, my throne,
my kingdom, and such joys as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it
ever enter into the heart of man to conceive. What an admirable thing is it,
that a poor soul may come and say, What may such a one as I am be pardoned,
that am condemned? may my infirmity be cured, when the soar runs and
cease not? may this loathsome leprosy be healed? what a comfort is it to a
poor soul, that he may come to Christ as the poor leper, and say, Lord, if thou will, whou can make me whole; Math. 8.2.
Besides in this world, he alone is able to supply all your wants, answer all
your doubts, seatter all your fears: and he is not only able, but has
engaged himself by promise, to all that hope in his mercy; he calls to you,
get ye to the strong holds, ye prisoners of hope: Zach. 9.12.
he bids you cast all your care on him, 1 Pet. 5.7.
for he cares for you; and be not distracted about the things of this life, as
other Gentiles that know not God, Math. 6.32.
for your heavenly father knows what you have need of: will you trust him for
your souls, and not for your bodies? will you trust him for Eternity, and not
for a moment? will you truse him to deliver you from the rage of devils? and
not from the rage of men? Psalm. 97.2.
roll your souls upon him, and he will carry you in his bosom; and though
clouds and darkness be round about him, yet you shall see that righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne; Isa. 33.17.
your eyes shall see the king in his beauty, that he is a defender above all
destroyers: you shall be upon a Rock higher then waves; we meet here with great
difficulties, and those cause great fears, and great fears had need of great
hope, and these are never great enough but in the great God, Augastin. Ho^^.
44. De ipsis amar^^udinibus mur^^urans, dich, Ecce pereunt omnia Christianis
temporthus, quid streqis? non boc promisit Deus, qu ed ista non peribunt:
Aeterna pro^^sit aelernus, etc.
Christ alone can make us above our selves, above men, above changes, above the
inconstancy of this present evil world: why does the soul which hops in
Christ complain that the world changes? did ever God promise that it should
not change? has not God told us expressly, that the Heavens wax old as a
garment and as a vesture, shall he change them, and they shall be changed: he
that is eternal, has promised things eternal: and if thou believe, of
mortal, thou shall be made immortal: and in the hopes of immortality, may
triumph over whatsoever is mortal, saying as he did, World, why do thou
fume? what would thou do if thou should continue, if so proud when thou
have no abiding? whom would thou not deceive if thou were sweet, if thou have
deceived so many whilst thou art bitter? Quid. strepis numde? quid immu^de
strepia? quid faceres si maneres? Quem non deciperes dalcis, si amarus, etc.


I come to the third part, the extent of this hope; viz. that the hope of a
Christian is not confined to this life; if we had only hope in this life, etc.
Hence arises the third Doctrine, viz. That they that would set their hopes on
Christ, must be persuaded there is another life after this life; and in this
life it is their duty to assure the hopes of a better. You read in the
Scripture not only of this world, but of the world to come: Christ tells us
of sins that shall not be forgiven, neither in this life, nor in the life to
come, Matthew. 12.32. And Christ is said to be far exalted above all
principalities and powers, Ephesians. 1.2^.
not only in this world, but in that which is to come; and that world is so
far above this world, that the thoughts of eternity are called the powers of
the world to come, Heb. 6.5.
and to overpower all the things of this world. We read of Judgment to come;
Paul's Sermon before the great Governout was of this subject, and it made him to
tremble, Act. 24.25.1 Cor. 4.3. Rin. 2.5.
and that judgment is sarre above the judgment of man's day: We read of wrath
to come, and all the wrath that is present, is nothing to the day of wrath, and
the revelation of the righteous judgment of God: the Sadduces who were none of
the best of men, but a generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7.1 These. 1.10.
yet were forewarned to flee from the wrath to come: and the great triumph of
the Apostle was, that God had delivered them from wrath to come. We read of
another life to come, and that is the great privilege of godliness, that it
has not only the promises of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8.
but of that which is to come: and the great work of grace upon the heart, is
to take us off from looking after things temporal, and to make us look after
things eternal, 2 Cor. 4.16. It was the Apostles life; they looked not on
things that are seen, but on things that are not seen. Men are never Christians
in good earnest, till they be persuaded fully of the things of eternity; and
that poor seduced soul that resolves never to be persuaded, has no ground to
think that ever it shall be converted. Luke 16.18.
Dives begged that one might go from the dead to tell his brethren on the
earth, lest they also should come into the same place of torment; intimating
the cause of his own sin and eternal misery; intimating that he was not
persuaded of this place of torment in his life, and therefore came down to this
place of torment at his death. God has made the vision herein so plain, that
every one that runs may read it; and he that hardneth his heart against
Moses and the Prophets, is left inexcusable, ver. 31.
and is irrecoverable, and would not be persuaded though one should arise from
the dead. The Use of this point is,

First, If there be an other life besides this life, then let us be humbled for
all that world of unbelief that is in our nature; that our persuasions about
the things of eternity are so weak, when Gods expressions are so strong and
clear; that we can believe the things of sense, and will not believe the things
of faith; that we entertain the reports of men, and reject the reports of God:
1 John 5.9.
Surely if we receive the witness of men, is not the witness of God greater?
this unbelief was the first sin, and is the last sin; the cause of our first
apostasy, and ground of our continued malignity: when Christ intends to
convert a soul unto himself, this is the great sin whereof the Spirit of Christ
convinces the soul, and the Spirit never proves a comforter, but where he is
a convincer; and the first work in conversion is laid in an act of conviction,
and that conviction discovers the great sin of unbelief, Joh. 16.9.
and where Christ does not convince them of it, he will condemn them for it: how
often are we bidden to take heed of this spirit of unbelief, Heb. 3.12.
in departing from the living God? nor can any man be an heir of life, who
lies under the power of unbelief: for will any man deny himself, cross his
own appetite, take up Christ's cross, to assure to himself a propriety to those
things, wherein he believes there is no reality? the soul must first believe
the excellency of the things in themselves, before it make it its great design
to get an interest in them: if the things of eternity were fully believed, what
manner of persons would men be, in all holiness of conversation? 2 Pet. 3.11.
and did you really look on such things, it would make you diligent to be found
of him without spot and blameless. In the next place;

get no advantage against you; especially fortify your selves with strong
arguments against these two opinions, which carry away a great part of the men
of the world captive: the first is, of the gross Atheist, the other of the
Semi-atheist.

The first is of the grand Atheist: how many are there that have the face of
Christians, but their hearts are heathenish? who resolve there faith into mere
reason, and their hopes, into sight? Such were the Sadduces in Christ's time,
Acts 23.8.
who denied Angels, and spirits, and the resurrection: such Were before Christ
among the Prophets, as those Epicures, Isa. 22.12.13.
who when the Lord called for weeping and mourning, behold joy and gladness,
slaying of oxen and killing of sheep; eating flesh, and drinking wine, saying,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die: such were some after Christ
in the days of the Apostle, verse. 32. of this chapter: Peter prophesies that
there should be such to the end of the world, wicked and profane men, scoffers,
2 Pet. 3.3, 4.
who should walk after their own lusts, saying, Where is the promise of his
coming, for since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of the creation. It was an article objected against one of
the Popes in the Council of Basil, that he had often said before diverse,
Joannes 23. Saepe coram di. versis praelatia pertinaciler, juadente dia^olo,
asseruit, vitam aternam nonneque aliam post banc, dixit animan bominucum
corpore relinqui, Council, Basil Ses^. 11
that were was no such thing as eternal life: and Paul the third is reported
to have said, when he was dying; now he should know three things, whether the
soul was immortal, whether there was a hell, whether there was a God: if all
these atheistical opinions were buried in hell, yet Satan's temptations, and
the hellish corruptions of our own hearts would raise them up again; and
therefore it is good to be established, that we may stand fast in this evil day,
and having done all, to stand: Against this atheistical opinion, lay this down
for a sure foundation, surely there is another life besides this life; and to
strengthen you therein, consider these Arguments.

First, Surely there is a God; Paulus 3. Moriturus dixisse fertur se jam
experturun veritaten^ trium quaestionum, de quibus in tota vita dabitas^et; 1.
an ^nimae sint immortales, 2. an sit insernus: 3. an sit Deus, Gerrard, loc.
com, de mort. p, 178.
the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth his
handy work: every creature points us to the Creator, and he that believes
not, is condemned of himself, and thou art left inexcusable, O man: now if
there be a God, there must needs be another life, wherein God will fulfill the
good he has promised, and execute the evil he has threatened, for in this life
there is arighteous man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a
wicked man that prolongeth his days in his wickedness.

Jesus Christ, whom you heard not only to be the Son of man, but to be the Son
of God, and the true Messiah, that great mystery wherein God has made known
the riches of his glory, for without controversy great is the mystery of
godliness, Christ manifested in the flesh, P^^l. 19.1. Eccles. 7.15. 1 Timothy
3.16.
a mystery so much admired by the Apostles, adored by Angels, believed by
Devils: if there be no other life, consider

mirror of Angels, become the reproach of men? Heb. 2.10.
was it not that he might bring many son and daughters unto glory? and that
glory, not in this life, for when he appears in another life, Col. 3.4.2 Cor.
8.9.
then are the Saints to appear with him in glory: why became he poor, but that
we through his poverty might be made rich. and obtain the riches of the glory
of the inheritance which is incorruptible, and undefiled, 1 Pet, 2, 3, 4.
and that passes not away, reserved in the highest heavens for them who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation?

Secondly, What was the end of his bitter passion? why did be taste death, who
was the Lord of life; but that through death he might destroy him that had
power over death, Heb. 1.14, 15.
that is the devil, and deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all
their life time subject to bondage? and what deliverance from this death is
imaginable? If the end of this life put an end to all our comforts, then the
dangers of death are not abated, nor the fears of death any whit diminished,
but he was made perfect through suffering, that he might become the author of
eternal life, Heb. 5.9.
to all that do obey him.

Thirdly, What was the end of his resurrection, but that his Saints might be
quickened up together with him, Ephesians. 2.6. 1. Pet. 1.3.
and made to sit in heavenly places together with him, and so obtain a lively
hope, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead?

Fourthly, What was the end of Christ's ascension, but to prepare a place for
his people? and if I go and prepare a place for you, says Christ, Joh. 14.2, 3.
I will come again and receive you, that where I am, there ye may be also.

Fifthly, What is the end of his intercession, but that he may be able to save
them to the utmost, Heb 7.25.
that come unto God through him? and how are they saved by him to the utmost,
if there be not another life after this life? in this life the Saints are slain
all the day long, and counted as sheep unto the slaughter: therefore abhor
that blasphemy, as once to imagine, that this great mystery of piety, should be
a mystery of iniquity: if there were no other life expected then this, then as
St Paul says of the resurrection, Christ is not risen, so may I say then,
Christ is neither borne, nor has he suffered, nor is he ascended, nor sits
on the right hand of the Majesty on high: despise not this glorious mystery
through unbeleife: for if he that despised Moses his law, dyed without mercy,
of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who treads under
foot the Son of God, Heb. 10.28, 29.
and treads the blood of the Covenant under his feet as an unholy thing, and
does despite to the spirit of grace?

2 Pet. 1.19.
Consider the Covenant of Jesus Christ: we have a sure word of prophecy, to
which we do well to take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place; men
may deceive, and be deceived, all flesh is grass, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24.
and the goodlines thereof like the flower of the earth, but though men die,
the Word of the Lord lives and abides for ever, and though Heaven and Earth
pass away, Math. 5.18.
yet not one jet or title of this word shall pass away, now if you believe not
that there is another life, then you make the Word of God to be a refuge of
lies, and the holy Scripture is looked upon by you, as some imposture, and read
over the parts of the Covenant, and dare you imagine that his Commandments are
irrational?

First, Consider his Commandments, viz. Lay not up for your selves treasures
on Earth, which the moth corrupts, Math. 6.19. Joh. 6.27. Luke 13.
and thieves break through and steal: labor not for the meat that perishes,
but for that which endures to aternall life: strive to enter in at the strait
gate: and can these directions of the Lord of glory, be thought by you to be
delusions?

Secondly, Consider the threats of the Covenant, do you think them to be vain
affrightments? Christ says, What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world, and lose his own soul; Math. 16.16.
now if the soul be the temper of the body, and if there be no life but this,
then the soul is lost for ever: for every one must lay down his life, there
is no man living that shall not see death; Christ bids us fear him that
kills body and soul; why do all the Scriptures tell us of devouring fires,
everlasting burnings, Isa. 33.34. cap. 30.35.
that Tophet is prepared of old, the pile thereof is much wood, the breath of
the Lord kindles it, the worm never dies, and the fire never goes out, but
the smoke of the torment ascends for ever and ever? do you, or dare any one
of you, when you hear the words of this curse, bless your selves in the
imagination of your heart, and say, I shall have peace, though I add
drunkenness unto thirst? Deuteronomy. 19.19.
be sure though you despise this Word of the Lord, yet this word shall take
hold of you, and all the curses of this book shall lie upon you, Z^ch. 1.6.
and the Lord shall blot out your name from under Heaven.

Thirdly, Look on the promises of this Covenant's and can any of you think
those promises which God counts to be most precious, to be lies most
pernicious? does Christ use Stratagems to overreach his people? can you think
the God of truth will deceive, who will not suffer any man to go beyond, 1
These. 4.6.
or defraud his brother, but will be an avenger of such things? how often does
Christ engage himself by his promise, Matthew.'s 19.29.
that no man has lost futher, or mother, houses or lands for my name sake, but
shall receive manifold in this life, and in the life to come eternal life? how
often does he pronounce his Disciples blessed, when all men shall revile and
persecute them, and bids them rejoice, and be exceeding glad in that day?
Math. 5.12, 13.
for though their troubles be great, yet their reward shall be greater in
Heaven.

Fourthly, What do you think of the graces of Gods Covenant, which are the
fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5.22.
as love, joy, peace? etc. If the eyes of our understanding be opened to know
what is the hope of the calling, and the riches of the glory of the inheritance
with the Saints in life, you cannot but confess, that the work of Conversion
is greater then the work of Creation, and the exceeding greatness of his power
toward them that believe, is according to the mighty working of his power,
Ephesians. 1.19.
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead: dare you without
abhorrence and reluctance, entertain a thought, that the real grates of God
are but the mere fancies of men? and that there is no distinction between good
and evil, betwixt light and darkness? and involve your selves in that woe, Isa.
5.20.
Woe be unto them that call evil good, and good evil?

Fifthly, What do you think of all the comforts of this Covenant? the joy of
gods chosen, Psalm. 106.5.
to much begged by David, so much admired by the Apostle, that believing, the
Saints rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory; 1 Pet. 1.8. Romans 5.2.
and rejoice in the hope of glory of God; and are ever looking for the blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God: the thoughts of the great
day, when the sun shall be darkened, Tit. 2.13.
and the moon turned into blood, rayseth up their spirits higher, and Christ
bids them lift up their heads, Luke 1.28.
for their redemption then draws near.

Sixthly, What do you think of the Children of this Covenant? the holy
Prophets and Apostles, and Saints and Martyrs, who loved not their lives unto
the death, Rev. 12 1^.
but kept the word of Christ's testimony. Moses was learned in all the wisdom
of the Egyptians, yet be refused to be called the son in Law to: Pharaobs
daughter, Heb. 11.26, 27.
and chose rather to suffer affliction with the children of God, then to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a moment, because he had respect unto the recompense
of reward. Paul brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Act 20.2^.
counts not his life dear unto him, that he may finish his course with joy,
and of that cloud of witnesses, how many of them were racked, tortured, and
accepted not deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection. Heb.
11.35.
Dare you condemn all the generation of the righteous, and souls of those
boly ones, that are now made perfect? if you imagine there is no other life
besides this, then you condemn, not only the wisest of men of folly, but the
comforts, and the graces, and the threats, and the promises, and the commands,
and directions of God, of falsehood: and that Atheistical foul that dares
imagine the God of truth to be liar, shall find that God Almighty will give
him his portion with lians, Rev. 21.8.
and unbeleivers for ever in the lake that burns with fire and brimstene.

glorious Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. Math. 26.53. Heb. 12.22.
you have read of their state and condition, that they are elect Angels; of
their number, that they are many legions, and an innumerable company of Angels,
how they shall appear with Christ at his coming in that great day, when he
shall come with his mighty Angels, Math. 25.31 Math. 22.30.
and how the happiness of the Saints after death is, to be made like the Angels
of God now consider what is the great employment of the Angels, to great in
power, till that great day come? does not the Scripture tell us that they wait
over us? that they are ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.14. Esal. 34.7 Luke 15.10.
Matthew. 11.10.
sont out for the good of them who shall be heirs of Salvation? do they not
pitch their tonts about us? joy in our conversion? there is more joy in heaven
among the Angels of God for the conversion of one sinner, etc. and they behold
the face of God for us, and why is all this if there were no other life, then
the joy of the Angels should be founded upon fancies, and mistakes, and their
consolation should be a mere delnsion; there is little reason to accoset he best
of men of madness; but is madness it self, for men to charge the elact Angels
with folly.

Fifthly, Consider the nature and the employment of those damned spirits,
Beeszebub the old Revel. 12 9. 2 Pet. 2.4.
red Dragon and Serpent, called, the Davil and Satan, who deceives the world.
Have you not read of their condition, how God has bound them with chains of
darkness, and has reserved them for judgment? If so, Quocumque vadunt geben.
numsuam portant. Aq. 12. q. 64. art. 4. T^rmenta fla^marum secum ferunt instar
sebricitant is, qut ^^s ^est's eburneis ponatur, servorem evitare non potest.
Estrus, lib. 2 distin. 6.13. Beda in Jacob. 3. 2 Pet. 2.9, 10.22.
then there must be another world, at least to them; and if to them, then to
us: for if God spared not the Angels that (...) but cast them down, to Hell,
that where ever they go they carry their chain and their holl with them:
surely then God knows how to reserve the unjust for the day of Judgment;
cherfly those that walk after the flesh, speaking evil of things they know not,
sporting themselves with their own deceiving; those men shall utterly porish in
their own corruptions. Have ye not heard of the horror that overwhelmeth them,
that they are forced, though they resist God, to believe that which they
approve not, and to tremble under the wrath they cannot avoid? But especially
think of that employment, how they walk through dry places, fretting and
vexing themselves, running too and fro, and compassing the Earth; how Satan
entered into the heart of Judas to betray his Master, Jam. 2.19. Math. 11.43.
Job. 1.7. Luke 22.3. Act. 5.3.
filled Ananias and Saphira to lie against the Holy Ghost. What pains they
take to lead away the souls of poor men and women captive? If there were not
another life besides, this, and if the soul were not immortal, why is it that
those spirits go about continually seeking whom they may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.
and never cease to accuse God to us, and day and night to accuse the Saints
unto God?

of witches and wizards: you have heard, how Saul sought to the witch of Endor,
how that witch had familiar spirits at her command, 1 Samuel 28.^.
how Manasseh made his sons pass through the fire, 2 King. 11.6.
used inchaniments, dealt with familiar spirits and wizards, how this sin did
abound amongst the Canaanites of old, how strictly God forbad the people of
Israel, that there should not be amongst them any one that used divination, or
an inchanter, or a witch, or a charmer, or a consultour with familiar spirits,
or a wizard, or a Necromancer, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.
for all that do those things are an abomination to the Lord, and for all
these abominations did the Lord drive them out from before them. How did Satan
deceive the Nations by the Oracle of Delphos? how has this sin reigned in
all ages amongst the Caldeans, the Jews, and Gentiles? which things are so
evident, as none can deny them: and can any one imagine that Satan would be so
sollicitous to seduce, ready to captivate, so obsequious for a time to become a
drudge and a vassal to the poorest of men, and silliest of women, that he may
win their souls, if there were no other life then this life? To this adjoyne
the art of Conjuring; which though abominable beyond expression, yet it is so
notorious in all places, and in all ages, that it is beyond the denial of any,
who has not sunk himself below his species, who, lest his lust should be
disquieted, and his soul tormented before his time, has sold himself over to
be a slave to unbeleife, and is resolved to shut his eyes against the light of
Scripture, and against the light of Nature, and to close his ears against all
the loud clamours of the heart within, and experiences without: and what
arguments can convince that soul, which has made a Covenant with death, and
is at agreement with Hell, that is resolved, what ever is said to persuade him,
yet he will not be persuaded? and though one, or ten thousand should rise from
the dead, that soul will not be persuaded, lest that his lusts should be
molested.

their thoughts one while accusing and excusing, Romans 2.15.
what inward gripes and secret terrors, still poor mad wretches suffer
themselves to be so baffled and mastered with their lusts, that at length they
joynwith their lusts, to baffle and get the victory over their own
consciences, that being past feeling, Ephesians. 4 19.
they may commit sin with greedines: yet when they have done all, they find it
difficult to keep down these sparks, and to suppress these flashes that are
ever rising up. If this be rightly weighed, it may be reputed one Argument,
that the thoughts of another life, of another day of account, are written on
the hearts of all men, and that the imagination to the contrary, is rather an
option then an opinion; rather an intimation of what is desired by them, then
believed of them; especially if you in the natural conscience consider these
things.

First, The inquisitions about immortality, all questions, doubts, debates upon
this subject argue the soul to be immortal; for it is only a principle of
immortality that makes man dispute whether the soul be immortal; for as none
can distinguish betwixt rational and irrational, but he that is rational,
Vid. Morn. de veritate rel. Cir. p. 293.
for he that denies man to be rational, by doubting of it, and disputing
against it, in those acts proves himself to be rational, which his words
seem to deny: so none can dispute or distinguish betwixt mortal and immortal,
but only he that is immortal: and these thoughts of immortality are not only
in some men of some tempets, but upon the hearts of all the sons of men.

Secondly, Consider the affectation of a kind of immortality in the worst of
men, who have taken great pains to gull themselves into an opinion that the
soul is mortal. What monuments, what pillars have they erected? Psalm. 49.11.
Ph. Morn. ibid. p. 202. Vulgus desunctis parentat, and quidem impe^si simo
officio, and quos negat sentire quicquam etiam desiderare profueru^t. Tertul.
de re ur carnis
how have they called their land after their own names? it is observed by him
that was an honor to the Nobility, that Epicurus himself, who denied
immortality in his life, yet he appointed at his death a great sum of money
to be yearly paid, that there might be an annual commemoration of the day of
his birth; and to what purpose is this, if when he lived like a beast, he must
die like a hogg? if nothing be immortal, why when immortality was so
groundlesly denied, is this kind of immortality so sillily desired?

Thirdly, Think of the unsatisfiednes of the mind in things present, and you
shall find the soul in a continued pursuit, reaching after something that is
infinite; other creatures have here their home, have their mind satisfied; but
the workings of the soul are still for future; some way forgetting, by a
natural inclination, the things behind, and stretching forward to find out
that in things future which it has sought in things past, and ever was
disappointed: now the operations of all creatures follow their essence; this
tendency of the mind to the future, argues the soul to be in transitu, in
the way, and not in its own country, and that we are not yet at home, that
this life is but a passage to another.

Fourthly, Consider the confessions of adversaries at their death, who have
denied this truth in their life. Belshazzar in the height of his jollity, when
the handwriting apeared on the wall, his countenance was changed, and his
thoughts troubled, so that the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees
smote one against the other, Dan. 5.6.

Phil. Motn. p. 29.
To this might be added the providence of God: if we believe Plutarch and other
heathen authors, this dispute is needless, for Gods providence and the souls
immortality are so united together, that he that denies the one, destroys the
other; why did God make this world so full of beauty, but that some should
behold the Creator in it? why should man contemplate the Creator in the
Creature, but to adore him? why should man above all sublunary creatures adore
him, if man above the rest of the creatures had no hope in him? Heb. 11.6. he
that comes to adore God, must believe that God is, and that he is a rewarder
of them that seek him; those rewards are not dispensed here, therefore are
reserved for a life hereafter: why has God given so many gifts unto man, which
perplex him in this life; and fills his mind with those dsiquietments, that
all the brurish creatures are freed from? in regard of these man should be
worse then a beast in his life, if not better then a beast at his death; and we
may say of men, in reference to other creatures, as the Apostle says of
Christians, in reference to other men, If man had only hope in this life, man
of all creatures would be most miserable.

day of judgment, that God has appointed a time, wherein he will judge the
world in righteousness, Act. 17.31.
by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance to all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead.

the resurrection of the body, and answers all objections to the contrary, with
all those Scriptures that tell us plainly that Jesus shall come in his glory,
and all his holy Angels with him; before him shall be gathered all nations,
Math. 25.31, 32. 1 These. 4.16. Joh. 5 28.28.
and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd does the sheep from
the Goats, and it is but a little time before the Lord shall descend from
Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an Archangel, with the trump of God,
and then the dead shall rise; and the day is coming, when all that are in
their graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and they that have done
good, shall come to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to
the resurrection of condemnation. I will couclude with that of Chrysistome,
(...), How. 5. in Act. cap. ^^. (...). Anime causa est omnis religro, August.
de utilit, tredendi c. 7. Vnde jamolim inter philosophos ijdem omnem religionem
s^. stuletunt, qui anima^ marta lei dixerunt. Estius, l. 4 did. 43. Isa. 7 9.
And Error confuted.
that the Devils great design has been ever to persuade man, that the nature
of man differed little from the nature of beasts; and when he had drawn any of
the sons of men into this flrange absurdity, to dispute themselves out of the
thoughts of their own immortality, he has so far prevailed to blind many of
them, that after they have affirmed the nature of the immortal soul to be
mortal, they have gone about to prove the nature of beasts, which is void of
reason, to be rational; whilst these great truths are questioned, the soul
neglects to be sanctified; all piety is founded in the thoughts of immortality;
and it is observed among all the Philosophers, that those destroyed all
Religion that held the soul to be mortal. Till this great truth be settled
upon the hearts of men, they lie open to all temptations, and suffer themselves
to beled away with all corruption. If you believe not this, you can never be
established, therefore be not faithless, but believing.

Secondly, There is a second error of the Semi-atheists, who confess that
there is a day of judgment and a resurrection; but deny that the Scriptures
hold out, that the soul is distinct from the body, or that the soul has any
abiding after the body is dissolved, but sleeps till the day of resurrection; I
could be willing to bury this error in everlasting silence, but that some have
raised it from the embers, and in these times with unsufferable boldness, under
the notion of new light, Vid August. haeres. 83. Husc errorem Mahomet in eruit
in su, Alcborano, docan;, and corpora and animas adextremun, judicium
resurrecturas. Estius l. 4. c. 43 Anno Don. 1568. Theses Craco via impressas
per Polontam divulgarunt, quarum prima est, Negamu^ aliqua^ anim^m post morrem
manner, etc. Soul is distinct from the body. Vid. Aquin. contragent. l. 2. p.
267. Heb. 12.9. Eccles. 11.5. Psalm. 22 9.
have ushered in this im^ of darkness. This error began to vent it self by the
heathen, afterward to poison Tatianus after the time of Justine Martyr, and
after him some other Christians in Arabia; yet in those days this error was
so sufficiently refuted, that it seemed for many ages dead and buried, till
Mahomet that false Prophet, who having a carnal mind, and savouring nothing
of the spirit, dreamed only of corporal pains and pleasures that men should
have after the resurrection; and among Christians it appeared little, till
Satan, to blemish that glo^rious reformation, in the days of Luther, stirred
up some Ambaptists in Polonia, and since, the Socinians and Libertines, to
revive this moncter. I have not time thoroughly to discover the root of this
poison: only give me leave to lead you by the hand to some sovereign
Antidotes, as strong preservatives against this infection.

To this end consider these two positions:

First, That the Scripture clearly holds out, that the soul is distinct from
the body. I pass over the arguments that learned men bring from the light of
nature to confute this error. Consider what the God of truth has revealed,
and you shall find that the Scripture tells us clearly, that though the soul
be united to the body, yet it is distinct from the body.

First, in its rise, Genesis 2.7. we have had the fathers of our flesh, and have
been obedient to them; how much more to the father of spirits, and live? though
God frame our bodies, cause our bones to grow in our Mothers womb, take us out
of our Mothers bellyt yet he uses our natural parents as instruments of our
body, but it is Gods great prerogative to be the immediate father of the
spirit, Isa. 57, 16.

Secondly, It is distinct in its natural operation, is:

First the soul grows most when the body grows least: there are distinct
periods of time, beyond which it is impossible to add either a cubit, or a
hairs breadth to ones stature: but the soul is ever growing forward to its
perfection, Job. 32.7.
and multitudes of years, though full of weakness, yet they utter wisdom.

Secondly, The soul is often strongest when the body is weakest, 2 Cor. Anima
regit corpus, and repugnat passionibus quae complexionem sequntur. Aquin.
Contra Gent. l. 2.
dying Christians have manifested the highest excellency under bodily
infirmities: when there has been the least of the life of nature, there has
been most transcendent glorious expressions of the life of grace: and for this
cause they fainted not, finding by experience, that when their outward man
decayed, their inward man was renewed day by day.

Thirdly, The soul is not the temper of the body, because it rules the temper,
and distempers of body.

supernatural consolations, when all joy of the body has been darkened, the
supernatural joys of the soul have been enlarged: when the bodies of Martyrs
have been on the rack, under torturings, how have their souls been filled with
inward triumphings, embracing the burning flames like beds of reses, and have
endured all the dreadful things that men could inflict, to the admiration of
their enemies, and the conviction of many of their beholders? as Justin Martyr,
and others.

unnatural pollutions, there are spiritual wickednesses and malignities, as
well as bodily, and we are bid to cleanse our selves from all filt hinesse of
flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Pet. 2.11.
and to abstaite fromall fleshly lusts, which warte against the soul.

opposite duties required of man, in demeaning himself to his body and to his
soul. Matthew. 6.25.
Christ has commanded us to take no thought for the body, but did he ever
command us to take no thought for the soul? are not his commands quite
contrary, viz. above all things look to thy self, Dent. 4.9. 2 Pet. 1.10.
Phil. 2.12.
and keep thy soul diligently, and give all diligence to make your calling and
election sure: and work out your salvation with fear and trembling; now if God
require those acts to be performed to the soul, which are absolutely forbidden
to the body: then the soul must needs be distinct from the body.

Sixthly, They are distinct at the time of dissolution, when they part one from
the other, when the Servants of God have commended their bodies to the ground,
how have their souls rejoiced to go out of this Tabernacle? as Hilario^ and
Polycarp: Stephen when his body was stoned, sees Heaven opened, and cried,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit: Acts 7.56. and 59.
if the soul therefore be distinct from the body, in the rise, in the working,
in its consolation^, in its duties, in its pollutions, and in the state after
death, than to confound the soul with the body is as great an error, as to
confound life with death, and light with darkness. But especially consider that
all those arguments that prove the soul to exist separate from the body, do
answerably confute that Error, that the soul is but the temper of the body,
therefore consider the second Position.

Sour^ immmortall, and does not sleep till the day of the resurrection.
but that the soul lives, when separate from the body, and that it is but a
fancy of inconsiderate spirits, to dream that the soul sleeps till the day
of resurrection: for the cl^ering of this truth consider three arguments.



to their fathers, so it is said of Abraham, Genesis 25.8. now if Abraham was
gathered to his fathers, this must be in his soul, for in his body there was
no such gathering, his progenitors being (...) in V^ of the Chalde^s, but
Abraham's body was interred in the cave of Machpelah before Mamre, Genesis 25.9.
in the land of Cannan.

Luke 23.43.
Christ promised the poor penitent thief on the cross, this day shall thou be
with me in Paradise, there are some to avoid this Scripture, would divide the
words thus, I say unto thee this day, and make a stop there; referring the
word, this day to the person promising, and not to the blessing promised; to
which I answer, that first, to alter comma's and stops, against all received
copies, is a high presumption, which, if tolerated, how will the sense of
Scripture be wrested by wanton wits to their own perdition? Secondly, 1 Pet.
3.16. Luke 23.41.
the Context sufficiently confu^eth this gloss, Christ answers the desire of
the poor penitent thief, his request is, Lord, remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom: but Christ immediately that day entered into his kindome; now
in Christ's answer, none can imagine the words to be a denial: and if there be
a granting his petition, then to interpret the words, that some thousand years
after, viz. at the day of the resurrection the thief should be remembered; is
to abuse the faith of this poor penitent, to straiten Christ's bounty, and to
wrest the words against their natural sense, that say expressly, this day,
Christ hodie must answer to the penitents quando, and if in Paradise, then
surely not in the grave, nor in any part of the Earth, as that Paradise in the
day of the Creation full of trees and herbs; for Christ entered into the
Heavenly Paradise, 2 Cor. 12.2.4.
and when Paul was wrapped up into Paradise, he tells us it was the third
Heaven.

Lazarus after his death was carried into Abraham's bosom, and that place, Luke
1^.22. Non quietis l^cum, sed aeternitatis sinum, Aug. Calvin.
not a place of quiet tranquillity, but the bosom of Eternal felicity: and
though some dispute whether the relation be a history, or a parable, yet how
ever, though you suppose it to be parabolicall, yet a parable is the similitude
of some real truth, and this Parable cannot signify what shall be done after
the day of judgment, but plainly points to a state the souls are in,
before that day, for after the day of judgment, what man can say as Dives did,
Luke 16.28, 29. 1 Cor. 15.2^.
I have three brethren upon the Earth? or how could Abraham return that
answer, they have Moses and the Prophets? etc. for after that day all
ordinances shall cease, and God shall be all in all.

Saints desire of dissolution is upon this persuasion, Phil. 1.23. I desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, etc. If Paul had imagined his soul should
have slept till the day of resurrection, it had been weakness and madness to
desire dissolution for this end, to be with Christ; for if this should be true,
then Paul had more of Christ in life, (for then Christ lived in him,) then
possibly he could attain to after death, if the soul should sleep till the
day of resurrection.

confidence upon their departure from Earth to enjoy a glorious life in Heaven;
we know that when this earthly tabernacle the body is dissolved, we have a
building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1. surely if the soul sleep till the day of resurrection, they should not
have said, when this house is dissolved, but when this body is raised, and this
tabernacle restored: when they desire to part with the body, this were out of
love to their souls, not out of want of love to their bodies; for Paul could
have wished mortality to be swallowed up of life, 1 Cor. 5.4.
(i.e.) that the mortal body might have gone to life with the immortal soul.

presence the Saints have with Christ, while the soul is in the body, is
nothing but a mere absence, in comparison of that neernes of presence unto
Christ, which they shall enjoy when they are absent from the body: for the
Apostle speaks this confidently, knowing that whilst we are at home in the
body, 1 Cor. 5.6, 8.
we are absent from the Lord: and we are confident and willing rather to be
absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord.

Heb 12.23.
is so far from being abolished, that it is perfected, and the Saints
departed this life, are by the holy Ghost styled the souls of just men made
perfect: to this I might add many more arguments, as that the happiness of the
Saints is in a perpetual progress. Phil. 1.6, that the Union they have with
Christ, is inseparable beyond the power of death, what shall separate us from
the love of Christ? Romans 8. That the happiness of the Saints is Eternal, Joh.
5.44. and 6.40, Rev. 6.9, 10.
42. that the souls under the altar, cry for the resurrection of the body,
that the counsel of Christ to his hearers was upon this foundation, make you
friends of this unrighteous mammon, that when they fail, they may receive you
into everlasting mansions, Luke 16.9. but all these things fail us at the day
of death, therefore at that day the promise is to be received into everlasting
mansions; thus you see the truth evidenced from the souls of the Saints.

they are not abolished: God tells us,

their own place, so it is said of Judas, who fell by transgression: Act. 1.18,
25.
now that place is not the grave, for the grave is not his own place, that is
the common way of all flesh, and that place where all meet together. Job. 3.18,
9.
Judas his place was the state and degree of torment, that his sin and Gods
justice inflicted on him.

are now in prison, Christ in the days of Noah, by his eternal spirit,
preached unto them, whose spirits are now in prison: the grave cannot be the
prison to distinguish the just from the unjust: that being common to the
obedient, as well as to the disobedient, 2 Pet, 3.21.

the place of torment; Dives, when his body was buried, is said to have his
soul in torment, and he beggeth of Abraham, send to my brethren, that they
come not to this place of torment: many prove this Scripture to be historical,
but suppose it in part to be a parable, as some expressions are granted by all
to be parabolicall, as the tongue of Dives, and the finger of Lazarus; yet this
Parable must be a resemblance of some truth, which is in rerum natura, and must
intimate something past, not future after the resurrection, as was proved
formerly.

Sodomites, that they now suffer the vengeance of eternal fire; it cannot be
meant of their bodies, Jud. ver. 7.
for they are burnt by fire to ashes, nor of that material fire that fell upon
their Cities, for that many ages since was quenched; but of their souls, which
are under the eternal wrath of God, where the worm never dies, and where the
fire is never quenched. Mar. 9.44.
Consider what the Scripture says of the souls of all men in general,
whether just or unjust, whether they fear God or fear him not.

Matthew. 10.28.
Christ bids us not fear him that kills the body, and cannot kill the
soul; now if the soul was but the temper of the body, then whosoever kills
the body, should by the same act kill the soul.

and the spirit of a man that gooth upward? Eccles. 3.^1.
yet though man do not consider it, the God of truth asserteth it, Eccles.
12.^^.
when man dies, then shall the dust return to the Earth as it was, and the
spirit to God that gave it.

Thirdly, If the soul should sleep till the resurrection, Corpus non statim
diss^^it post secessum, manetigitur (...) magit anima. L^c^ant. (...)
then the soul should be as mortal as the body, for the body is not presently
dissolved into a non entity: when it is parted from the soul: and if the body
be not abolished, can any one think the soul to be anihilated?

revealed in Scripture, and would prove as difficult to men to believe, as the
resurrection of the body; but about the resurrection of the (...) scripture is
altogether silent.

is a departure, 2 Pet 1 14.
putting off this tabernacle and it is a strange ^^ake to take the house for
the inhabitant.

(...) gap to the overthrow of all the thoughts of Eternity, for if arguments
from nature can prevail to delude the soul so far, as to think the soul
is abolished at death, what arguments can prevail with a carnal heart to
persuade it, that the body shall be raised after death; the voice of nature
cried aloud amongst the heathen, that the souls of man were immortal, and
that there was a different state of the souls of just men, and unjust, after
death: the Elizian fields, full of happiness for the one sort, and the Tartarean
darkness full of horror, for the other: it is an ancient observation, that almost
all Philosophers, all Heretics confessed the soul to be immortal, and though
they did not much desire it, Animae salute^ credo tractatu carere: omnes fere
baeretici eam quoquo modo volunt, tame^ non nega^t. Tertul. de resur. Carnis.
yet they were not able to deny it; but the resurrection from the dead was by
few of them discerned, scarce by any of them acknowledged: besides this error
is destructive to all religion; our corrupt natures are full of the seeds of
Atheism: we need all religion to eradicate them; but nothing to foment them:
thoughts of Epicurisme sink deep, to count the fruition of carnal pleasures
the greatest good: how many thousand souls have miscarryed upon this rock? who
from hence have turned to be lovers of pleasures more then of God: to preserve
your souls from this infection, 2 Timothy 3.4. Vid. Tertul. Lactan. etc. Discede
ab Ethnico, haeretice, quid alieno uteris clypeo, si ab Apostolo ornatus es.
Tertul. de resur.
I have been thus large in proving this assertion: I should proceed to confute
the arguments brought to the contrary, but the time preventeth me: only in
brief, their argnments are either drawn from corrupt nature, which are
abundantly answered by the fathers in their disputes against the heathen, and
they wondered that heretical Christians, that enjoyed the light of Scripture,
should borrow any arguments from Galen, and the rest of the heathen that sat in
darkness, and in the valley of the shadow of death; let Heathens turn to
Christians to assert this truth, but never let Christians so sarre ^^^^tatise
to Heathens, as to assert their ^orrours: or else their objections and seeming
arguments, are taken from mistaken Scripture: I have scarcely time to relate
them, much less to refute them.

Object. Some object and say, Did not God threaten Adam, In the day thou easest
thereof, thou shall die; and if he died, Genesis 2.17.
then the whole man did die, for the body is not the man without the soul, and
therefore reason, that immortal Adam, must be made mortal.

Sol. To this I answer; 1. That the death which God did threaten, was not only
natural, but spiritual and eternal; and spiritual and eternal death may be
upon the soul, when the body perishes: the Angels that fell from their first
standing, are under death, yet their being is not abolished; Rev. 20.10, 14.
and after the day of judgment, the wicked shall be cast into hell, the second
death, yet they shall never be reduced to a non entitie, for the smoke of
their torment ascondeth for over. If any say, Rev. 14.11.
Why is the whole man said to die, if the soul lives when the body is
destroyed? Lanswer, That whatsoever belongs to any part of any whole,
Quicquid convenit parti, qua pars, convenit toti secundum illam partem.
may be truly asscribed to the whole, according to that part. Man sees, yet
the whole body is not an eye, for then where was the ear? but the whole light
of the body is the eye. Christ was born, put to death, buried, and this is said
of whole Christ, but this is only in reference to the humane nature, for the
Godhead is immortal, 2. pet. 3.18.
and therefore he was put to death in the flesh only.

Object. But they say, When men are dead, the Scripture expressly says, that
they cannot praise God; Psalm. 6.5. and 88.9. Isa. 38.8, 9.

Sol. I answer; the dead, qui tales, so far as they are dead, cannot praise
God; Rev. 14.13.
the body that lies in the grave rests from its labor, yet this does not
exclude the realiy of the act, but the manner of the performance; and so says
Hezekiah, they shall not praise thee as I do this day, Isa. 38.19.
the father to the children shall make known Gods truth. 1. Though they cannot
do it for another conversion, yet they can do it for their own consolation;
and these souls that are with the Lord, they follow the Lamb where ever he
goes, and have their hallelujahs continually in their mouth. Rev. 5.9. and
blessed be they that dwell in God presence, Psalm. 84.4.
they will be always praising him.

Object. God is said only to have immortality, etc.

Sol. God alone is immortal, a part ante, from all eternity; he alone is
independently, unchangeably, infinitely immortal; impossible it is for any
creature, or all the creatures to anihilate God: it is an easy thing with God
to anihilate any of his creatures, he alone is the author and continuer of
immortality. But I dare not in this point presume to detain you any longer;
what ever flesh and blood may suggest, or carnal reason object, let your souls
everlastingly dwell upon this strong foundation, believing that there is
another life besides this life. There are many other Uses of this Doctrine, to
persuade you not only to believe this truth steadfastly, but to bless God for
it abundantly.

That your souls do not die with your body, herein triumph, that death has
no power of absolute destroying, but only of changing, and that change to your
souls (if you be in Christ) is unspeakably for the better. Be you therefore
entreated all the days of your life and appointed time, Job 14.14.
to wait till your change come: esteem this truth as one part of the oracles of
God most comfortable, and one of the greatest remedies against all future
fears, and present miseries, that though death destroy your body, yet your
hope may be in the rock of eternity, that you may say, as the Apostle does
here, If we had hopes only in Christ in this life, we were of all most
miserable.

As you have heard the extent of this hope, The 4th part
so consider the ground of this extent, here expressed by the Apostle, drawn from
an absurdity, that the best of men otherwise should be most miserables which is
an absurdity so gross which the light of nature cannot but abhor; and
therefore Paul counts it needless to use any other arguments to refute: hence
observe,

good that the soul expects from Christ should be limited to this life, then
the best Christians should be most miserable. And if so, then God the best
master should be the worst; and the children of wisdom should be the sons of
folly; then might the Epicure and Atheist bless themselves in their own lusts,
call the proud happy, and say, it is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit
is it, Mal. 3.14, 15.
that any have kept his ordinances, and walked mournfully before the Lord of
hosts?

Obj. Why? may some say, if there be an end of all good and evil to all men at
the end of this life, yet wherein are the Saints worse then others? Is not
their condition at least equal to the condition of other men? though there
should be no heaven to crown the righteous, and no heli to torment the wicked,
yet is it not an excellency in it self to choose good and refuse evil? Should
not virtue be loved for it self? Can there be any greater reward to goodness,
then goodness it self? etc.

Answ. I answer, however it be a pleasant thing in it self, to praise the Lord
with joyful lips, Psalm. 36.8. 1 Pet. 2.3.
yet after that the soul has drunk of the Rivers of Gods pleasures, tasted
that the Lord is gracious, made their boast of God, and triumphed in the hope
of the glory of Christ, then for the seul to go under a dark cloud, and
everlastingly to be cut off from those ravishing enjoyments: this would make
the Saints in many respects more miserable then other men.

life are fewer: God of set purpose calls their hearts off from the creature,
commands them to forsake Father and Mother, Mat. ^^.37. Mark 8.34. Genesis 12.1.
Heb. 11.24.
house and land, for his Name sake, bids them deny themselves, Abraham must
forsake Vr of the Chaldees: Moses must refuse to be called the son of Pharaohs
daughter: The Disciples leave all to follow Christ; and they are promised, Mat.
19.28.
that when the son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, that then they
also shall sit upon thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel.

spoiling of their goods with joy, Heb. 10.34.
persuading themselves that in heaven they have a better and more enduring
substance: for Christ sake they are reproached in their names, to this very
hour, says Paul, We hunger and thirst, and are naked, 1 Cor. 4.11, ^^.
and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place, reviled, persecuted,
defamed, we are made the filth of the world and the off-scowring, of all
things: For Christ's sake, in their bodies they are imprisoned as Paul and
Silas; banished from their dearest relations, driven from their sweetest
comforts: How were the Martyrs stoned, Heb. 11.37, 38
sawn asunder, stain with the Sword? How were they forced to wander in
sheepskins, and goat skins, in deserts and in mountains, in dens and in the
caves of the earth, destitute, afflicted, tormented? and yet were they, in
their generations, men more precious then the gold of Ophir, of whom the world
was not worthy. And how did the modern Martyrs sing in the flames, triumphing
in Christ? Romans 8.^6.
for thy Name sake are we slain all the day long, and we are counted as sheep
to the staughter.

of this life, they are more miserable: So consider them in reference to the
life to come, and you shall find, that the great work of grace is to take up
their spirits from this world, Tit. 2.14, 16.
to look for the blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God. Hence it
is that,

apprehensions of heaven are larger; Christ has taken up their souls unto the
tops of Pisga, and has discovered to them the land of Canaan, (...)7.
and has given them more then others to taste the powers of the world to come,
and to sit with him in heavenly places, Hen. 6.4. Ep^^^^. 2.6. 1 Cor. 13 1^.
and though they see but little, and that little darkly, as in a glass, whilst
they are in their way, to what they shall see, when they are in their Country,
when they shall see God face to face, and know him, as they are known of him;
yet they see so much, as they cannot but admire, O how great is thy goodness,
Is^^. 31.19.
O Lord, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee?

affections toward heaven are stronger: Carnal hearts that know not God,
believe not the things of Christ; though they be never satisfied with the
earth, yet they are very indifferent about the things of heaven: If I be saved,
says such a wretch, I shall be saved; if I be damned, who can help it? I shall
not be alone, I shall be as well as others, I will endure it as well as I can.
What? endure the loss of heaven, endure the wrath of the Almighty God? oh poor
wretch, when thy soul comes to see but a glimpse, Lu. 1^.28, 29.
what heaven is, and shall see others coming from the East and West, sitting
down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, and thy self shut
out; when they are admitted, thy soul to be excluded, this will cause weeping,
and wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever. M^t. 8.
If Rachel could not endure the loss of her children. If Jacob could not
endure the supposed loss of Joseph, G^n. 37.35.
and when all his sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, he refused to be
comforted, saying, I will go down into the grave to my son mourning. 2 Samuel 7.23.
If Ahithophel could not endure in the rejectment of his counsel. If Mordecai
could not endure the want of the bowing of the knee of Mordecai. Esth 5.13.
If Queen Mary could not endure the loss of Callis, but said when she was
dead, if they opened her they should find the loss of Callis written upon her
heart: how then can thy soul endure the loss of eternity? The Saints know this
and believe it, and the thoughts of the loss of heaven, cuts them to the
heart; their souls are made willing to undergo any loss on earth, Act. 20.24.
and they count not their lives dear unto themselves, so they may finish their
course with joy. But when they have willingly over gone the loss of all the
comforts on the earth, of their estates, their liberties, their lives, then to
undergo the loss of heaven: this is that which they prayed against all their
lives long, O draw me not away with the wicked. Psalm. 28.3.


things above, but their conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.10.
from whence they look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change
this vile body, that it may be like unto his glorious body: for this they both
labor and suffer; this is that for which all the days of their Pilgrimage,
since their conversion, they have been trading and trafficking for; now, when
they have laid out all they are, and all they have for the purchasing this
pearl, if at the end of their life, they should be deprived of this purchased
possession, this must needs make them more miserable.

is sweeter: Christ has led them into his wine-cellar, and taken them up into
the bed of love, espoused them to himself, and kissed them with the kisses of
his mouth, when others are mere strangers to these spiritual embraces: what if
a stranger count it no misery to be severed from Christ, Isa. 54.6.
yet what woman is not grieved in spirit for the loss of the husband of her
youth? What says a poor Christian, must Christ and my soul part now? God
forbid. The time was I did not know him, nor long after him, when the thoughts
of Christ were not in my heart, then to have been severed from Christ would
have appeared to me to have been no great misery; Gal. 4.9.
but now when my soul has known him, or rather is known of him, when the
desires of my soul have been let out toward Christ, Isa. 26.
and the remembrance of his name; when I have made Christ my joy, my crown of
rejoicing, now to part with that, which my soul loves, will make me miserable,
Ruth 1.16.
therefore the poor soul cleaves to Christ, as Ruth to Naomi, saying, Entreat
me not to leave thee nor forsake thee, where ever thou go let me go, that
where thou art, there my soul may be also.

expectations of the Saints are firmer. It is the hope of heaven, that makes
them pass through good report and bad report, the gladness of their hearts is
not the joy of sense, but the rejoicing in the hope of the glory of God; (...)
and this hope holds them above all fears, to this hope they flee, as to a Rock
of refuge, set before them: and for this cause they faint not, and all these
light afflictions, Rom 8.^^. H^b 11.1^.
which are but for a moment, they count unworthy to be compared to the glory
which shall be revealed to them, willing they are to count themselves Pilgrims
and strangers upon earth, seeking this heavenly Country, this house not made
with hands, this inheritance immortal, undefiled and that never fades away. 1
Pet 1.4.
They that were never born to these high hopes, may better bear their mean
condition: but after the abundant mercy of God has begotten them again to this
lively hope, and raised them up to all these glorious expectances, 1 Pet. 1.3.
then to go disappointed, must needs make them miserable. Job 6 12, 20.
If the Troops of Tema when they looked, and the companies of Sheba when they
waited for waters, and found none: if they were confounded because they had
hoped: if the sons of Nobles, in that time of drought returned ashamed, Jer.
14.3.
confounded, and with their heads covered, because they came to the pits and
found no waters: if in petty expectations here below, Isa 9 11.
we often times roar like Bears, and mourn sore like Doves, when we look for
judgment, but there is none, and for salvation, but it is far from us: what
soul can then bear the disappointments of eternity? But surely experience of
Christ works hope, Romans 5.4. verse. 5.
and this hope will never make the soul of any Christian to be ashamed.

the disparagement of Christ their head, whose name is more tender to their
souls then the apple of their eye. Where is the great work of Christ's
redemption? from what evils did Christ redeem his people from? If his people
have only hope in Christ for this life, surely from the evils of this life the
best of the Saints are not exempted, to the greatest of these evils they lie
exposed; where, and what then is the inheritance of the Saints in light? where
are those sons and daughters that the Captain of salvation made perfect through
sufferings, brings unto glory? Heb. 2.10.
What are become of all those precious promises of Jesus Christ? Joh. 14.2.
I go to prepare a place for you; In my Fathers house there are many mansions:
What is become of all the prayers and strong cries that Christ uttered in the
days of his flesh? Father I will, that those that thou have given me were with
me where I am, Joh. 17.24.
that they may behold my glory. Surely, if the hope of the Saints be limited to
this life, then Christ is disparaged, and all the expectation of the Saints
disappointed.

Obj. It may be this Doctrine is true for those Christians that are poor, that
live in a low, afflicted condition, whose sorrows and sufferings do abound,
whose life is made bitter unto them by reason of sore bondage: but what do you
say to great men, whose cup is full and runs over, upon whose tabernucle the
Almighty shines? in this life God has made their portion very fat, and their
meat to be plenteous; and if there be no other life beside this, sure of all
men, in this life, they are most happy, and in what sense can it be said, in
life or death, upon this supposall, that of all men they are most miserable?

An. The text speaks of Christians that are good, rather then of them that are
great; and if God has made men both great and good, Psalm. 119 96.
and has called your souls into fellowship with Christ: he has opened your
eyes to see an end of all these seeming perfections before you come to your
end; and then what is all the greatness upon earth, in comparison to one days
communion with the great God? Besides, the more you enjoy in your life, the
more you are to lose and leave at your death; and is it not a misery in death
to be stripped of all? if beggars so unwillingly put off their rags, how
unwilling are Princes to be plucked away from their robes, and the sons of
Nobles to go down into the grave, and there to make their bed in the dark?
what greater unhappiness is there, then to say, I have been happy, but now I
must be plundered of all, and be eternally in an undone condition, never to take
pleasure any more, and there is nothing of honor, nor of all my labor wherein
I have showed my self wise under the Sun, that I may take away with me in my
hand? This is a sore evil, that in all points, as I came naked, Eccles. 5 16.
so I must go; where the rise is highest, the downfall is greatest, and there
is no downfall like that of great Babel, How art thou fallen from heaven, O
Lucifer, son of the morning? Hell from beneath is moved for thee, Isa. 14.11,
12.
to meet thee at thy coming, thy pomp is brought down to the grave, and the
noise of thy viols, the worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee.

by sight and not by faith, that as the Prodigal will have their portion in
their own hands, Luke 6.14.
and in this life have their consolation: what will these poor souls do, when
all their water in the bottle is spent, and their lives draw near to death, and
their days to the destroyers? there are others also, whose condition is yet
more dreadful, that not only neglect this hope in themselves, 2 Pet. 3 4.
but deride it in others, that walk after their own lust, saying, where is the
promise of his coming? who are a generation of men, that need rather to be
lamented, then to be confuted; they shame the counsel of the poor, because he
makes the Lord his hope. Psalm. 14.6.


2 Pet. 1.10.
it is time to provide elsewhere for some certainty: it is our duty to make our
calling and election sure, and blessed be God that there is a possibility for
the main to be assured, when all other things are endangered: You are bound to
give a reason of the hope that is in you, 1 Pet. 3.15.
with meekness and with fear: and if you owe this duty unto others, you owe it
much more unto your own souls; if you dare not seriously commune with your own
hearts in the day of peace, what shall you do in the day of trouble, and in
the swellings of Jordan? If any ask, may this hope be discerned? I answer,
though this hope in some be real and radical, where it is not visible, yet it
is possible to be discerned where it is, and needful to be attained where it
is not.

Use Exam. For the discovery of it where it is, it is very helpful to
consider, 1. The Causes that breed it. 2. The graces that do accompany it:
and, 3. The effects that follow it. I may not presume to handle the two former,
give me leave to insist upon the latter; Consider the effects of hope in a
fourfold demeanor of the soul toward hope it self, toward God the author
and object of it, toward the world, or the Word of God, the ground of hope.

The effect of hope in the carriage of the soul toward hope. Psalm. 17.14.
appears in these or such particulars.

1. That the soul that has this hope in heaven would by no means confine this
hope to earth, but prays with the Psalmist, Deliver me from the wicked, from
the men of this world, that have their portion in this life: When Christ
discovered the sad condition of the Pharisees, he said, Woe unto them, verily I
say unto you, you have your reward: why, might they say, Mat. 6.2.
if we have it we are the surer of it, and a little in hand is better then much
in expectation. But what ever you imagine, this is certain, there can be no
greater misery, then to have your reward in this life, where you have but a
short being; and to have no reward in another, where you are to have your
everlasting being, therefore Christ denounces their condition to be woeful,
Luke 6.24.
that in this life have received their consolation.

exchange their hopes of heaven, for the possession of all the good things on
earth: it was a bold speech of Paul to King Agrippa, I would to God that not
only thou, Act. 26.29.
but that all that hear me, were not almost, but altogether such as I am: Why
Paul, what is thy condition, that thou desire not to be like to King Agrippa,
but the King to be like to thee, and not almost, but altogether? surely Paul's
happiness was not in hand, but in hope, consisting in this, I know whom I have
believed: 2 Timothy 1.12.
nay such high thoughts have the Saints of this hope, that take the poorest
soul, that has many doubts, and fears, and temptations and desertions, that
never attained any certainty of hope: ask that soul, will thou part with a
possibility of heaven? why do thou wait any longer? that soul for all the
world would not part with a possibility of heaven in reversion, to obtain the
whole earth in present possession; whereas the carnal heart and groundlesly
confident, will easily part with his seeming certainty of heaven, Heb. 12.16.
for the least probability of earth, and is as profane Esau, who sold his
birthright for a moss of pottage; but the Saints prize unspeakably more a
mere possibility, then a carnal heart does all his seeming certainty.

Thirdly, The soul so prizeth this hope, that it is never content without it,
full of doubts, unwilling to be deceived, unable to be held in suspense,
inquisitive into his own condition, giving all diligente to attain the full
assurance of hope to the end, Heb. 6.11.
this is the grief that poor Saints mourn under, the great weight that they
cannot bear, crying out as the Church says, I seek him whom my soul loves,
Cant. 3.^.17.
I seek him but I find him not: but still enquiring, Oh tell me where thou
lodgest, thou whom my soul loves; and I charge you, Cant. 5.8.
Oh ye daughters of Jerusalem, it you meet him whom my soul loves, tell him
that I am sick of love.

it is attained, they count this hope their chief contentment. The joy of the
Saints consists in holding fast the confidence and rejoicing of their hope sure
unto the end; Heb. 3.6.
well may the Psalmist say, My lines are fallen in a good place, Psalm. 16.5.
the Lord is the portion of my cup. When the seventy Disciples returned with
joy, telling Christ, that the devils are subject unto us through thy name, Luk
10.17. ver. 20.
Christ answers, In this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you:
what, not joy in this? to heal all diseases, to cast out Devils: if this be
not a cause of joy, what is? or what can be? Christ answers, rejoice in this
rather, that your names are written in the book of life; this hope made Paul
say, Phil. 4.11.
I have learned in every estate therewith to be content, and has made all
Saints in all ages to be confident, that godliness is profitable for all things,
1 Timothy 4.8, Job 21.14.
whereas carnal men have undervalued the ways of God, and have been ever
questioning, what profit shall we have if we pray unto him?

will not adventure the loss of it, for the attainment of the best things in
the Earth, Phil. 3.8.
but counts all things as loss and dung, in respect of this; choosing rather to
suffer afflictions with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin,
Heb. 11.26.
that are but for a moment; and liking this choice so well, that no arguments
can draw them from it; Joh. 6.68.
whither should we go? Lord thou have the words of eternal life; no nor will
the Saints adventure this hope, for the avoiding of the worst condition, for
this hopes sake they have bin Act. 5.41.
imprisoned, Heb. 10.33.
plundered, Heb. 11.37.
banished, Heb. 11.35.
tormented, and all too little; hope causing them to triumph, that all these
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.
work unto them a more exceeding weight of glory.



adoreth the riches of gods love, that man may come to God in the new and
living way, Heb. 10.29.
when Adam fled from God, and the damned spirits cannot endure the approaches
of Christ, but cry out, What have we to do with thee, Matthew. 9.29. Ezra 9.2.
thou Jesus of Nazareth, that yet there is hope in the God of Israel for such
sins as they have committed, and for such sinners as they confess themselves
to be: when all other hopes fail; that there is yet hopes of Heaven to poor
sinners that are conscious of their deserts of Hell: here are the exceeding
riches of his glory, and that height and depth, and such dimensions of love,
that the more they know the love of Christ, Ephesians. 3.19.
the more they find t passes knowledge, and their apprehensions of this love
end in admirations: behold what manner of love the father had bestowed upon us,
1 John 3.1.
that we should be called the sons of God, who are the children of wrath by
nature?

inlargeth the soul in love to God: 2 Cor. 5.14.
for the love of Christ constrains us, if Christ died, then were we all dead,
and therefore we that live, are no longer to live to our selves, to our own
ease, and carnal contentment, but to the praise of him who love us, and gave
himself for us.

makes us to eye God, to see him that is invisible, to set God at our right
hand, to make his glory our end, Heb. 11.27. Psalm. 16.8. Psalm. 25.15. Romans 8.24.
and our aim: our eyes are ever to the Lord, and he shall bring us out of our
distress; this keeps the soul in a waiting condition, and not to be weary
in looking upward.

transformeth us into Gods nature: he that has this hope in him, purifieth
himself even as God is pure; 1 John 3.1.
looks on every act of sin, as an act of uncleannes; never counts himself
pure enough; but while he is living, that soul is cleansing himself, till the
soul come to be presented to the father without spot or wrinkle. Ephesians. 5.27.


sweetens the thoughts of God and of Eternity, makes all those glorious
truths, as the day of the appearing of Jesus Christ, etc. that in their nature
are very dreadful, to grow delightful, and sets them into a state of
looking for, 2 Pet. 3.12.
and hastening to the coming of the Lord.

admireth the happiness of all that are in Christ, crying out, Psalm. 65.4.
Col. 1.12.
Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, giving thanks that God has counted any
of the sons of men meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the Saints in
light, Ephesians. 1.18.
and beggeth for others, that their eyes may be opened to see what is the hope
of this calling.



First, Weakens our esteem of things below, enabling the soul to count it a
small thing to be judged in man's day; 1 Cor. 4.3.
when we are risen with Christ, then we begin to set our affections on things
above, and not an things below. Col. 3.2.


Secondly, This lessens our expectation from things below, shows as the
vanity of all earthly comforts, in their nature, in their continuance, in their
use, Luke 12.15.
that man's life does not consist in the abundance of these things.

Thirdly, This hope keeps the soul from swelling, when outward comforts do
abound, Psalm. 64.10.
if riches increase, set not your hearts on them.

Fourthly, This hope preserves the soul from sinking, when discomforts flow
in to overwhelme it; calls upon the soul, why art thou disquieted in me?
Psalm. 41.5.
hope thou in God: there is more good to be received by hope, then we have
lost, then we can lose: that hope that brings the soul to the good that is
eternal, only can sustain the soul from sinking under evil temporal.

soul from sinking, so the word of God holds up faith from fainting;
therefore all the children of hope are much affected with the word, Psalm.
119.49.
upon which God causes his servants to put their trust: see what high
expressions there are used in one Psalm, Psalm. 119.
by him that was a man after Gods own heart. First, is your esteem of the word,
such as you can say with him in truth, ver. 32. ver. 6. ver. 27. ver. 52.
the Law of thy mouth is better then thousands of Gold and Silver: and that you
have respect unto all Gods commandments: thy testimonies are my delight, and
my counselors: and thy statutes have been my song, in the house of my
Pilgrimage? Secondly, That your souls love this word, and can say, I love thy
commandments above Gold, yea above much fine Gold: and how sweet is thy Word
unto my taste? yea sweeter then the honey, ver. 127. ver. 103. ver. 11. ver.
148. ver. 111. ver. 161.
and the heney-combe. Thirdly, Are your desires so after this word, that you
hide it in your hearts, make it your meditation, claim it as your inheritance
for ever: that your heart stands in awe of his Word, that you have chosen the
way of his precepts: that your souls can no more subsist without the Word of
God, then your bodies without food, and therefore your soul breaks for the
longing it has to Gods precept at all times: ver. 20. 1 Pet. 2.2. Job. 23.12.
that you desire the word as newborn babes the breasts, and long for it, as
much as for your appointed food? this is a strong argument, your hope is
grounded upon the Word of God, when the word does nourist it: this word
weakneth the hope of Hypocrites, discovers the rottennes of their vain
confidence; but it is otherwise with the Saints, though their souls have many
doubts, when they consult with humane reason, yet when they come to the law,
Isa. 57.19.
and to the testimony, the Lord creates the fruit of the lips to be peace, and
when their light is cleerest their hope is strongest.

arc to preserve you when others are drowned, a City of refuge to secure you,
when others fall into the hand of that avenger of blood that does pursue them:
If any ask, how shall we attain this frame of spirit, to set our hopes on
God? I answer, and so conclude.

apprehend and meditate upon the great blessing of Jesus Christ; let the
thoughts of eternity dwell upon your hearts; things not apprehended can never
be desired, nor really expected.

Secondly, That you may apprehend these riches of Christ's glory, believe the
excellencies revealed in the Gospel the object of hope is things invisible, and
faith must be the ground of such things hoped for, Heb. 11.1.
and the only evidence we can have for those things that are not seen: if any
profane person resolve, I will not believe that there is a Heaven or a Hell,
nor the powers of the world to come, till I see them; Consider (poor soul)
when these truths are the object of thy sight, they cannot be the object of thy
hope, for hope that is seen is not hope, for what a man sees, Romans 8 24.
why does he yet hope for? believe therefore the excellencies of Jesus Christ,
otherwise thou will never be at the pains to clear thy interest in them, and
if Heaven be not first made the object of thy hope, it can never be made the
object of thy sight: expectation must precede fruition.

Thirdly, Love the excellencies of the Lord Jesus Christ: many things may be
believed as true, Fides est ^^alarum rerum and bonarum, quare bona creduntur
and mala: and boc fide bona non mala, etc. Lombard. l. 3. did. 27. Psalm. 43,
4. Cant. 8.6.
and yet not loved as good: faith may be good, when the object of it is evil,
for we are bound to believe every truth which God reveals, the evil of sin,
as truly as the goodness of grace: but nothing is the object of hope, but what
the soul is really persuaded is truly good: where love is weak, the mind is
careless, and hope cannot be strong: and that which is not earnestly desired,
is never greedily expected: but when the desires of our soul are earnestly
carried out after Christ, when we set up Christ in our hearts as the gladness of
our joy, then we begin to long after him, then love and hope prove strong as
death, and hope deferred makes the heart sick: but this is the great
privilege of this hope, though in all other things you may meet with
disappointments, yet God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, and
the expectation of poor souls in Christ shall never go away ashamed, Prove.
13.12.
and when this hope is granted, it will be a tree of life.

Fourthly, In the use of all means that God has appointed, beg importunately
the spirit of grace which God has promised freely; it is beyond the ability of
man's will, above the strength of ordinances, above the reach of any created
power, to work this hope: it is easy to presume, but to believe and hope in God
that raises up the dead, is an act of transcendent difficulty, for a poor
soul under the sense of sin, and Gods wrath, and sight of Hell, to roll it
self upon the rich mercy of Christ, to have all this guilt so great to be
pardoned, and all the lusts that are strong to be subdued, this is only the
gift of God: and therefore pray that the eyes of your understanding may be
opened, and that your hearts and consciences may experimentally feel that
exceeding working of his power, Ephesians. 1.19. 1 Pet. 1.21.
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, that your faith
and hope may be in God: and that your souls may be so in love with Heaven, and
your persuasions thereof so well grounded, that you may be above the love of
this life, and above the fear of death, and that all the days of your
appointed time, Job. 14.14.
you may be waiting till your change come.

FINIS.

