WHIPPING-TOM Turned Citizen: OR, The CRACKS Terror:
Being a True Account of his many strange adventures; As likewise a Relation of
his Whipping several Wives, Widows, Maids, Bawds, Cracks, etc. in
Fleet Street, the Strand, Holborx, Whetstones-Park, Fetter-Lane, New-Street,
and other places. Together with the opinion that several have given concerning
him, and of the strange method he uses in Whipping them.
Tune of, A figg for France.


AGain the Females plague is come,
The buttock-flawing Whipping Tom,
Who for some time as many say,
Has been on the other side the Sea:
But being tired with Foreign ware,
Is now returned to traffic here:
Then females 'ware how late you stray,
Lest Whipping-Tom your Buttocks pay.
For nightly he in corners stands,
To see on whom he can lay hands:
And when he hold of them has got,
Then strait their Tobies go to pot:
He walking Cracks does so affright,
That they have lost their trade by night
Then Females 'ware how late you stray,
Lest Whipping-Tom your Buttocks pay.






In Flow'r-de-Luce-Court he of late,
Met with a Female, who in state
Was trudging to her proper home,
Not dreaming ought of Whipping Tom,
But he did her so vilely use,
That to lament she could not choose,
Then females, etc.
The Gray-pease woman's dragl'd Tail,
He with such fury did assail,
That up her heels flew* and her Tub,
Did down Ram-Alley ^vement rub^*
And though she offered him her ware,
Yet Tom would not her Crupper spare:
Then Females, etc.
And in Red-Lyon Court again,
He did take up a Female train;
And fell as barbarously to work,
As any wicked Jew or Turk:
Two Cracks by Fleet-Ditch felt his rage,
Which all their Prayer could not assuage
Then Females, etc.
He makes the Bawds both swear and curse,
Because their trade does still grow worse
For why their Scout now dares not roam
For fear that Tom should claw their Bum;
He in such awe keeps Whetstones-Park,
That not a Do will stir when dark*
Then Females, etc.
Jane, Cate, nor Ciss, now dare not meet
Their Sweet-hearts, as they used ith street
For fear that Whipping-Tom should find,
What they often carry half behind:
And his misusage spoil the sport,
For which kind Ralph does daily Court;
Then Females, etc.
No sooner Tom did hear the nose,
Of her that Hot baked Wardens cries;
But toward her with speed he makes,
And up her Linen strait he takes:
Then on her dirty Buttocks laid,
And them of Scarlet color made:
Then Females, etc.
Though armed some go, yet it is in vain,
For Whipping-Tom does fear no pain;
For armed he goes, as some do tell,
Who whilst he whipped them did it feel:
One in White-Fryers late he got,
And though she strove, he paid her Scut:
Then Females, etc.
Some says he does it in pure love,
To such whose wives are used to rove;
And that since last he came about,
Few City Dames dare not stir out:
The which if true, will save much Coin,
Which otherwise they would spend in vain,
Then Females, etc.
And now the Female Clubs go down,
Which frequent were about that Town;
For fear that Whipping-Tom should meet
Them as they ramble in the Street;
And each does seek to save her Bum,
From the fierce rage of Whipping-Tom:
Then females 'ware how late you stray,
Lest VVhipping-Tom your Buttocks pay.
Printed for P. Brooksby near the Hospital-gate in VVest-Smithfield.


