A most exact RELATION Of a great VICTORY, Obtained by the poor Protestants IN
IRELAND, Under the Command of the Lords Inchequeen, and Kinealmekie, and Sir
Charles Vavasour, against the Rebels.

Also several DEPOSITIONS Taken before the Mayor of Kinsale, concerning Ships,
Men, and Ammunition, sent to the Rebels from France and Spain. Sent from the
Mayor of Kinsale, to a brother of his a Merchant in London.

Presented to the high Court of Parliament, and commanded to be forthwith
Printed.

October. 3. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.

Kinsale the 16/29 of September. 1642.
Brother BENJAMIN WHE^^^^E,
MY last w^^^ (...) and 26 past, which we^^ ^^ry sad, and therefore make no
repeatail, only a touch of the necessity of the Fort of Doncannon, if it be not
speedily releived, The Rebels are in great numbers continually round about it,
and questionles do thirst much after it, Waxford have set forth 5 or 6 men of
War, one of them carries 18 Pieces of Ordnance, and it is reported they have
lately taken 5 or 6 English Barques, so that all those parts, Duncannon
excepted, is as secure unto them, as the River and County of Limbrick; It were
good service for some of our Ships to destroy the Herring fishing of Waxford
and Rilbeggs. I will now with much joy and thankfulness of heart relate, to
Gods glory, the great and wonderful work he has lately done among us. The last
day of August came the Lord Inchequeens command to our Governor, requiring him
to send away all the Force he could possibly make, foot and horse, and that he
should rise and march away presently; the like was done in Youghall and
Bandonbirdge, the first present they marched from hence, the second they all
met at their Randevouz near about Donnerayle and the third day for ever to be
remembered, very timely they marched to Liscarrell Castle, which Muscry the day
before had taken, and was then there with h^^ f^rces encamped about 8000
fighting men (...) and seven hundred horse, the best of the (...) Province, our
forces not passing seventeen hundred horse and foot: the Enemy were full fed,
ours had scarce bread in their Knapsacks; theirs healthy strong and lusty, ours
for the most part weak and sick, not able to endure the weight of a Musket,
and for certain, many upon the march had perished in the ditches, had not some
of our horsemen taken them up behind them and carried them to the place where
they must make a stand; The Enemy had the Castle of Liscarrell to friend, three
pieces of Ordnance, whereof one of them weighed near 8000. weight, mounted in a
convenient Battery, half Moons and Breast-works drawn with much ingenuity; on
the other side a very great Bogg to secure them, in sine, they had so far what
they desired and to natural reason what nature could afford, ours for the most
part a naked People. The Onset was given by a few horse of this Town and
Bandon, and a little too timely, they had not any of them so much as a
headpiece, only my Lord of Kinealmakie that was clothed with Armor of
proof, were enforced to retreat, in which my Lord only was shot, and not a man
of the rest touched; It was Gods great mercy that this so timely Onset had not
wrought untimely effects, by encouraging the Enemy and disheartning of us: But
our main Body coming up, and so well ordered, the horse led by my Lord of
Inchequeen, and the foot by Sir Charles Vavasour, who went in the head of them,
and with good language and reasons did so encourage them, as every man cried
Victory before they had given fire; Captain Chidley behaved himselt with
singular valor and discretion: Sergeant Major Story is much honored for his
valiant Actions. The Lord Inchequeen was once far engaged and in some danger,
but relieved by Captain Gibson, and at that time slew one of their great
Champions called Oliver Steevens with his own hand, The Onset being given by
our Horse, and the Battle began by the Musketeers, being in number about 400,
continued for a time something doubtful, the Irish making hideous noyses, and
stood to it very valiantly; their Ordnance at first stroke a terror, but God
so directed the business, that they went over and did us no harm; our sick
were recovered, felt no more weakness nor infirmity, but stood to it like
brave men, God gave them hearts according to the goodness of their cause; and
after an hour and a half, or thereabouts, the Friars and the Priests faith
failed them, that they ran away, General Barry was easily persuaded to go with
them; the Lord of Muscry took his leave with a plain Complement, That he had
done what he could, and did hope another time to have better success; it is
imagined he had received a shot, abundance of the prime Gentlemen were slain
upon the place, the rest fled, and according to their wonted custom, betook
themselves to Woods and Bogs; our Horse pursued them as far as it was
convenient: Two hundred that were in the Castle, and might have kept out 5000,
ran with the rest, the like did those that were with the Ordnance in the
Battery, Colonel Butler, and diverse other Commanders taken prisoners: Of the
Rebels were slain at least 700, and above a thousand more dangerously wounded:
Our people brought away five or six hundred Muskets, three Pieces of Brass
Ordnance, which were taken out of the Castle of. Lymbricke, five Barrells of
Powder: it is thought the Friars carried the rest of the Powder with them; the
Fields were covered with Pikes, which our people regarded not: Captain Cooper,
with a Company of men, was appointed to keep the Castle, and the three Pieces
of Ordnance brought to Mallow, supposed they shall be brought to Cork.

This was the great work of the Almighty, for of our side were not passing four
or five men slain, and five or six wounded, which in short time may recover:
Colonel Butler that was taken prisoner, confesses that they knew of our
coming to them at least 24 hours before, which was almost as soon as the
business was conceived, And that they made nothing of us; his comparison was
no more, then if ten men armed completely, should encounter with two naked
horse-boyes, And that their intent was from this Castle, to have gone to
Donnerayle and Mallowe, which in their conceits would scarce have hindered them
an hours march; From thence to Cork and Bandon; and from this place to have
diiven us all into the Sea: And indeed, as the case stood wi h us, what they
intended might have been easily brought to pass, what by the desease amongst
our soldiers, want of pay and clothes, the difference that was grown in Bandon
between the Lord of Kinelmeakie and the Inhabitants, and to natural reason our
going thither with such a handful of weak men to give them Battle, so many in
number, so well Armed, and so strongly situated, had been to abandon our
Garrisons and to hasten our own destruction; But as I have said it was the
finger of God only that did direct us, that his power and providence in his
own cause might be the more clearly discerned by us: They had all taken the
Sacrament to fight it out to the last man, and it is credibly reported that the
Friars had given many of them Charms to keep them shot-free.

One passage more I may not omit, how it pleased God to confound them in their
own policy, they did possess the Common People that all the Common Soldiers
and English of these parts were all sick and dead, and that there were not
passing three or four hundred living, and that it was but staying eight or ten
days till they should have the possession of all the Towns without striking a
blow; but when they saw our people approaching near, and not able to discern
what number we might be, which seemed very great unto them, and seeing us
marching still toward them, that the former Informations stroke such a terror
in them, that they all cried out, Are these the three or four hundred men
living? and thereupon flung down their Arms and ran away, so in every thing it
is plain the Lord was our deliverer, we shall now I hope in few days be able
to gather some relief for our Towns.

A Gentleman, one Master Hasset, that was a prisoner with them, understanding
very well the Irish Tongue, says he heard them talk a day or two before this
Battle, that the Lord Harbes and his Fleet were at Galway, and with the help
of the Fort, had taken in that Town; which I believe to be true.

We are now at the 19 Ditto. The above is Copy of a former, which I coufirm in
each particular, since our Army has not stirred in any business of
consequence, neither have we heard of any thing done by the Rebels hereabouts;
neither can we learn of any new head made by them to attempt any thing suddenly,

Sir Charles Vavasour is cone to garrison with two or three companies in Bandon
bridge, Captain Chidley is with him, they were with me about three days past,
and by Gods blessing they will be now a means to repair the breaches of
disorder which were in that Town, and be a great securing to us in all these
parts, we labor now to some purpose to bring in what harvest we can; it is
much better with us then we expected, it is Gods great mercy and favor
toward us.

Enclosed I send you an examination taken of a Merchant and Master from Bilvoa,
the contents agree with a copy of a Letter sent me by Master Authory Stowell,
which he says was presented to the Committee, and by them to be sent to the
several ports in these parts now in obedience, which I have done, the Letter
was written by George Pasmore in St. Sabastians to Humphry Tocker in Exon. and
it agrees in the substance with the examination.

Yesterday came into this Port one Captain Erowne of Plymouth from the
western parts, reports my Lord Forkes was at Galloway, and ordered all
things well in that Town, (as he thought) and from thence came to the river of
Lymbrick, and that before he could do any thing there, News was brought him
that Golloway was again revolted, whereupon he returned again thither with
all his forces, and that in this progress some of his fleet had taken a
vessel that came from the coast of Byscay, laden with powder, ordinance,
musket-barrels, and other arms, and my hope is it is true.

I hope the Admiral Kettleby is by this brought to answer his leaving this
coast when it was in most necessity.

I have furnished the castle of Castle-haven by the Lord Inchequeenes entreaty,
with two pieces, ordinance, carriages, shot, and all things complete, and three
barrells of powder, which were belonging to the ship Charles.

Likewise by my Lord of Barrimeres command, I have delivered four pieces
ordinance, and all appurtenances for the fortifying of this castle Lions, which
has been long threatened, and often assaulted by the enemy. I hope in time I
shall have satisfaction for all, if all things go well, if otherwise, both our
selves and our estates must go together, my confidence is God will be further
glorified by us.

Yours the 24th of August came lately to hand, and take notice how near your
condition is broughr to ours, it was always my opinion they were twins.

I sent you an account of my disbursements in his Majesty's service to that
day, which I am confident you have received, but answer nothing unto it, at
which I marvel, but I shall expect it by yours next, and hope that honorable
assembly will speedily order you satisfaction.

If William Slaughter of Crook-haven be with you, put him in mind to petition
for his horses and arms, Captain Kettleby keeps a horse of mine with his,
very unworthily, and but by some such means we shall never have any
recompense. forget not the solicitation of Pelilong it is all the earthly
means I depend on in Recompense of my losses, and for the future maintenance
of my poor distressed family. This is what for the present I remember, the
Lord of heaven keep and protect you and us from the evil is daily threatened,
if we beg and pray aright we shall prevail.

Your loving Brother, Trestram Whetcombe.

Depositions of William Lake, Master of the Hope-well of Foye, burden 60 Tuns,
taken before Tristram Whercombe, Mayor of Kinsale, upon Oath, Sept. 6. 1642.
THis Examinate being duly sworn, upon the holy Evangelist, says interalia,
That about eight days past he came forth from Bilvoa in Biskey, in company of
seven other Vessels, belonging to several Ports in England; And that in July
last, he, this Examinate was at Nants, where he saw, and did often converse
with several Irish Merchants belonging to Gallaway, Blabes, and Brownes, who
seemed to be very plentiful in Moneys, and bought a French Ship belonging to
Oldron, burden 120 Tuns, or thereabouts, 12 Pieces of Ordnance, and presently
after began to take aboard Ammunition of all sorts, the certain quantity he
knows not; but as far as their estates would stretch they employed, and gave
forth, That they intended to proceed a man of War to take English, and that of
as many as they could take, not a man should escape with his life; and that
they should not expect any quarter at all. And further says, That within few
days after this Vessel was bought and divulged abroad, there came into the
Town 3 or 400 Irish from Paris and other places, amongst which were diverse
Priests and Friars to this Deponents knowledge, and so many of them went aboard
the said Vessel as she could conveniently carry; but, the certain quantity of
Ammunition, number of persons, or place where they were bound, he knows not.

He further, deposes, That one Stephen Linch of Galaway Merchant, but of late
years has resided in Bilvoa, having a Veslell of about 60 Tuns, lying in S.
Sabastians about two Months past, began to load her with Powder and Ammunition;
the certain quantity of Powder he had provided, was five hundred Barrells, 40
or 50 Pieces of small Ordnance, Musket-Barrells, and Rapier Blades: Which
intention and practice coming to the notice of English Merchants there
resident, in a general way they petitioned to the Governor make search and
stay of what should be found aboard, or in his possession; whereupon the
Governor, instead of giving a favorable answer, commanded all the said
English to be imprisoned, and imposed heavy Fines upon them; and for
satisfaction of the said Pines, caused their Cellers and Warehouses to be
broken open, and seized and sold the goods therein, until the uttermost penny
of the said Fines were satisfied; in which sales the said goods were much
under-valued, to the great damage of the said Merchants: And presently after
the said petition and punishment, the Irish, with the Governors approbation,
not only ordered the said Vessel, but Linch and his adherents bought another
Vessel of 50 Tuns, and sent both to a near adjoining Creek called Muttrico,
where they both finished their ladings.

This Deponent further says, That he was credibly informed by some English
Mariners that were present, and saw when two Lighter-loads of Chests packed
with Musket Barrells, and Rapier Blades, were put aboard the said Vessels; and
that they were both full laden, and ready to sail a Month past; and as he was
informed, they did depart that Coast about 18 days past, bound for Galaway:
the said Stephen Linch Imbarqued himself, and had in both Ships about 60
Seamen all Irish.

This Deponent likewise says, That besides the Ammunition (as he was credibly
informed) these Vessels have aboard at least twelve thousand pounds Starling,
in ready Coin, which was gathered there in the Country: and that every Irish
man there resident, did strive, and was very forward to adventure the uttermost
penny of his Estate in this Catholic Cause, and did boast in their common
discourse, what they had and would do. And being demanded what passengers came
in the said Vessels, says, They had aboard many passengers, but one of them
of special note, called by the name of Oneale, which had been bred, and
brought up in Spain, and further he rememembreth not. Richard May Merchant
came in the above said vesssell, from Bilbvoa, and confirmed the above things
in each particular.

Tristram Whetcomb Soffraigne.

FINIS.

