WHereas it is Certified under the Hands of very many Mercers of the chief
Towns in North and South- Wales (who are the only Traders in Books there) That
there are very few Divinity-Books in the Welsh-Language to be sold there; And
to the best of their knowledge, not one Welsh-Bible to be bought at any rate,
although greatly desired by Persons of all Ranks and Conditions: It would be a
singular work of Charity tending to the good of Thousands, who otherwise may be
destitute of the means of Knowledge, to contribute, as toward the Printing of
some Pious Treatises in the Welsh-Language, to be freely given away to poor
Persons and Families there; so especially toward the Printing of the
Welsh-Bible in Octavo, which will shortly be put to the Press.

And in regard that few poor Children are there brought up to Reading, it is
another good work of Charity, to raise and maintain several Schools, for
teaching the poorest of the Welsh-Children to read English, and the Boys to
learn to Write and cast Accounts; whereby they will be enabled to read our
English Bibles and Treatises, to be more serviceable to their Country, and to
live more comfortably in the World. We therefore whose Names are underwritten,
do promise to contribute, during our pleasure, toward the Printing the
Welsh-Bible, and other Licensed Treatises, to be freely given away to such poor
people as can read them, and are not able to buy Books; as also toward the
Teaching of poor Welsh-Children to read English, Write, and cast Accounts, in
such Towns where Schools for that purpose are not already erected and settled by
the Charity of others. Provided that this charitable and pious work be ordered
and managed by Dr. Tillotson Dean of Canterbury, and the rest whose Names are
after-written.

We whose Names are underwritten, do promise our greatest care in managing the
Money given to the abovementioned charitable and pious works. John Tillotson.
Benjamin Whichcott. Simon Ford. William Bates. William Outram. Simon Patrick.
William Durham. Edward Stillingfleet. John Meriton. Hezekiah Burton. Richard
Baxter. Thomas Gouge. Matthew Pool. Edward Fowler. William Turner. Richard
Newman. James Reading. Thomas Firmin. Henry Norton. John du Bois.


An Account of what has been done this last year from Michaelmas 1674, to
Michaelmas 1675, in pursuance of the aforesaid Trust, upon the encouragement
given by diverse Honorable and worthy Persons to this Pious and Charitable
design.
I. THere have been bought, and distributed in several Families Thirty-two
Welsh-Bibles, as also Four hundred seventy-nine New Testaments in Welsh, which
were all that could be had in Wales or London.

II. Five hundred Whole Duties of Man, in Welsh; bought and disposed of in like
manner.

III. Two thousand and five hundred of a Treatise called, The Practice of
Piety; with some hundreds of other Licensed Treatises, translated into Welsh,
are now Printing, and almost finished; which are to be freely given to poor
People in Wales.

IV. In Eighty-six of the chief Towns and Parishes in Wales, Eleven hundred
sixty-two poor Children are put to School to learn to read English, and the
Boys to learn to Write and cast Accounts, over and above the Two hundred put to
School the last year by the Charity of others, before this Trust began.

Which Pious and charitable undertaking has already provoked diverse of the
Landlords and Inhabitants of several Towns and Parishes in Wales, to put Eight
hundred sixty-three of the poorest Welsh Children to School upon their own
account. So that Two thousand two hundred and twenty-five in all, are already
put to School.

As more particularly appears by the following Account.

The Names of the Towns and Parishes in North and South- Wales, in which the
Poorest of the Welsh-Children are put to School to learn to read English, and
the Boys to learn to Write; upon the Charity of diverse worthy Persons in
England and Wales. As also the Number of poor Scholars in each Town and Parish,
with the Names of the Minister and Churchwarden, or chief Magistrate, in each
Parish, who have certified the truth thereof under their hands.
In Carmarthenshire Number of Scholars. Laughborne 40 Mich. Owen, Vicar. John
Lewis, Churchwarden. Penboyne 20 Edmond Myrrick, Rector. John Philips,
Church-Ward. Lanboydy 30 Walter Philips, Vicar. Walter Rees, Churchwarden. St.
Cleeres 20 Will. Evans, Vicar. Wheeler Jones, Church-War. Marrows 20 Mick.
Owen, Vicar. David Price, Church-Ward. Llanelthy 20 Roger Prosser, Vicar. Henr.
Dunell, Church-Ward. Llandovery 20 John Griffith, Vicar. Rees Bevan,
Church-Ward. Kidwelly 40 David Evanson, Vicar. Will. Dyer, Churchwarden.
Lan^ct^^ny 12 Edmond Meyrick, Vicar. John Hopkin, Church-Ward. Llandiowrer 20
Walter Philips, Rector. John Eaton, Churchwarden. Carmarthen Town 24 John
Williams, Mayor. John Scurlock, Alderman. In Pembrokeshire Carew Town 20 Lewis
Boddor, Vicar. John Phelps, Warden. Lampeder Welfry 10 George Owen, Rector.
Will. Willy, Warden. Vsmoston 20 Phineas Whitesoot, Rector. John Viltot,
Church-Ward. Pembroke Town 60 Nic. Stokes, Vicar. John Hughs, Warden.
Haverford-west 60 John Bateman, Mayor. John Williams, Alderman. Nolton 30 John
Llewhellin, Minister. James Higgin, Church-Ward Tresgarn 30 John Llewhellin,
Minister. James Higgin, Church-Ward ^rawdy 10 George Williams, Curate. Owen
David, Church-Ward. Frestrop 10 Maurice Williams, Rector. John Lloyd,
Churchwarden. Langham 10 Maurice Williams, Rector. John Lloyd, Churchwarden.
N. of S. Martheltwy 20 John Criffith, Vicar. Tho. Philips, Warden. Slehbish 15
Maurice Williams, Curate. Roch-Parish. 20 John Saice, Churchwardens. John
Roblin, Churchwardens. Cosheston 24 Morgan Davies, Rector. Tho. Hancock,
Warden. Tenby 25 Joseph Critchley, Mayor. James Lloyd, Alderman. Narbarth 12
George Owen, Rector. John Thornbrough, Ward. In Glamorganshire Cardiff 50 Guil.
Evans, Clerk. Lewis Cox, Church-War. Margam 20 John Lougher, Curate. Cunfigg 20
William Edwards, Ward. St. Nicolas 12 William Button, Esquire. Lancarvan 20
John Jones, Esquire. Oliver Jones, Gentlem. Lantrithed 20 Edm. Waters, Rector.
John Courtney, Chapter Ward. St. Mary Hill 20 Edm. Waters, Rector. John Courtney,
Chapter Ward. Penmark 20 John Jones, Esquire St. Hilary 10 Oliver Jones Wenvoe 14 Ien.
Christophers, Rector. Will. David, Chapter Warden. Cowbridge 40 John Wyndham, Esquire
Swansey 20 Man Mathews, Vicar. Anth: Jones, Chapter Warden. Neath 40 Godwin Lewis,
Rector. Thomas Hopkin, Warden. Llandilotabout 20 Pe. Meyrick, Vicar. Will
John's, Chu. Warden. Bridg-End 20 Nath. Gamage, Clerk. W. Christopher, Warden.
Bettus 15 John Hutton, Curate. Evan Lewis, Chapter Ward. Brecknockshire
Brecknock-Town 20 Meredith Penry, Vicar. Dan. Herberth, Warden. Hay-Town 20
Henry Prosser, Vicar. Ja. Watkins, Warden. In Monmouthshire. N. of S. Chepstow
20 Henry Allen, Vicar. Tho. Goslin, Churchwarden. Lantrissent 20 Henry Evans,
Clerk. Moses Daniel, Churchwarden. Newport 40 Tho. Powell, Clerk. Tho. Basset,
Warden. Caerlion 40 Char. Hurchins, Vicar. Philip Gwyn, Chur-Warden. Langiby 20
Trever Williams, Knight and Baronet. Mac^^n 20 William Morgan; Esquire Basslogg 20
William Morgan; Esquire Vsk. 32 Phineas Roger, Vicar. Thomas Jones, Ch.-Warden.
Monmouth 50 Rick. Ballard, Mayor. Will. Bellamy, Baliff, Abergavenny 40 John
Grenhaugh, Vicar. Joseph Haits, Chur.-Warden. Bont be Pool 16 Caple Hanbury,
Esquire Tho. Jones, Gent. Michelstone de Vedo 32 Rich. Praunch, Curate. Tho. Evans,
Churchwarden. Cardiganshire Cardigan-Town 40 John Morris, Mayor. B. Young;
Alderman. Lambeder 24 Rees Powell, Vicar. David Tho^as, Ch.-warden. In
Mongomeryshire Myvad 32 Randle Davies, Vicar. John Jones, Churchwarden.
Welsh-Pool 40 Sam. Davies, Vicar. Humphrey Draper, Warden. Kinnerly 20 Hugh
Gethin, Vicar. Evan Davies, Church-Ward. Llanchfrochwell 12 Tho. Peers, Vicar.
Step. Thomas, Churchwarden. Oswestry 25 Rich. Edwards, Vicar. Edw. Rogers,
Churchwarden. In Radnorshire New Radnor 20 Hugh Watkins, Chur. Warden. James
Bedward, Chur. Warden. Knighton 40 Rob. Milward, Vicar. John Mason,
Churchwarden. Prestain ^0 Phil. Lewis, Rector. Hugh Howel, Church Warden. In
Carnarvan: shire N. of S. Carnarvan-Town 20 Row^. Williams, Vicar. Conweigh 36
Roberts Roberts, Vicar. Will. Pryther, Ch.-Ward. Llandegay 12 Robert Williams,
Knight and Baronet. Llanllechid. 12 In Denhighshire Ruthe^ 40 Robert Evans,
Curate. John Shurlock, Chapter Ward. Denhigh-Town 50 John Roberts, Vicar. David
Davies, Warden. Markeweell 16 Will. Hanmer. Vicar. Wrexham 40 Will. Smith,
Vicar. John Hughs, Chapter Warden. Gresford 12 Maurice Evans, Curate. John David,
Chapter Warden. Llanrwst 20 Henric. Sodorensis. Abergelly 40 Will. Williams, Vicar.
John Whaley, Chapter Warden. Holt 12 Daniel Brown, Vicar. Nath. Pasnage, Warden. In
Flintshire Bangor 50 Rich. Williams, Vicar. Tho. Pitson, Chapter Warden Flint-Town
24 Henry Thomas, Curate. Griffith Jones, Warden. Northop 20 David Lloyd, Vicar.
John Jones, Chapter Warden. Caerwys 15 Tho. Gryffith, Vicar. Tho. Roberts, Warden.
Mould 30 Walter Williams, Vicar. Robert Jones, Warden. Ourton 50 Mich. Jones,
Curate. Tho. Jones, Church-Wa. Worthenbury 20 Guil. Whittle, Curate. John
Roberts, Chapter Ward. Anglesy Bewmarri^ 48 Will. Williams, Rector. Rich. Shaw, Chapter
Warden.

Here follows a Testimonial under the hands of diverse Honorable and Worthy
Persons, Deputy Lieutenants, and Justices of the Peace, in several places of
WALES, where the Schools are set up.
WHereas there is a late Pious and Charitable Design set on foot, for the
Teaching poor Children in Wales to Read and Write; and for the buying,
printing, and giving away of Bibles, and other good Books in the
Welsh-Language, for the use of poor Families there; which is managed by Dr.
Tillotson Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Whichcott, Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Ford, Dr.
Bates, Dr. Outram, Dr. Patrick, Dr. Meriton, Dr. Burton, Mr. Durham, Mr.
Baxter, Mr. Pool, Mr. Fowler, Mr. Firmin, and some others. Which is also put in
execution by the Charity of diverse Honorable and Worthy Persons, and by the
care and diligence of Mr. Thomas Gouge. We whose Names are underwritten, having
Personal knowledge of some places where it is executed, and certain information
of others, do willingly testify, that it is carried on with all impartiality
and fidelity, and we hope, through Gods blessing, for many good and happy
effects from it.

Edward Mansell. Edw. Harley. Jo. Awbrey. Erasmus Philipps. Tho. Moston. Trever
Williams. John Trevor. H. Owen. John Wyndham. Ev. Seys. Henric. Sodoret Monae.
Robert Williams. Will. Morgan. Robert Hooks. Will. Thomas.



We having examined the Accounts, and perused the Originals of the foregoing
Cer(...) do hereby certify the truth of them.
John Tillotson. Benj. VVichcott. Simon Ford. Will. Durham. Edw.
Stillingfleet. John Meriton. Hezekiah Burton. Mat. Pool. Edward Fowler. Tho.
Firmin. Henry Norton. John du Bois.

