A SPEECH OF Mr John White Counselor at Law, made in the Commons House of
Parliament CONCERNING EPISCOPACY.

London, Printed for Thomas Nicholes, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
sign of the Bible in Pope's Head alley. 1641.

A Speech of Master John White Counselor, concerning Episcopacy.
EPiscopacy as it stands in this kingdom, comprehends in it in line a recta,
these four degrees, the Deacon, the Presbyter, the Bishop and the Archbishop,
Every Archbishop wades through every of these ordinarily.

Of the first and last we have no vestigium in the holy scriptures. This Deacon
may Preach and Baptize and help the Presbyter to administer the Lords Supper,
Book of ordering of Deacons.
but may not consecrate the Elements in the Lords Supper: contrary to the
Scriptures, by which Preach and Baptize, is a full Commission for the exercise
of all the ministerial function. Mat. 28.19.

The Deacon mentioned in holy Scripture, is the same in Office with our
Churchwarden, to look to the Church goods and the poor, Acts 6.1 Tim. 3.

The Presbyter is of all hands acknowledged to be, Jure Divino.

The Bishop is considerable in respect of his trayn, and secondly, in respect
of himself.

His trayn are these, first the Dean and Chapter (called Prebends, quia
praeberent auxilium Episcopo,) and were originally ordained for his Counsel to
advise him in difficulties in Religion, and to advise him in, and consent unto
his dispositions of his possessions, Cok. r. 3. Dean and Chapter of Norwiches
case.

Secondly, the Archdeacon is the oculu^ Episcopi to discover and punish
offenses spiritual and Ecclesiastical within his limits, and manus Episcopi,
to present unto him such as are to be made Deacons and Presbyters, and to
induct such as he admits and institutes into Benefices.

Thirdly, his Chancellors, Vicars General, Commissaries, Officials,
Surrogates, Registers, Promotors, and others belonging co his Cathedrals.

These be all merely humane, and may be taken away without offense to God or
conscience, if there appear just cause for it.

The Bishop in respect of himself is considerable in his Barony and
temporalties, and his spiritualties.

The first, is merely Exgratia Regis, and in this kingdom began 4. Case of
tenures 35. a.
of William the Conqueror: And by virtue hereof, they have had place; in the
house of Peers in Parliament. 7. H. 8.1846. Kel. it is resolved by all the
Judges of England, that the King may hold his Parliament by himself, his
temporal Lords and Commons, without any Bishop, for a Bishop has not any
place in Parliament by reason of his spiritualties, but merely by reason of his
Baronry, and accordingly acts of Parliament have been made, 2 Rich. 3. cap. 5.
and at diverse Other (...).

They have usurped the name of Spiritual Lords but of late, and were first
called so 16 Rich. 2. c. 1. in our Statutes.

By his spiritualties, I mean those wherein he is more then a Presbyter, and
therein I consider his authority over Presbyters by the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, by which he may command them to collect tenths granted in
Convocation, etc. 20 Hen. 6.13. p. 25.

Secondly, his Office which in partly judicial, and partly ministerial;
Judicial, by which he is Judge in his Courts of all matters Ecclesiastical
and spiritual within his Diocese, Cok. Rep. 8. Trollops. C. Secondly, he is
Judge of the fitness of such as are presentell unto him to be instituted into
Benefices, Cok. rep. 5. Spoc^^^. cap.

Ministerial, and thereby he is to Sacred places Dedicate to Divine Service.
9. H. 6.17 page 8. Secondly, he is to provide for the officiating of Cures in
the avoydance of Churches on neglect of the Patrons, presenting thereunto.
Thirdly, he is to certify loyal Matrimony, general bastardy and
excommunication. Fourthly, to execute Judgments given in quare impedit, upon
the writ Ad admittendum Clericum, and other, etc.

Fifthly, to attend upon trials of life, to report the sufficiency or
insufficiency of such as demand Clergy. Sixthly, to ordain Deacons and
Presbyters.

All these I conceive to be Jure humane, given to these Bishops, and may upon
cause be taken away from them.

Bishops have been in the Primitive Church, Ob.
and are Apostolical and from the beginning.

To this I answer, first, Sol.
that in the pure primitive times of the Church the History whereof is recorded
in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles, (in which the first and best patterns
of Church government is expressed) there is no mention of other Bishops then
the Presbyters, as appears.

First, the holy Scriptures declare the duties and office of Presbyters and
Bishops to be one and the same. The Bishop is to teach and rule his Church or
Congregation 1 Timothy 3.2.5. and the Presbyter is to teach and feed his flock,
and to oversee, care for, and rule them, 1 Pet. 5.2.3.

Secondly, the Presbyters are in holy Scriptures, said to be the Bishops of the
holy Ghost, Acts 20.28. Paul charges the Presbyters or Ephesus to take heed to
the flock whereof the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops. And other Bishops the
Holy Ghost never made.

Thirdly, Ephesians 4.11. God is said to have given to his Church for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying
of the body of Christ, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers;
here is an expres enumeration of the officers God has given, whereof the first
three are extraordinary and ceased: and the last only remains, and is to remain
until we all come to perfection, as it is ver. 13. and this perpetual Officer
is called Pastor, in relation to his flock whom he is to govern in
Spiritualibus, and Teacher in respect of his duty to feed them with the word of
truth, and is the very same with the Presbyter, as appears above. Argumentum a
divisione est fortissimum. The Bishop as he is any more then a Presbyter, is
none of these, no Officer given by God, and therefore ought not to be in the
Church; Christ the King of his Church was faithful in his House, not only as a
servant, as Moses was, but as the Son in an excellency and eminency, Heb. 3.5.
and to his kingly Office it pertains to appoint the Officers he will use for
the government of his Church in spiritualibus, and it agrees not with his
faithfulness to neglect or omit the appointment of them, and leave his House,
his Church, without such Officers. He is only wise, and therefore best knows
what Officers are useful for his Church, and infinitely loving of his Church,
and therefore has not lest her without any Officer fit for her.

Thus in the end of Paul's Epistle unto him, Ob.
is said to be the first Bishop of Crete, and Timothy in the end of the
Epistles unto him, to be the first Bishop of Ephesus.

Those additions are spurious, Sol. Perk. upon Gal. 6. infi^e. For Tim. See 1
Cor. 4.17. and 16.10. Acts 17.13.15 and 19.22 and 20.4.5. 1 These. 3.1.6. Heb.
23.25. Colos 1.1. Phil. 1.1. and 2.19. For Titus See 2 Cor. 7.12 and 8.6.16.23,
and 12 18. Gal 2.1. ^ Tim. 4.20. Tim. 1.^. and 5.12.
and no part or the holy Scriptures, and as Bezia observes, are not in many
greek ancient topics to be found, and this is so evident as it is granted by
most Divines. 2. And as they be no part of the Scrriptures of God, so they be
apparently contrary unto them, for by them it appears, that they, namely Titus
and Timothy, were Evangelists, extraordinary officers, associats and
fellow-helpers of the Apostles in their general and Universal function,
attendant upon them; and sent by them (as occasion required) from one Church to
another, never Keeping any fixed residence any where, and it they had been
Bishops of any place, Paul would never have suffered, much less forced them to
be non-residents.

Saint John Revel. 12.3. Ob. 2
writing to the 7 Churches of Asia directs his speech to the Angel of each
Church, and in each of those Churches there were then several Congregations
and Presbyters, therefore the Angel was the Bishop over them.

To this I answer, that as Angel is a name common to all Presbyters who are
Christ's Messengers and Ambassadors: So it appears to be used here by the very
context cap. 2. v. 10. Where speaking to the Angel of the Church of S^cyrna,
the holy Ghost says, Fear none of the things thou shall suffer, the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, but be thou faithful, etc. Angel (being
nomen multitudinis) is taken in these chapters collectively for all the
Presbyters (some of whom the adversaries should imprison,) and not for any one
above or before the rest. The same appears in the like manner, ver. 13.23.

Seeing; then the Episcopacy may be taken away in all, wherein it exceeds the
Presbyters office, and that the office of the Presbyter is clearly jure divino;
I conceive we are first to restore the Presbyter to his due, and to him it
belongs to teach and feed his flock and to oversee, care for, and rule them in
spiritualibus, Act. 20.17. 1 Timothy 3.2.5.1 Pet. 5.2.3. So says the holy
Scripture.

And so says our Law also. He is to minister the Doctrine and the Sacraments,
and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm
has received the same according to the commandments of God: See the book of
Ordering of Priests in the 3. question And he is called in our Law Rector
Ecclesoa, and the words of his institution be, To^octorem Ecclesiae instituimus
curamque and regimen animarum parochianorum tibi in Domino committimus.

The Bishops have taken by usurpation from the Presbyter diverse rights: first,
contrary to his Ordination and institutition, they will not suffer him to
preach in his own Cure without a license.

Secondly, they restrain him from preaching some doctrines, as of
predestination and others that over throw Arminian tenets, when his
faithfulness in his Office requires he should keep nothing back, This is read
to the Presbyter upon his Ordination, and his charge then given him is
remarkable See the book of ordering Priests.
but to show them all the counsel of God, Acts 10.27. Thirdly, they will not
suffer him to intermeddle in the discipline. These usurpations I conceive are
to be taken away, and the Presbyter to be left free from them.

Secondly, for the Episcopacy, I conceive, that first their Baronies and the
intermedling of the Clergy in Civil Councels, affairs, and employments, ought
to be taken from them.

First, I conceive such Bar. and intermedling is against the Law of God, Christ
refused to intermeddle in dividing inheritances (though more able and fit for
it then any Bishop) Luke 12.13. and says his Kingdom is not of the world,
John 18.36. and the Disciple is not above his Master, Mat. 10.24. and Acts 6.
The Apostles refuse to intermeddle in the Deacon or Churchwardens office,
though of all earthly employments the nearest to the Church; and the reason
they give is remarkable for this purpose, because they were to attend to Prayer
and Administration of the word, and therefore not meet for them to attend such
secular matters, and 2 Timothy 2.4. The Apostles lays down a rule in this case,
that nemo militans Deo se implicat negotiis ^ujus seculi, and upon this ground,
even the Popes Canon-laws are against these things, as inconsistent with the
ministerial function. And the due execution of the commission, Go preach and
baptize, is of it self burden and work enough for any man whatsoever his
gifts and parts be, and made Paul though of a more excellent and able spirit,
cry out under the sense of the weight of it, Who is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor.

Secondly, it is against the fundamental Laws of this Land, whereby they that
are within holy Orders, Non esi consonum quod ille qui salubri statui anirusrum
and piis operibus continue deservit ad insistendum in secularibus negotiis
compellatur. vide the writ.
that they may the better attend upon, and discharge their duties, are not to
be entangled, with temporal business, and therefore if any such be chosen to
any temporal office, the Law has ordained a writ to discharge them thereof,
Reg. 187.6.

The King may command the service of men in orders, and then it is to be given
him by natural allegiance.

This rule admits two exceptions and both are in this case: first, except the
service from that person be against the Law of God as here it is, and then it
is better obey God then man, in praesentia majoris cessat potestas minoris.

Secondly, if the service concern the Commonwealth, and the person of whom it
is required, be not sufficient for it, nor brought up unto it, the command is
against Law, and the service not to be done, if the King grant the Office of
the Clarke of the Crown to one not brought up to it, it is void, and the
service not to be intermedled withal by him, 9 Ed. 4.56. Winters case.

Secondly, that part of the Bishops spiritual office by which he claims
superiority over Presbyters ought to be taken as I conceive from them as being
against the will of God.

The Apostles questioning among themselves which should be the Superior, are
sharply reproved by our Savior for it, and he tells them plainly it shall not
be so among them, Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. and Diotrophes, 3 Job. 9. is branded
for it, that he sought pre-eminence in the Church. The mystery of iniquity in
the Popish Hierarchy, in the Presbyters exalting themselves, began to work in
the purest primitive time, (as we see in Diotrophes, and Peter's caveat, 2 These.
2.4.7.
1 Pet. 5.3.) and never left till it came to the Pope, the highest degree and
top thereof; By which it seems to me evident, that to leave the pattern of
Church government set down in the word of God to follow the examples of after
ages upon a false cry of primitive times, is to forsake the pure fountain, and
wallow in the muddy and corrupted streams of antichristian ambition.

Thirdly, that part of the spiritual officer of the Bishop whereby he is to
instruct the people committed to his charge, with the holy Scriptures, as upon
the 2 question put unto him at his Consecration, he undertakes to do, ought
(as I conceive) to be reduced to a possibility for him to perform it. It is
impossible for him to do it to a whole Diocese, therefore he should be
limited to some particular Congregation, unto which he might perform this
trust, which requires sufficiency, attendance and diligence.

Fourthly, Ordination in the scriptures is ever expressed to be by them in the
Church, that had authority and were officers in the Church, as Apostles,
Evangelists and after by the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. And a shadow
of this remains in our Law, Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5, 6, 7.
for the Bishop only is not to lay hands upon the party to be ordained, but the
Presbyters there attending are to join with the Bishop therein. Books of
ordering Priests.
This I conceive is not fit to be in the hands of any one ordinary officer in
the Church, the descerning of the gifts, abilities and faithfulness of persons
to be ordained Presbyters, requiring great judgment, care, and circumspection.
Plus vident oculi quam oculus. The like I say of deprivation.

Fifthly, Excommunication by the Scriptures ought to be only in case of enormous
offenses and obstinacy in them, and only in the Congregation whereof the party
to be Excommunicate is a member, 1 Cor. 5.4. Tell the Church cannot be meant of
one man, Mat. 18.17. Diotrophes is branded for taking upon him alone to cast
any out of the Church, This also abused as well as usurped by the Bishop is to
be reformed.

Sixthly, Instituation and induction are usurped by the Bishops upon the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, by which the Patron after his Clerk was
ordained, did without any more invest him into the Church. See Seldom of tithes
86. And a relick of this we retain still in Churches that be donatives.

Seventhly, The jurisdiction of tithes, causes matrimonial, and causes
testamentary in the times of the Increasing power of the Pope, when the Bishops
thereby grew more formidable, were taken from the Civil Magistrate to whom
originally they belonged, upon pretense, that the tithes were Jure divino, the
Churches patrimony and Marriage a Sacrament, and that the disposing the goods of
the dead, most properly belonged to him for the good of the soul in Purgatory
to redeem it thence, to whom the cure of the Soul appertained in his life
time, vide 2 R. 3. Testaments. 4.11 H. 7.12 B. Plowdeu 279. B. Foxes c. Cok.
rep. 9.37. B. Heustoes case. Dames rep. 97. B. Lalors c. Seldom of tithes, 4^5.

Eighthly, The matters which are merely and only spiritual, (which are
properly of Ecclesiastical cognizance) were anciently by the Lawyers of this
Kingdom, heard and determined in the County and hundred Courts by the Sheriff
and the Bishop, and by William the Conqueror these matters were taken thence
and appropriated to the Bishop alone, 2 R. 2. Rotul. Parliament, number. 12.
Seldom of tithes 412. Book of Martyrs, 154.

And by the Law of God (as I conceive) they ought to be heard and determined by
them that have rule in the particular congregations and Churches, Mat. 18.17. 1
Cor. 5. which if it were so among us would be a wonderful case, and save great
charges to the subject.

And where the difficulty of case or greatness of the persons whom it may
concern, or where the Governors in particular Congregation demean not
themselves as they ought, it ought to be referred to a Synod of Presbyters, of
many as shall be thought meet, as Acts. 15* a question of difficulty arising in
the particular Church of Antioch, and the dissension growing great about the
same, they sent to Jerusalem, and there the Apostles, and Presbyters convened,
debated, concluded, and decreed the matter, and imposed the observation thereof
upon Antioch and other Churches, ver. 1.2.6.28. The Apostles would not meddle
in the question without the Presbyters, and other Bishops there were none
there, nor in the Churches. And faelicius expediuntur negotia commissa
pluribus, in the multitude of Counselors there is safety, Proverb. 11.14.

And the change of our Laws (in case this House shall see cause for it) will
not be so great or difficult as is conceived by some. For ordination,
admonition, suspension and deprivation of Presbyters, and the judgment of the
fitness of persons to be invested into Benefices Ecclesiastical, and the care
of providing for the serving of Cures during the vacancy and avoydance of
Churches, and taking of the subscription of Ministers to the Articles of
Religion: 13 Eliz. cap. 12. 14 Eliz. cap. 5.
and the visiting of Hospitals, whose Founders have appointed no visitors,
which are now in the Bishop, may be settled in a convention of Presbyters, to
be appointed for every hundred, from whom appeal may be had upon every
gravamen to a greater Assembly of them, and those Presbyters, or any one of
them, may be enabled to give the Oaths of Supremacy and allegiance; where the
Bishop is authorized to give the same. And Excommunication may be ordered to be
certified by the Parson, 5 Eliz. c. 1. 7 Jac. cap. 6.
Vicar or Stipendary of that Church where the party is excommunicate, And all
Churches presentative, may be filled by investure of the Patrons, and all
questions concerning them be determined by the same rules of law as Donatives
are, And loyal Matrimony be tried by a Jury where, the woman is party to the
suit, as now it is where she is not party, so E. 3.15. p. 5.11. H. 4.4. B. 30.
and as it is now, where the issue is Nient sa femme, 12. E. 3. Brife 481.50. E.
3.15. B. 7. H. 6.12. June 35. H. 6.9. P. 10. Coke 8. E. 4.12. a Laton: And
Bastardy general and Bastardy beyond Sea, within the Statute, 25 E. 3. De
natis ultra mare, may be made tryable by Jury, as now special Bastardy is 11
Ass. 20.38. ass. 24.39. E. 3.31.6. and 7. Ed. 6. Dier. 79. P. 52. So tithes may
be reduced to the Common Law and be sued for there, as it was ever in the case
of the King or his Debtor 38. ass. 20. Cok. r. 5.16. a Cawdreis case, and as it
is by the Statute of 2 and 3 E. 6. cap. 13. And for the Bishops attendance on
trials of life, it is needless, he being no Judge in it, but the Court, who
may appoint any other, or do it themselves. And for Sacring of Churches and
other dead things, it is fit to be neglected and left off, being a Popish vain
superstition, and without color of countenance from the word of God, the
Leviticall consecrations being typical and shadows of the good things we enjoy
under the Gospel, Heb. 9.19, etc.

The Bishop being thus reformed and reduced to a condition and state agreeable
to the word of God, the only right rule of reformation:

The Deans, Chapters, Vicars General, Chancellors, 25 Exodus 9 40. 1 Chronicles.
28.11.19. Ezekiel. 4^.10. 2 Cor. 4 6.
and the rest of his Train, qua tales (being telluris inutile pondus) are to
be removed and taken away also as superfluous and useless.

We have entrusted the Episcopacy these fourscore and two years with the cure
of Souls, a trust of the highest concernment, if we consider the price of
Souls. Our Savior is at a stand in it, What shall a man give in recompense for
his Soul? Mat. 16.26.
the price of it is best seen in the price given for it, God and man must
become a curse to redeem it.

How have they discharged this trust? Survay the Churches throughout the
Kingdom, and you shall find near eight parts of ten of them filled with
Idol, idle, or scandalous Ministers, whom the Bishops might have by law
refused, if discovered unto them beforehand, and ought to have removed being
discovered unto them afterward. And it has abundantly appeared this
Parliament upon examinations taken in this House of Commons and the Committees
thereof; that when Ministers extremely scandalous, have been discovered to the
Bishops and their Officers, and in the Highcommission Court, they have received
no further censure then admonition, or to be put to purgation, and so sent home
to destroy more Souls, as if they had not done sufficiently in that way before.

But if any godly, learned, and painful Preacher has been discovered by them,
they have sought out all occasions against such, to thrust them out of the
Church, and lay their Congregations waste and desolate, and every trifle,
though indifferent in their own account, bath been made use of, and sufficed
them for this, yea, they have made occasions and traps to overthrow such
worthies without Law and against Law.

And herein they have inherited the virtues of Diotrephes their first
Predecessor, who would not receive the brethren, and forbad them that would,
and cast both out of the Church, 3 John 10.

And though some of the Bishops have been and are good men, yet look into their
Diocese, and the Churches in their gift, and judge whether they be good
Bishops or no, you shall finds them as faulty concerning this great trust as
any of the rest. And whether it be not from hence evident, or at least greatly
to be suspected, that some curse cleaves to the very Office of Bishops, when
good men cannot manage it to any better purpose then the bad, let any man judge.

This Spiritual Monarchy has two incidents inseparable unto it, first that it
is always incroaching and usurping upon other powers, and swallowing them up,
as the series of all ages abundantly manifests, Secondly, that it is ever
inclining and returning to Popery, and the Religion of Antichirst, as has most
clearly appeared, even in our days as well as before since the restoring of
Religion; I shall for this time instance only in three places of the Rubric
corrupted by Bishops: In the Rubric confirmed by act of Parliament, in the
beginning of it, It is directed, that prayer shall be in such place of the
Church or Chancell, and the Minister shall so turn him, as the people may best
hear.

In the Rubric as it is now Printed, prayer shall be used in the accustomed
place, etc. except it shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinary.

Whereby they have introduced the Popish practice of reading Prayers as the
upper end of the Chancell at their Altar, where few in the Church can see them,
and fewer hear them, and turning their faces to the East, and their backs to
the people in reading in the Desk, and color all with the determination of the
Ordinary.

Secondly, in the Letany, there are these words in the book of Common payer
confirmed by the Statutes of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. and of 1 Eliz. From the tyranny
of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, good Lord deliver us;
and that the Bishops in the latter books have caused to be left out wholly.

Thirdly, in the Rubric concerning the administration of the Lords Supper, as
it stands now altered, an excellent declaration of the reason why kneeling at
this Sacrament was left in the reformation, and a renunciation of
Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, adoration of the bread and wine, as
abominable Idolatries, are wholly obliterate and left out, that the use of
that gesture there might be rendered the more suspicious and superstitious, and
a more clear way might be made, to induce the Popish superstitious innovations,
that have been since obtruded upon us, concerning the Table, Altar,
supe^reminent presence of God almighty there, cringings, Altar-worship and the
like. And I conceive alterations were made by the Bishops, as appears unto me
by the Proclamation they procured to be set forth 5. Martii, 1. Jac, concerning
the book of Common prayer.

And how can things prosper better in the hands of the Episcopacy, when Gods
blessing alone gives out prosperity, and the Lord disposes his blessing in
his own way only, and not in any other?

And this being no plant planted by God in his Church, how can it be expected
it should yield us any better fruits then we have received from it?

Again, (if I be not much deceived) the Episcopacy in whatsoever it exceeds
the Presbyters office (in which sense only I speak of it) is a branch of the
Hierarchy of Rome, and of the Antichrist: and of that consider what is
prophesied Revel. 14.14. They shall not have any rest day nor night, that
receive any print of the name of the Beast; and examine the former and present
times, whether the same has not been verified among us, and in all such places
where that Hierarchy has been entertained, whether the must troubles and
miseries of the Churches, and in great part also of the Commonwealth, have not
sprung from the said Episcopacy and the fruits thereof?

Therefore let us proceed to the perfecting of the Reformation of our Church,
and to the gathering out of it every stone that offends, even whatsoever is not
according to God, and the standard of his word, and reduce every thing in the
government to the rule, and walk in it in Gods way, which is the sure way to
have his presence with us, and blessing upon us and ours for ever.

It has ever been a point of higher honor from God, and of greater acceptance
and esteem with him to advance the reformation of his Church and Worship, ^
Cro. 17.^4 (...) 1 Kings 15.14, 2 Kings 12.3. 1 Cron. 28.1^. Zac. 4.7.
and was and ever will be a reproach from him, and blot upon such as have left
any thing not agreeable to his word unreformed, and not taken away: Up then let
us be doing, and the Lord will go before us, and make plain all mountains that
may occur in our way, and give a blessed issue and success.


