THE COPIES of Several LETTERS Contrary to the opinion of the present powers,
Presented to the Lord Genesis Fairfax, AND LIEVT. GENESIS CROMWELL.

By Francis White, Mayor of his Excellencies Regiment of Foot.

London, Printed by T. Pain for Tho. Slater, and Stephen Bowtell. 1649.

To the Reader.
HAving for some years been an Actor in the Affairs of the late wars, and
likewise an observer of the proceedings of State, in which I have been
concerned more then every private person; I have therefore, offered my
Judgment, and declared my opinion in matters of highest concernment to my Lord
General, and Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, and had no great desire to have published
what I have written: But hearing by many of my friends, that it is generally
reported by most that have heard of me, that I have now declined my principles,
and am turned Cavalier. The reason of this Conception is, because J declared my
Descent to the taking away the life of the King: But to manifest to the world,
the truth and innocence of my heart, J have published these following Letters,
to show that J was of the same Judgment formerly as J now continue, as may
appear in my Letter sent to Lievt. Genesis Cromwell, almost a year ago, and what
J have written to my Lord General, although contrary to the opinion of the
present powers; J thought my self bound in Conscience to perform, to preserve
my own inward peace. For although some men make no conscience of their
Engagements, Vows, and Oaths, yet J hope, God will give me power rather to
suffer death, then destroy my life. J know that my Judgment is not infallible,
yet notwithstanding J must keep close to my Principles, until J am convinced
of Error; J have here declared my Principles and purpose, to stand in the
prosecution of the public service with faithfulness, whiles God by his grace
does enable me.

Francis White.
March the 20. 1648.
The Copy of a Letter presented to his Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, General.
My Lord,
I Am a Member of your Army, and included in all actions done by the
Disciplinary power, whiles I silently consent thereto, and I would never appear
a Discenter to any thing that tends to public good, although never so
prejudicial to my particular interest; but rather then I would submit to any
thing of essential public prejudice to the people, or to destroy my inward
peace, I would expose my self to a temporal destruction. For God is my
witness, I do not so much fear them that can kill the body only, as I do him
that is able to cast both body and soul into hell; so far as I have been
employed in the common work, I have cheerfully acted or born my public
testimonies, and I hope for ever shall. My Lord, I have taken notice of many
Petitions from almost all the Forces in England, and from diverse people of the
Countries, which supplicate for many good things, which they desire your
Excellency to procure. In all which good things, I do heartily concur with
their Petitions; but I have observed this as one thing generally desired, that
they may have execution of Justice upon the King, and as far as I can perceive,
it is generally intended by the Officers of the Army, and the Members of the
present House of Commons, to take away the life of the King. But with
submission to your Excellency, I desire leave to declare my descent, and upon
grounds conscientious for these Reasons following.

First, Because there are no clear grounds by any Legal Authority, to take
away the life of the King. Secondly, It is contrary to our first Engagement,
and our general Professions, Vows, and Covenants, to God and the world.
Thirdly, I do not discern it will produce any general good to the Nation, but
rather the contrary.
Having declared my opinion, and the chief Reasons for the same, I desire your
Lordship to read these following Lines, for the clearing of those Reasons, and
the justifying my integrity and innocence in former actings.

At the first taking up of Arms, I was sensible of the oppression and injustice
which was exercised by the King and his Ministers upon the people; he exalting
himself to act beyond all Laws, which his Predecessors and himself had bound
themselves by consent to observe; He raising Arms to enforce the exercise of
his power, to the maintaining an absolute tyranny over the Nation, was the
chief ground of my opposing him: and I have freely acted in the affairs of War,
to the subduing of his power, and the vindicating of the peoples just Rights,
and claim to the disposal of the Military power without his consent. In the
prosecution of this service, I have been as free from seeking revenge upon the
Person of the King, as to violate my own life. The chief end I seek, is the
preservation of the righteous people, with the safety and well being of the
whole, and if possible without taking away the life of Charles Steward, King of
England.

First I say, I do not understand how it may be done by any Legal Authority
according to the Kingly Government, though it may be a just thing, yet I know
not how it may justly be done. I never heard of any Throne erected in the
earth, either by God or men, for the judging of a King, until the erecting of
this late tribunal at Westminster. All the Judgment Seats, that are legally
erected in this Nation, were made by King, Lords, and Commons; but the King
ever did exempt himself from personal judgment, by virtue of the Military,
Regal, and Legislative power which he retained in himself, which was gotten by
the Sword of his Predecessors, and kept by Traditionall dissent: although the
people since the Conquest, have had the liberty of choosing Laws, so that he
did not set up Laws and Judicatures legally at his will, yet there was no Law
made, nor Judicatures erected, but by his will, although he agreed, the people
should have the power of choosing Laws, yet he determined, that he would keep
the power of confirming Laws; so that no Law was ever made without his will.

And if it be thoroughly examined; we may find that the King has no other
right to the Military, Regal, and Legislative power, then the Sword did
constitute and invest him with by divine permission, the people submitting
thereto for fear, and to avoid greatest mischief. But now the King and his
party being conquered by the Sword, I believe the Sword may justly remove the
power from him, and settle it in its original fountain next under God, the
people. But to judge or execute his person, I do not understand any Legal
Authority in being can justly do it. I doubt not but the Sword may do it, but
how righteous judgment that may be, that God and future generations will
judge. It is clear that the Military power is exalted above the Regal and
Legislative power, and is now come to the throne of God, and under no other
Legal Judgment, until there be a Legal Authority erected, as is offered in
the Agreement, to which it may submit. And seeing God has in righteousness
for the sins of the people, and their King, brought us into this unhappie
condition, I therefore plead with your Excellency, to use the sword with as
much tenderness as may be, to preserve the lives of men, and especially the
life of the King.

And for my second reason, Because we have made general profession of
preserving his person, and whenever any accused us of seeking the life of the
King, we always denied it, until this late Remonstrance. Now Sir, it is as
real a manifestation of a Christian, a honorable and noble spirit, as can be
discovered to the world, to be true to what it does profess, and to be the
same in adversity, as in prosperity, and in prosperity as it was in
adversity; and it is more honorable to save the life of a conquered enemy,
then to destroy him: For if he has prosecuted his designs according to his
judgment and conscience, and were in the wrong way, it was because God
suffered the Devil to blind his understanding, that he did not know the truth,
and it is better to let him live, and learn to repent, then to make have to
send him to destruction; so that his remaining alive, be not any general
prejudice, or more mischievous then his death would be, which would well be
considered under the third reason.

I do not understand any essential good can acrew to the people, by the
taking away his life. For it is not so much the person that can hurt us, as the
power that is made up in the Kingly office by this corrupt constitution; for if
the person be taken away presently, another lays claim to the Kingly Office,
and for any thing I know, has as much right to the Dominion as his Predicessor
had, and will, questionless, have all the assistance that this person can
procure, for the attaining thereof, and will be able to do more mischief,
because he is at liberty, and this under your power.

Again, This King being the King of Scotland and Ireland, according to the
Laws in being, they have an interest in his person as well as England,
notwithstanding he is under our power. Now if you will judge the Kingdoms of
Scotland and Ireland in that which concerns their interest, where you can
claim no right, it is a evident wrong, and may give them just offense, and
ground of quarrel against this Nation, and by this, may be of more prejudice
to the whole, then can be good to the particular. I desire my Lord, that we may
issue a Christian spirit, not rendering evil for evil, but rather good for
evil. Although wicked men will deal wickedly with us, yet let us deal
mercifully with them, and pardon and forgive, as we desire God should pardon
and forgive us. Jn this way J do verily believe we shall be greater Conquerers
then yet we have been, if we can conquer ourselves, and the affection of our
enemies which this does lead unto. My Lord, in all that I have written, J am
not against the judging of the King; but J say it is by no legal Authority,
but only what the Sword exalts: although it be not an exact Marshal Court,
yet it is little different, and not a Legitimate Authority to the King, yet it
may as justly judge him, as ever he judged the people, and may dethrone him,
and divest him of all power and authority in the English Nation. And I think
it is necessary so far to proceed, and to detain him as a prisoner at war,
till he may be delivered with safety to yourselves and the Nation. I desire
your Excellencies favorable Construction of what I have written, and if it be
not your Excellencies judgment, all that I desire for my satisfaction is; That
your Excellency will appoint such a General Council as the Army in these parts
shall be included by the Mayor voice thereof, if it be not concluded according
to my Judgment, yet therein shall I have my desire, because J consent to be
included by the Mayor part, to avoid division: If this may not be granted, then
must I declare my descent, and that it is an action done by virtue of the
Disciplinary power of the Army, by which J am not in this case willingly
included, and so I hope I shall preserve my self in innocence and peace, and
not be an instrument of the mischiefs, and evils that may be brought upon this
Nation, by the taking away the blood of their King. Having taken this Freedom
to write to your Excellency, I shall now take my leave, and remain.

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Francis White.
January the 22. 1648.
To the Right Honorable, His Excellency, the Lord Fairfax, General.
My Lord,
I Have for these six years been a servant to the public in the affairs of the
late Warce, and for the most part under Your Excellencies conduct; and I can
speak it with confidence, that no man has been more faithful to the people,
or to your Lordship, in the prosecution of their interest, then my self. If I
have erred in this work, it has been chiefly in too forward actings for the
public good; and I would rather err in the prosecution of my principles with
zeal, then in the abusing patience with sloth, wherein I am convinced of
offense, from which no man is free, I shall submit; but rather then betray
innocence with cowardice, I would perish. My Lord, I must needs inform you,
that my principles leads me to a concurrence with those people which joined in
the late Petition of the many thousands in the City of London, and parts
adjacent, and must upon all lawful occasions, as I will vindicate my
integrity, use means for the accomplishing of the most essential parts of that
Petition; and if the prosecution of such principles be offensive to your self,
as to produce your Lordships prejudice, for to remain under your Excellencies
displeasure in my employment, as I am informed from some in near relation to
your Excellency, I do; and that it has been the reason of your Honors
depriving me of a further trust, by putting another over me, to command your
Excellencies Regiment, which I had sought and conducted through the greatest
difficult with success, and free from imputation, or proving false to my trust
in the least. If it be true that your Honor bears prejudice to me for my
principles, then must I in faithfulness speak it, I would rather quit my
employment, then remain under your Lordships disaffection and jealousy in my
command: my Lord, I am very sensible of my discouragement, and entreat your
Excellency, to give me the manifestation of your affection, and acceptance for
the future; or to let me know if it may not be, that I may remove my self from
being a burden to your Honors proceedings. However I shall prove my self to be,

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Francis White.
Knausburgh, Septem: 23. 1648.
To the Right Honorable Lievt. Genesis Cromwell.
Honored Sir,
IT is not unknown to many, your great pains, and unwearied endeavors in the
public employment, from the first undertaking; you have appeared constant,
valiant, and successful in the greatest affairs of the late war. And having
through Gods blessing passed through many difficults, subduing all adversaties
that opposed our just proceedings It now lies upon you, and others of the like
interest, to see the establishment of those things which we have contended for
that there may be some requital for the expense of so much Treasure and Blood.
It has ever been the consideration of all wise undertakers of a war, First, to
consider the right of their cause Secondly, their abilities to manage the
same. And thirdly, that the benefits may countervail the ill convenience or
prejudice, that may be sustained in the procuring success.

What bondage oppression and injustice, we were made subject to, by the King
and his Ministers; is not unknown to your self: and when he could no longer
keep the people in subjection, under his oppressive government, but was in
danger of being cast out of his Throne he then called a Parliament, which he
endeavored to make subject to his will. For the better prosecution of his
principles, but failing of his expectations in Council, he endeavored to
bring his purposes to pass, by the force of the sword, and undertook the
managing a War against the Parliament, They seeing the evil he endeavored to
bring upon themselves and the Nation, took courage to appear faithful to
those who had entrusted them, and called in all that had bowels of mercy and
compassion to themselves or the Nation to come in to the help of a distressed
State, and to maintain their just rights and freedoms.

The Parliament did then claim, and since have claimed, a Right to determine
all controversies that may arise in the Nation and that of right they might
dispose of the Militia of the Kingdom as they should see cause; for in the
House of Commons vertually the power of the Kingdom is for to make Laws, or
repeal Laws, and to be the final judges. It is true, the King held a
confirming voice, and was entrusted with the Militia and the Regal power, for
the protecting and administering justice unto the people, but when the
Parliament saw a danger of the Kings converting that power to their and the
trusters destruction, they took upon them the disposal of the Militia, upon
which the King broke with them and made a war.

God having now given success to their cause, and invested them and their
assisters with full power, it now lies upon them, to make good all promises,
if possible, the lesser giving way to the greater, and as much as in them,
lies, endeavor to prevent future disputes and quarrels, for the welfare of
posterity; and to settle the government of the Nation: So that the Regal power
in what form soever, may be subject to the Legislative, and likewise to
untwist those lines of bondage, which will question our just proceedings, there
is no rational man that will imagine it unreasonable, that the Parliament
should proceed to the settling the Kingdoms peace and Freedom without the King,
seeing that after the conquering his Forces, and so many addresses, he will
accept of nothing but what shall be agreeable to his will; the which must be a
giving up the right of our cause, and advantage to the name and thing King, to
recover all power in short time, and to the winding of the Nation into worse
bondage and servitude then ever, to the will of the Prince, which will of
necessity be our portion, if there be not a clear vindicating of the Rights
and Freedom of the people, in the Legislative power; which was the maine thing
contended for; and it is evident, that the supreme power next under God, is
inherent in the multitude, and that there is no just authority, but what is
immediately derived from God himself by divine appointment, or mediately given
from the people by their Representative, who of right are not subject to any
particular person or persons; but may upon grounds of common safety, alter
Magistrates or Government, make new Laws, or repeal old: Abolish Courts, or
set up new, without the concurrence of King or Peers. However this be caled
new Doctrine or Levelling, it will appear that in this is laid the foundation
of the Freedom of a Nation, in stating their Representative free and equal,
invested with full power, the persons changeable successively, so that
whatsoever Laws or Burdens the people bring upon themselves, they will be of
their own choosing; whatsoever custom is held contrary herto is a fruit of
conquest kept by force, and may justly be by force repelled. This is no change
of principles, as is evident from the first contest. The peoples safety argued
the supreme Law, and the House of Commons judges of that safety and
interpreters of Law and they affirming the Kings oath binding him to confirm
what Laws they choose, the Commons telling the Lords they should endeavor to
save a people without them, if they would not concur.

But it may be objected, that the Engagement at the first undertaking of the
war, declared for King and Parliament, and that the Parliaments Declaration in
the year 1646, declares, for the maintaining of the constitution of this
Kingdom, by King, Lords, and Commons, and that the Protestation and Covenant of
this Kingdom and Scotland, ingageth them to maintain the Kings authority, and
that they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power
and greatness.

To this I answer, that men are bound by Conscience and Honor, to make good
all Engagements so far as justly they may, and if men be not found constant to
their principles, no man can wisely put confidence in them, nor trust them
farther then necessity inforceth. It will not be amiss to look over our former
Engagements, and moderately to consider what may be performed, and what not.
For indeed, they are so interwoven that it will be a difficult matter to make
good every particular. Therefore first consider the most general things of
greatest importance, and make good them with as much provision for particulars,
as general will permit. And in the first place, that Interest of the peoples
freedom must in Justice take place: For in all Declarations, Papers, and
Covenants, it has been the chief thing pretended, and there never passed any
promise of intrusting the King, but in order to the peace, freedom, and
security of the Kingdom; and I believe it was expected, that when the Kings
powers should be subdued, he would have accepted the Parliaments conditions,
which he refusing, is a just ground to alter their promises, and to proceed to
the settling the Kingdom in freedom, safety, and peace, without the King: the
which can never probably be done, without altering the former custom in making
Law. For whatsoever is acted upon the former constitution, will run to the King
for confirmation; so there will be no security, unless ye declare the
Parliaments Ordinances good Laws, and so conduce one Estate, and take away the
thing King, which name the ancient Romans could not endure for the space of
400. years; and it will be found no small let to the settlement of our peace.
For it must be time that must produce security from him and his posterity: the
Army must not be a protection for ever, neither will the people endure this
Parliaments perpetuity, for the continuance of either longer then necessity
inforceth, is inconsistent with the peoples freedom.

And now the Soldiery having contracted much of the business of the Kingdom
upon their Shoulders, you will be put upon the exercise of reason, you have
already shown your strength and valor in subduing the Forces that have opposed
us; and if you can now find ways to secure your self and our assisters, from
the Authorities we have resisted, you will appear much like a complete man in
Reason.

J beseech you Sir, look back to the first Engagement of the Parliament with
due consideration, and endeavor what you may, to procure the performance
thereof. At the first raising an Army, The Parliament declared it to be for the
desence of the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the Kings person,
the privilege of Parliament, the peoples just Rights and freedom; these
things are spacious, and were never stated and published what is meant hereby.
Some understand the Protestant Religion, to be the Book of Common prayer for
Worship the Episcopacie for Discipline, and the thirty nine Articles for
Doctrine: But it Religion be taken in such forms, then is it in a great
measure altered by the Synod, in part with the Parliaments approbation,
imposing the Directory for Worship, the Presbytery for Discipline, and the
Confession of Faith, which they have published, for Doctrine; and in stead of
Resorming, have introduced Schism. It cannot be denied but we were very
zealous for the promoting of Religion, and I hope still are; but I fear we did
not rightly understand what Religion is. Certainly, Religion in the most
general acceptance, is that profession of Worship, Discipline, and Doctrine
which a people hold forth to the world: in the former sense it is most
probable, that which we call Religion, was understood, and that which was then
intended by the general party of the Nation, was a Reformation of what might
appear corrupt, and to free the people from those burdens in Ceremonies
imposed, which many tender Consciences could not bear. But now that which we
call Religion, appears to me only a traditionall formal profession, and is
made use of only to gain parties and Factions, under the specious pretense of
Religion, thereby to gain power to rise in Dignities, for profit and honor
among men. This is the Religion of Rome as at this day, pure State policy, in
which is comprehended the depth of the mystery of iniquity. Such is the
Religion of the Turk, and many other Nations a mere empty form, in which
nothing of the power of God is; and what is this alteration of Church
Government, Worship, and Doctrine which some men so furiously pursue, but the
clothing of Antichrist with a new coat, changing out of one form of the
mystery of iniquity into another. But it you seriously consider, you may
understand, that Religion is not a name, but a thing; not a form, but a power,
not a notion, but a substance divine: Religion consists in faith, and works
of righteousness; Religion is properly that inward power in the soul of a
man, whereby be believes, and is bound to God in righteousness and holiness;
the demonstration thereof, manitest in acts of Justice and mercy, visiting the
fatherless and the widow, and keeping unspotted from the world; so much of
this power a man has, so much Religion, where there is none of this power,
there is no Religion; To as many as believe in Jesus Christ, to them gives he
power to become the Sons of God. Now Sir, if there be a defending of the
Protestant profession, let men take it in what form they understand. I believe
it will be the best and safest making good this Engagement Religion is not
propagated by any humane power: the Civil Magistrate may protect Christians in
religious exercises, but to compel an external Uniformity by a coersive
power, seeing there is no pretended infallibility will be preposterous, and
more Antichristian then is the Pope himself. Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, and
propagated only by the spirit in the administration of the word, without the
help of humane force. If the Civil Magistrate exercise impartial justice, and
tolerate religious exercise, it will be as much as Christians will desire.

As for the Laws of the land, which we are engaged to defend, I think there
are very few understand what they are in general: we defend the laws, if we
act according to the supreme ends thereof, which is to save the people, and
preserve propriety, and dispense impartial Justice; and let the law have its
course in Courts till there be a just alteration. But if any thing appear
contrary to these ends by the judgment of the lawmakers, it can be no breach
of this engagement, to alter the same.

The third particular, was for the defense of the Kings person and the voice
went for the King and Parliament. But it seemed a strange partadox to many, how
we should fight for the King, fighting against his personal commands,
accompanied with his person, the best construction J could make thereof, was
the rescuing him from his evil council, that led him to the ruining himself
and the Nation, and we ever made him merely passive, seduced by evil Council,
but it appears that his Followers rather acted his council, then he theirs,
but seeing he is still in safety, it can be no breach of this engagement, if
his person be kept from destruction.

The next particular is the privileges of Parliament, and it were very good
the people knew what they are, unlimited privilidges may prove as destructive
as unbounded prerogative; it is reason they should be cleared and declared that
future Parliaments may be prescribed, likewise for their sitting and ending,
that they may not wrong posterities: and when they are rightly stated according
to reason, no question, but we shall make good this engagement so far as may
stand with the peoples freedom.

The fist thing, called the liberty of the subject, which is the only thing
that can stand in competition, which the Prince must of necessity be secured
from oppressing tyrants, which can no better ways be done then by giving all
authority from their representative, to whom all ought to be accountable, they
being changable by an unalterable decree, having this once settled, we may
safely involve all in this common bottom of Parliaments; unless this be
procured, we have done nothing for posterity; and I dare affirm, we had
better have continued under arbitrary tytrany, then have contracted this
misery and oppression that the people have suffered, and still lies upon them.

Now Sir, that which hinders our peace, is pride and coveteousnesse; which are
the roots of all grand evils and mischiefs, the great men contend which shall
be greatest, profit and honor blind the eyes of the wise, the people are
divided upon these two heads, the King, and the Covenant, to which parties are
contracted, and the way to compose is not compulsion, but by conviction, it is
mercy and lenity conquers more upon iugenious spirits, then austerity and
force: it would not be amiss to procure what shall be done, for or with the
King, for it is against the Parliaments declared principles to keep men in
prison, any longer then necessity enforces, until they may have a Judicial
try all, and seeing we have been under such bondage, that the constitution
has provided no Judicature to judge the King, and indeed he is not legally
subject to the penal laws. it will be most safe therefore to referr him to
divine justice which will judge righteously, and to settle the government of
the Kingdom for quietness sake, with as much favor to the Prince, as the
public safety will permit. But as he sticks to his former principles and
parties, there can be no trusting him with power, without giving up your cause,
and subjecting your selves to the mercy of his will: he may be restored to the
enjoyment of a sufficient revenue, beyond any particular person, with his wife
and children to a condition of freedom, safety, and peace, the public safety
being first provided for, and may be entrusted with power if afterward
invested therewith from a future representative, in whom the fountain of
authority among men, justly is, and then can there be no deny all of being
accountable thereto: Thus may the people be secured from tytrany.

The Covenant which has been insisted upon for pollitique ends, and still is
much pressed by the Scots, J believe, may be stuck to till the promoters
dissert it without any forced construction, for thein sweareing an utter
extirpation of popery, prelacy, with all dependence on that hirarchy. It will
necessarily follow, that all coersive power enforcing an external uniformitie,
must be taken away, for this is the foundation of popery, this is that spirit
that sits in the Temple of God, showing it selle to be God, and exalting it
self above all that is called God, by making laws to bind the conscience in
matters of faith.

And by the extirpation of the prelacy with all dependence on that Hierarchy,
will the ordination of the Ministry received from them become null: For their
dependence is on that Hierachy from whence they had their institution, to the
office of the ministry The Prelates dare not press this argument, because of
giving advantage to their adversaries of Rome, from whence they had their own
sending these two arguments from the best interpretation of the Covenant will
easily beat them often from that hold, we may justly defend the government of the
Kirk of Scotland, against any that shall enforce any thing upon them contrary
thereto, either in doctrine, discipline or worship: we may likewise endeavor to
bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms, to as near a conformity to
the word and the example of the best Reformed Churches as is possible, still
provided there be no humane force or power, exercised to this purpose, the
weapons of the christian warfare are spiritual, not carnal, but mighty in
operation to the destroying of spiritual wickedness in high places, to the
bringing of the thoughts and imaginations of men's hearts into subjection,
according to the mind and will of God. If conscientious people were but united
upon this principle, it would take off all cifferences in relation to
spiritual things.

Having taken this boldness to write to you of matters of such general
concernment in relation to the public. Give me leave to offer my thoughts in
relation to the late transaction of affairs between the Army and the
Parliament, which are but stifled for the present, and will questionless break
forth to the clear justification of the Army, and those members of Parliament
that came to them or otherwise make them culpable, and justify those Members
that sat with Mr. Pellam. The Breach between them and us, was managed by the
major part of the House, whose commands we disobeyed upon just grounds, but
came not to a resistance till our way was made more clear, by that outrage in
the City Tumult, which made the Speakers and our friends fly to us for succor.
After which there remained near six score in and about London and Westminster,
and not above seventy came to the Army: Now without question, the interest of
the Houses Authority remained with those at London. For by the custom of the
Kingdom, the House is included by forty men, which keep their fitting
according to its precedent adjournment, and they remaining, being the highest
visible authority in the Kingdom. The question will be, by what authority we
marched up to London in defiance to their commands, to the repelling of those
Hostile powers contracted by their Authority, and how the Army shall be
justified or vindicated in such proceedings.

That which gives me quiet and peace of Conscience, is from these
considerations.

First, That when a Company or Society of men, who are invested with power
from God and nature to preserve themselves, and the Authorities over them
command things unjust, which will prove their ruin if obeyed. It is clear to
me, necessity has no Law, they may appeal to Heaven and Earth to bear
witness to their cause, and betake themselves to the prime Laws of nature, to
preserve and defend themselves, and may suppress the Authority, if they
persist in prosecution of things destructive to the Communicie. I know no other
way of breaking tyrannical Usurpations.

Now it is most clear, that the Parliament put the Army upon conditions which
would have proved their ruin, if they had yielded to their will. For if they
had renounced their just Petition, and swallowed that abominable Declaration,
and disbanded, they had been cast upon their enemies mercy for their
Indemnity, and to have trusted those that had acted by secret Councels with
the King, for settling the Rights and Freedom of the Nation which we had
contended for.

Secondly, The consideration of the unequal Elections and Constitution of the
House of Commons not representing the mayor part of the Nation, but Elections
distributed according to the will of the King and his predecessors, so that
those who did not consent, were only bound by a power of force, and the mayor
part not consenting, are not obliged when there being come in competition.

Thirdly, The Houses departing from their first integrity of communicating
impartial Justice, and by virtue of that act of continuance during pleasure,
grew into parties and Factions, and neglected to settle the government of the
Kingdom, in order to the period of their sitting, but rather its probably
endeavored to be perpetual Dictators, so as to deprive the Nation of that
changeable Law making authorities which are the conservators of their
Liberties, to mantain all arbitrary in themselves; this may justly be charged
upon the prevalent party, that were our opposers, who secretly carried on a
combination to comply with the Kings interest to a more universal inslaving
the people then formerly.

Having considered all proceedings of the most material concernment, it will
necessarily come to this issue, that we have disobeyed, resisted, and repelled
all the Authority and Government of the Kingdom, both King, Parliament, and
all bounds of Law; and the authorities and government being broken, it is
wholly dissolved, and involved into its original Fountain next under God the
people. And the highest authority that is now visible is the force of the
Sword. For there is no reasonable man, but will conclude the Parliament to be
under a force, mixed of two parties, that have been in opposition, one while
one party is the Parliament, another while the other, even to which the
strongest power is contracted, so the stream runs, for at the time we lay at
Brainford, your self, and Son in Law Ireton affirmed in my hearing, that those
which remained at Westminster with Mr. Pellam, were no Parliament, but some
Gentlemen claiming a Parliamentary Authority. And in our Remonstrance from
Kingston, we declared to the world they were Usurpers and Intruders, and that
we would not suffer those who had voted to make a new war upon us, to sit
there as ours and the Kingdoms Judges; yet since they have been acknowledged to
be a Parliament, and sit here in Court to this day, and for what I know, are
the chief fomenters of our distractions, and the Protracters of the redresses
of the common grievances of the Nation. Now Sir, so long as that Remonstrance
from Kingstone stands owned, J do not conceive the Army concluded under the
authority of the House, but only setting the House as a skreene between them
and the fiery fury of the people in the midst of the common grievances and
distractions, and do yield obedience to the Parliament in what they command
agreeable to your own judgment. And on the other hand, the Parliament and
Synod, with all the Presbyterian party, with the Scots Council, are
endeavoring to get a power to bring you under the Lash, and you can look for
no other, but that if they get you and the Army down, they will pay you and
your accomplices for their disobedience. Therefore take care to use your reason
and your power to secure your selves, not only from the King and his Laws
which he still fights by, but likewise from the Parliament Pellamites, and
their Ordinances, which you and the Army have slighted.

Now Sir, I profess for my own part, J am not over careful J shall only use
means to the discharge of my duty according to my judgment and reason, and
whether I be any thing or nothing, it matters not; yet it behooves me to take
care for the security and welfare of those poor Soldiers under my command,
which I have endeavored to engage in this common cause, which I vindicate, and
shall by Gods assistance seal with my blood, by suffering if called thereunto.
I value my reputation as a man to stand in competition with my livelihood, but
I value my principles more then life natural, and before I would violate my
conscience in matter of concernment upon mature consideration, I would suffer
all the torment that men and Devils can invent.

Now Sir, to secure your self and friends, which is the chief work that lies
before you, I must needs say, I see no other way but by entering upon some way
equivolent to that presented in the paper, entitled The Agreement of the
people. There is a necessity of setting a period to this Parliament, and
changeing the current of the Law out of the Kings name, into the Commons,
without which I can see no sure security, but by making up your Interest under
the King, and receiving Indemnity and pardon from him: which last I do
detest, and shall ever labor to prevent. If any man can hold forth any other
way wherein there is a probability to obtain security, freedom, and peace, I Will
acknowledge my own weakness, and give God thanks for raising up an Instrument
for my conviction. I know the prosecution of the former is very dangerous and
desperate, the King, Scots, and foreign States will be our Enemies, yet if you
fall back you must expect ruin; and if you go forward, you can be no worse in
the greatest hazzards: and it is better perishing in right ways then in wrong.

Having thus freely discovered my principles, and offered my desires to your
view, I must confess my inabilities of adding to your knowledge in things of
this nature, but looking upon you as a person of power and interest I thought
good to discharge my mind, and to let you know, I shall not be forward to
exercise force for the procuring things of this nature, but only plead at
oportunities in ways of reason, and shall stand by thofe that stand for the
public interest of the Nation, and shall upon a clear way and call engage my
life as formerly, against such as shall endeavor to destroy honest, peaceable
men, by ways of force and violence. And if you as formerly, shall still own
the Jnterest of honest people, and forbear the exercise of rigor upon those
that are friends to your self, and the Common wealth, then shall I be ready to
hazard my life for your preservation, when you shall be cast upon the greatest
extremity in the midst of your many enemies, for you may assure your self all
storms are not over, and that late insurrection in London is but a fruit of
that council which will endeavor to raise more such there and in other places,
who care not if they break all reins, and make way for that abomination that
makes desolate, rather then let go their pride and ambition: you must expect
the further exercise of your faith and patience in the times of trial that are
coming upon this Nation. But the Lord instruct, keep and preserve you in the
ways of righteousness, shall be the prayers of him who desires to serve you,
while you serve the public.

Francis White.
Colebrook April the 21. 1648.
FINIS.

