Christ with Nicodemus CHRISTUS LOGNITUR CUM NICODEMO. Jo: 3.

Nicodemus rightly Informed. John. 3.

P. Boucho oxcudit



THE ACADEMY OF True Wisdom: OR, THE SCHOOL OF VIRTUE.

WHEREIN, One is your Master even CHRIST, Matthew. 23.10.

A WORK lately Compiled, and brought to its Ultimate Perfection,

By J. W.

Come ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord,
Psalm. 33.22. ROTTERDAM, Printed for the Author, 1694.

To the most Virtuous, and Right Honorable Lord Henry Arundel, Baron of
Warder, and Count of the Empire, etc.
My Lord,
IF any of the Critics of this Age should censure my Access to your Lordships
acquaintance now, being an absolute Stranger to you before; I hope he will be
thoroughly satisfied when I shall tell him, the Perfumes of your Virtuous and
Pious Life, were so sweet, the Commendations given me of your most Illustrious
and Ancient Family, so great, and extraordinary Charming, that I soon was moved
to purchase so great and blessed a Treasure; for a Man must not, nor can he (if
he would) be a Stranger to Virtue wherever it is lodged; being it is that
perfect good which makes the complement of a happy life, and it also has an
attractive power to draw all mortals, even the most wicked among 'em to its
admiration and praise.

It Is allowed by all who pretend to a perfect knowledge of your Lordships
Pedigree, that Fortitude (which we call the contempt of all hazards agreeing
with reason) was the raising of your first Progenitour, and a worthy
Prerogative ever since entailed on all his Posterity. Tradition which alone
gives life to the best of Historys, and which alone can revive in our thoughts
the memory and bravery too, of passed Transactions; will tell you that He was
one of the greatest Hero's of his Age, a daring man, who feared nothing more
than the weakness of being affected with Popular Glory; yet did the World extol
very much the greatness of his Courage, the Wisdom of his Conduct, and the
famous Renown of all his glorious actions in Hungary; where He was employed by
his Imperial Majesty against the Turks, against whom he often fought, and so
often worsted, that their insulting Courage failed them in so great a measure,
Egesyppus Polouus in his Remarks of Hunga^y.
as his very name became as dreadful to them, as that of Talbot was formidable
to the French; nay it was with them an effectual means to quiet their unruly
Children, to threaten them with the great Arundels coming.

His Valor purchased him so great an Estimate with his General, that he was
the only person of all his Field Officers, he reli'd upon to manage the most
perilous enterprises of War, and such Adventures as were sufficient to terrify
the most expert in Martial Discipline. He was no less in His Imperial Majesty's
favor, Who had on several Occasions made experiment of his wise Conduct, firm
Resolution, and great Courage; Epran on the South side of the Danube was taken
by Sir Thomas Arundel of Warder in the year 1595. for which brave Action the
Emperor Rodolphus created him a Count of the Empire.
and therefore having resolved in Counsel to lay Siege to a strong City which
the Turks had possessed for several years before, He appointed him chief
Commander of a considerable Army with Orders to reduce it to his Obedience,
which he most willingly accepted; for he was more ambitious of being reputed
Loyal to his Master, than made happy with all the Riches and Treasures of the
World; whereupon he took leave of His Majesty, and immediately marched toward
the place; where he was no sooner arrived, after having drawn his Lines, and
provided all other necessary things for the security and welfare of his Camp,
but he raised his Batterys, planted his Cannons, and in a short time made a
considerable breach in the Walls; and then resolving upon a general Assault, he
called a Council of War, and spoke to them in this manner. Gentlemen, the War
we have in hand is glorious because it is for our Religion, We fight against a
People that are Gods enemies as well as ours; and the work we are upon is both
honorable and meritorious, for we are certain that He is altogether as
powerful to defend us from the annoiance of our enemies, Aeternum gloriae
pondus operatur in nobis. 2 Cor. 4.17.
and bring us off safe without the least harm, as He is bountiful to reward our
Souls with an eternal weight of Glory, if we dye in so good a Quarrel; moreover
our Blood spilt upon so Christian account, will undoubtedly move the Heavens to
shower down the sweet influences of their continual Blessings upon all our
respective Families.

This short and efficacious Speech inflamed the hearts of all his Officers and
Soldiers so extremely, that they all Vowed unanimously to follow him; though
they should lose their lives in the action; which he immediately began, and
marching in the Front of them, gave the first onset like a Thundering Jove in
his greatest Storm; Ovid Meta.
or like an angry Hector in his sharp Conflicts and Bloody Slaughters of the
Grecian Legions before the Walls of Troy; Ovid Epist:
or like a furious Hercules in the Lybian Forest beating down the lofty Cedars
and the aspiring Oaks that came in his way, so did he beat down to the very
ground as many proud Turks and unbelieving Heathens as came within the reach of
his dreadful strokes. He was the very first Person that entered the Breach,
Sealed the Walls, and with his own hands pulled down the Half Moon, and planted
the Spread Eagle in its place.

This no less brave than bold Attempt deprived the Enemy of Courage, made 'em
quit their Posts confusedly, and brought so great a Consternation upon the
Citizens that they all laid down their Arms, Parcere subjectis, and debellare
superbos, are two worthy propertys of a Christian Conqueror.
and begged for mercy, which he was as forward to grant, as they were desirous
to obtain it; to let them know, that as he had the Courage to subdue them, he
had also the Piety to spare their lives. O what unspeakable Joy did the News of
the taking of this strong City create in the Emperors Court, and indeed over
all Europe, but especially in all true English hearts? What an extraordinary
satisfaction was it to them to hear and see their Noble Countryman so highly
extolled by all the World for so great and so renowned a Victory? His Imperial
Majesty was no less joyful at the good success of his English Champion, neither
was he remiss to gratify him for so famous an Action, for at his return to
Court he created him with all the Solemnity imaginable Count of the Empire, and
entailed the same Honor upon the Heirs of his Family for ever, with many other
Privileges and special Favors, which are inseparable from that Illustrious
Title.

The eternal Wisdom of God declares openly that such will be the Fruit as was
the Tree, A Fructibus eorum cognoscatis eos Math. 7.16
and the goodness of the one may be easily discerned by the other. My Lord, I
have given you a true and faithful description of your most renowned
Progenitor's great Achievements, Martial Exploits, Loyalty, Valor and
Courage; by which we may reasonably conclude, that the whole Series of his
noble and numerous Race were much of the same temper when occasion was offered;
witness your raising a Regiment of Horse upon your own Cost and Charges for the
defense and supporting King Charles the First, and his Royal Prerogatives
against the basest of Usurpers, Oliver Cromwell.
the most cruel of Tyrants, and the very worst of Subjects; The several and
perilous hazards you have exposed your self to in manifesting your Loyalty, as
well in Battles and Skirmishes, as in Storming and taking of Towns and Castles
with as much Bravery as could be performed by the most expert in the Stratagems
of War, will be a convincing Argument to after-Ages of the greatness of your
Courage, and also a perpetual Evidence of your unspotted Loyalty, which was
always reputed to be the chief ground of your happy Rise, the main support of
your Noble Family, and will be in the other World a most glorious Flower to
complete the Beauty of your Eternal Crown.

But as Brave Men must expect to be tofs'd when they Steer their course against
the Stream of Fortune, and work against Wind and Weather; Almighty God who
disposes of all things to the best advantage of his beloved Servants has
suffered your noble Family to be notably suppressed for a time, and to groan
under the heavy weight of great Persecutions and Troubles which were, in a
manner, equal in number to the afflictions of Holy Job, Job 1.
for your Children were taken violently from you, and made close Prisoners,
your Virtuous Lady was confined another way, your Plentiful Stock of Cows,
Horses and Sheep driven away by the Rabble, your Mansion house taken and
plundered by the Enemy; your whole Estate exposed to Sale before your Face, and
your self after all was forced to Travel into Foreign Countries for a
subsistence, yet in all these disasters you were never heard to repine at your
ill Fortune, In omnibus his non peccavit Job labiis suis neque stult m quid
locutus est contra Deum. Job 1.21.22. Pliny of the Property of the Swallows.
for you accounted all your worldly Substance to be only adventitious, and the
temporal Blessings which you had from God, A Deo data, and therefore you were
as willing to part with them as he was free to recall them, in order to exercise
your Patience. How well the generous dispositions of your noble mind agree with
the inbred inclinations of those innocent Creatures of your Coat of Arms,
appears in this, that you have performed by the light of Grace what they do
only by the instinct of nature, for when any of their little ones happen to be
afflicted with Blindness, they fly with all speed into a certain Island of the
Sea, whence they bring a little Stone which they know has the virtue of
restoring their fight, and you my Lord, in all your afflictions, have made your
most humble and earnest addresses to Jesus, Esaias 28.16.
who is the tried and precious Corner Stone lodged in Zion for a foundation,
and who alone has the power to make all our afflictions (though never so bitter)
sweet and comfortable. The Swallows have another property no less remarkable,
they seem to touch the Earth with their Wings, yet the least grain of its Dust
cannot stick to their Feathers, because they are no sooner down, than up in the
Skies out of all Men's sight, and this your Lordship has always performed, for
though your Fortune be considerable, and that you have a competent share of the
World's wealth, yet nothing of its fleeting dross comes near your heart,
already possessed with the love of God who will not admit of a Rival, neither
are you resolved to entertain any, and though your Body has endured a close and
tedious Confinement for Justice, your Thoughts have been all the time sporting
themselves within the enclosure of a vast Eternity, or taking a fore-taste of
the everlasting Joys and Pleasures of Heaven. It Is true, the manifold
Calamities of those sad times were so sharp and terrible that many Catholic
Families fell from their Religion, and went to Church rather than be deprived
of their Estates and Livings, but yours my Lord, was tied fast to the Anchor of
Faith, and stood firm on Peter's Rock, unmoved with any external violence, or
otherwise, so little moved, that all the Commotions and Troubles, the Malice
and Rage of their miscreant Foes could invent in order to remove their hearts
from God, were no more to them than is a shower of Hail on the Roof of a House,
that crackles and skips off again, without doing any damage to the Inhabitants.

It Is nothing my Lord, for a Man to hold up his head in a Calm, but to maintain
his Post when others have quitted their ground, and there to stand upright
where others are beaten down, this is Divine and praise worthy, and this is
what you have vigorously performed in your days; induced to it as well by the
good instructions as the rare examples of your Noble Parents and Ancestors; for
the one with the other is very powerful to stir us up to Heroic actions; nay
the History alone of such large and masculine Souls is able to inspire any Man
with generous Thoughts, and make him long to be in Action, and doing something
that may be beneficial to the World, as protecting the innocent, upholding the
weak, delivering the oppressed, relieving the poor, clothing the naked,
cherishing the distressed Widows and Orphans; Job. 1.16.17.18. Tob. 1 20.
this was the only thing that the holy Job and the righteous Tobias did value
themselves upon; It was likewise the pious and constant practice of your
renowned Ancestors, and the same is now settled in your Lordships Breast where
it shines to all men's admiration, and no wonder, for your Table was never seen
without Strangers no more than your Door without a number of Poor, whose
several Necessitys were copiously supplied in due time and good order; you have
besides preserved Thousands of His Majesty's Subjects from Starving, and
Hundreds of the Irish Nation are obliged to your Lordship for their lives; this
is Praiseworthy indeed, and the rather that they are a people which their
Loyalty and their Zeal of Religion have depressed to the deepest abyss of
misfortune, for besides loosing all their earthly substance upon so honorable
an account, they are hated, reviled, and spit at, even by those, that should in
all equity and Justice love, respect and cherish them, and bring others to do
the same by their own Examples!

But as Abraham's liberality to Lot, Genesis 22.16.
with the greatness of his Faith, gained him the powerful Protection of Heaven,
and the promise of a numerous Issue, I hope the same favors will attend your
Lordship, and be the reward as well of your Charitable Inclinations for the
Poor in general, as of the rare examples of Piety and Devotion you give your
Children, and which they are faithful to follow as well at home as abroad;
Moribus and vita nobilitatur homo.
and the rather, that they know them to be the essential Ornaments of true
Nobility, and that without them, a Gentleman born is no more, than he who is a
Clown by his Extraction.

They know full well my Lord, that whoever converses with the proud shall be
puffed up, that a lustful acquaintance makes a Man lascivious, and the way to
secure a man from wickedness is to withdraw from the examples of it, it is too
much to have them near us, but more to have them in us. They know likewise that
ill examples, pleasure, and ease, are without doubt, great corrupters of
manners; and as an ill Air may endanger a good Constitution, so may a place of
ill examples endanger a good Man. There be some even of the highest rank who
ought to influence their Inferiors with Piety and Devotion, that take a
Privilege to be licentious, so that the meaner sort are hurried on by their
ill examples to all manner of dissolution. And this perfect knowledge of the
present Corruption of this unhappy Land, prevents them from hankering after
such places or persons; and makes them take more pleasure in their Clossets
than they can expect to find in their debauched Company.

It Is this virtuous and godly disposition of your noble heart and Family which
moved me to bring this pious work newly modeled, under the shadow of your
gracious Protection. The very Title of the Book is able to make your Lordship
affect the perusing of it, and I am certain the substance thereof will give a
further increase to your Devotion, and also contribute much to the reducing
strai'd Souls to the right understanding of their Duty to God, which will
redound to your greater Glory, being it is by your means it appears to the
World out of the obscurity of my Confinement, who am

Your Lordships most humble and most Obedient Servant Jo. Weldon. C.J.

THE Preface.
WHen God the grand Architect of the Universe had completed the vast Fabric
of this visible World and brought out of nothing the Heavens, the Earth, the
Seas, and all that is contained within their Prccincts, to exhibit as yet a
more remarkable instance, and a more glorious evidence of his Eternal Wisdom,
he did fully resolve to start out of the Bowels of the Earth with a Faciamus,
that Microcosm Man, and give him an ascendent power to keep all other Creatures
in Subjection: He was molded indeed (as to his Body) not very unlike to
Terrene and Bruit Animals; but as to his Soul, if not equal with the Heavens
and heavenly Spirits, at least be was not much inferior to them; for its
certain that in the whole Universe thore's nothing worthy any difference (if
compared with the Soul.) Gold, Silver, Jewels, Pearls, Fire, Moon, Stars, and
the very Sun it self, which with its resplendent Beams brings a solemn joy over
the whole surface of the Earth, are of no Estimate in her regard; because that
with a Word only God gave them all both their rise and their office, which was
to serve Man, and give him all their attendance. The wonderful Structure of
humane Body is a sufficient demonstration of his Excellency, for, where as God
had created all other things with a sole Dixit, as David says, he must come
himself in person to the Creation of this little great Masterpiece; Genesis 1 26.
first he prepares the necessary matter for this Construction, then he Breaths
into it the Spirit of Life, and after he shapes him to the likeness of the
primitive and principal Beauty: But to what end? It was, says Scripture, with
an effectual resolution to devolve upon him an absolute Supremacy over all the
Fishes of the Sea, Ibid. 28.
the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Earth; so that Man even before he
was wafted over from Nothing to a Being, was openly declared Lord of the whole
Universe, and was after introduced thereinto, at to his Royal Palace, already
furnished with all Necessarys and Varieties both for his subsistence and
pleasure. But you must conceive that all this Honor was exhibited to him only
upon the account of his participated resemblance of the Divine Trinity, by
which alone he does infinitely exceed all terrene Creatures; so that every
mortal Man may be deservedly termed a petty Divinity (especially when the Grace
of God resides in his Soul. Psalm 81.6.
) For you must know that he does not bear this resemblance of God in his Body,
but within his Soul, because that God is a pure Spirit without any terrene
medley, and consequently cannot be perfectly represented by any Corporeal Image.

Its then within the facultys of his Soul that Man bears that resemblance which
gives him an ascendent power over all other earthly Creatures, viz. in his
Memory, Understanding, and Will, where God is still President, and constantly
present as in his Image and Throne; so steady, that he is more intimate to the
Soul, than she is to her own Substance: For the Eternal Father does replenish
her Memory with his Omnipotency, the Son does illustrate her Understanding with
his Wisdom, and the Holy Ghost does inflame her Will with his Charity; and even
as God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost are not Three, but One
God in Three distinct Persons; so the Memory is the Soul, the Understanding is
the Soul, the Will is the Soul; yet not three Souls, but one in each Body,
bearing those three distinct Dignitys, wherein the Image and likeness of God
does shine to admiration.

It Is true, our Sins may deface this Image within our Souls, however they cannot
utterly blast it; for it is an inherent property in the Wicked as well as in
the Just; but with this distinction, that the Righteous are a lively Image of
God, whereas the Wicked are indeed a sort of an Image of God, but a very
obscure one: however the Divine Bounty is so much enamored with the Soul he
devoted to himself with the impression of his Image to be his dearly beloved
Spouse, that he cannot be removed thence, though the Devil should worm out her
consent to debase his Image with all the enormity Imaginable.

Moreover the Soul leans over, and tends toward God her Spouse, with so great
a weight of natural inclination, that nothing in this World is able to
replenish her capacity, or satisfy her mind but he alone, who of his own Nature
is Infinite good, incircumscript, and Immense. The Dignity and Excellency of
the Soul must therefore be truly great, that all th'alluring objects, and
attracting pleasures of this World cannot content her, though they may barter
her affections for a tract of time, and may perhaps now and then provoke her to
their earnest and hot pursuit, yet they will never make her happy; for when she
thinks to possess them, they fly away, and leave her nothing but an everlasting
displeasure to have settled her affections upon 'em, she is of so unsatiable a
capacity that all the munificence of the Universe is not able to content her;
none but her Heavenly Spouse can afford her true Consolation, perfect
Tranquillity and Joy without any medley of displeasure. Whatever Species she
receives within her besides that of her Creator, whatever object she embraces
besides her God, is Seditious, Killing, Vain, and savours more of perfect Gall,
than of the sweet Honey of real Comfort.

As for the Body, who is able to express the wonderful Fabric thereof; let us
consider how the wise and Heavenly Architect has united those two Natures (the
Body and Soul) so contrary one to the other in all respects, and has linked them
together with so sure a knot of true friendship, that they cannot be separated
without a deal of Violence and Grief. Let us also consider how man (as if he
were naturally avers'd to the Earth) looks with his face Heaven-wards, whence
he received his Creation and Dignity, and where he does expect his final
repose. This favor he received from God above all other Creatures as a
peculiar evidence of his good Will for him, it is also a memorial to him of his
incumbent duty to God, that by his upright look he might conceive the weighty
Obligation he lies under to think always of heavenly things, to tread under
foot all earthly affairs, and never to harbor any vile or sordid thoughts in
his mind.

This was the happy State and Condition of Man before his dismal Fall; for then
all his Senses, his Inclinations and Powers were perfectly united, far from the
least motion of any Rebellion, and entirely submitted to The Empire of the Will.
Then Reason paid her humble Submission, perfect Obedience, and a complete
Homage to her Creator alone; and that perfect submission of Man, together with
his faithful concurrence to the Will of God, brought upon him the great
Blessings of a profound Tranquillity, of a grateful Accord, of a firm Peace, of
perfect Justice, of candid Innocence, of unspeakable Purity of heart; so that
he was a plentiful Source of all good Qualities, of all Virtues, and of all
kind of Happiness. But alas! no sooner did he expel from his heart the Love
and Fear of God, to give ear, and obedience to the malicious dictates of the
Infernal Serpent, no sooner did he forsake his Heavenly Spouse, to prostrate
himself to his Rival and mortal Enemy the Devil, no sooner was he so impiously
bold as to cancel the Divine Precept at the fatal request of his silly Wife,
but he was miserably degraded of all those glorious Prerogatives, and suddenly
dejected from that happy State into an Abyss of such Evil and Woe, that you
would hardly believe him to be the same Man. His little Republic, which was
before his Rebellion in a profound Peace, fell into so great a disorder, that
no two were of one mind. the Will was contrary to the Understanding, and Reason
was opposite to both; the Spirit repined at the Flesh, the Flesh rebelled
against the Spirit, and gave him no Respect or Obedience, because he did the
same to his Creator. Why should I aggravate his misfortune more than really it
was? I will only say what is most deplorable, and likewise most true; all
things happened to poor Man after his Rebellion quite contrary to his
expectation, which was to be happy for ever. His Memory, which was (whilst he
remained in the state of Innocence, and whilst he tugged at the Oar of
Obedience) replenished with all good, and even with the Summum Bonum, had taken
so great a draught of Oblivion (not out of the River Letheos) but from the
Forbidden Apple, that he hardly knew or retained any thing but Wickedness and
Vanity: The Understanding, which was a little before wonderfully Illuminated
with the Knowledge of God, became so desperately involved in the darkness of a
profound Ignorance, that he knew nothing in a manner of his Creators Projects,
and was altogether ignorant of his ways. The Will which was all in a Flame of
Divine Love, became so perverse, that like a Blind Mole, she embraced Falsehood
for Truth, Temporal for Eternal, Evil for Good, Carnal for Spiritual, and
undervaluing those things which might make her happy for ever, she retained
nothing of her Innate and Primitive Goodness; nay she followed such disordinate
courses as were enough to carry poor man headlong to everlasting Perdition.

Reason, which as a Monarch, should keep those petty Princes of Man's
disjointed Republic in subjection, having abdicated his Scepter, together with
all his Royalties became Tributary, and paid Homage even to his Vassals, nay,
he suffered himself to be ruled, and seduced by those who were created to pay
him their constant and most humble submission and obedience.

O sad Misfortune! What, Man that noble Creature who had from God (as due by
his Creation) an absolute Supremacy over all terene Creatures, to be so
deluded, and worm'd out of all his Prerogatives by the Devils craft, that he
had not the full command of himself? He was, heretofore upright both of body
and mind; and was looked upon as a divine Creature; But alas, he was soon after
reduced to that low condition, as he might be very well compared (if not to a
Brute) at least to a prodigal Child, who had revell'd away all his Birthright.
However, God of his infinite mercy was pleased to receive him again into
favor; and after he had washed off his sinful spots with the sacred Blood of
the New Testament, he Espoused him to Christ by Faith. This was an
extraordinary Grace, and the wonderful product of a most merciful God: It was
able to force Man's concurrence (though he were never so ungrateful) to love
and serve him for ever. Never-the-less, this miserable Wretch, has been an
Enemy to God even from his blooming years, and publicly forsook Jesus his
gracious Redeemer; nay, he has impudently committed so many Adulteries with his
Rival, and mortal Adversary the Devil, as were able to divert him from having
any futher compassion of his misery.

What then must be done with Man? must he always persevere in so foul and
horrid a Relapse? Nunquid qui cadit non adjiciet aliquando ut resurgat Aug.
Must not he that falls strive to rise again? If the Devil had the power and
malice to debase him to that extreme misfortune; has not Jesus a far greater
power to cancel his Contract with that mortal Enemy of mankind, and bring him
again into his Flock, Romans c. 5. v. 15, 16, 17, etc.
as a straid Sheep? For St. Paul says, that Sin is not so powerful to destroy,
as the gift of Grace is to repair: If the sin of one Man has been the fatal
occasion of the loss of many Souls, the Grace of God through the Merits of one
man Jesus Christ can procure the salvation of a far greater number: Man fell by
his own fault, but cannot rise again by his own strength; he wants one to help
him out of the dunghill of Sin; he requires a God and man Redeemer to restore
him with the effusion of his most precious Blood to Righteousness, and this was
mercifully performed to him.

What remains to complete the grand work of his Salvation, is, that the same
Redeemer may be graciously pleased to touch his heart with a true feeling of
his sincere conversion; Jo. 1.5.
for he says himself that without him we can do nothing; and that if a man
abide not in him, he is cast forth as a branch that is withered, and fit for no
other use than to be cast into the fire, and burnt: But he says in the same
place, that if we abide in him, and his words in us, we may ask what we will,
and it shall be granted to us. Where upon the Sacred Council of Trent, Con.
Trid Soss. 6. Can. 3.
and that of Nice thunders forth an Excommunication against all those who will
believe, or teach that we can operate our Salvation, or be truly penitent
without the precedent motion of Divine Grace. And St. Augustine says, that
there is nothing more necessary for a man to live, and die happily, than to be
upon good terms with God, who alone is able to create in our hearts the motions
of a true Conversion. He alone can breed in us a hearty detestation of our
sins, and a firm resolution to love him above all Creatures.

Most gracious Savior, thou art pleased to call thy self in several places of
thy holy Writ, our Father, our Brother, our Shepherd, our Spouse, and have
graciously conversed with Sinners on Earth in order to their conversion; thou
did discourse a Samaritane, and a Harlot too, Matthew. 23 10.
upon the very same Subject; thou did overthrow a Saul to raise him up a
Paul; and which is more, 1 Cor. 4.1.
thou did make him a Vessel of Election. Thou have forbid us to have, or call
any one our Master on Earth; for that thou alone art our Master; and therefore
I presume to call thee our Divine Master, and to honor this Book with that
specious Title of Academy, or School of Virtue, because what it contains, is
either thy Doctrine, or grounded at least upon the solid foundation of thy
Eternal Vereties. The most that I can glory of in this Work, is to be thy
unworthy Minister, and Steward to make known thy sacred Will, and thy divine
Mysterys to thy People, which I have performed to the utmost of my Endeavors;
for here the Christian Reader shall find such deep Considerations, and powerful
Meditations as will divert him from hankering after even the smallest Vices:
They will tear all his ill habits up by the roots, that they may never shoot
again, and will extricate his poor heart out of all the straights that commonly
ensue a criminal and guilty Conscience. They will teize a man (though never so
cold in Devotion) to grasp at all manner of Mortifications to satisfy for his
sins, and appease the just Indignation of the Divine Justice. They will deliver
us from all blindness, and preposterous Errors, enriching our darkness with
light, and restoring all troubled souls to a profound peace. They will hinder
us from descanting upon other Men's lives and manners. They will make remote
Foreigners, near Neighbors, and cement them in Christian Charity. They will
bring us to pry into what ill abounds in our own hearts, and find there work
enough to employ our pragmatical Spleen upon, without hunting after the sins
and imperfections of others. They will bring Strangers to God's acquaintance,
dissolve all discords. and make the Devil to despair of his aim, which is to
blow the hellish fire of a perpetual dissension into our souls. They will
conclude a League of everlasting Peace with God, and (if we believe St.
Augustine) they are the complement of a happy life, and the only immortal thing
that belong to Mortals. And no wonder, being that God himself is the first, and
principal Author of this heavenly Exercise: For as soon as he had given the Law
to his People, Deuteronomy. 6.
He declared it was his will and pleasure it should be the worthy Subject of
their serious and constant Meditation, fix my words, says he, in your hearts,
and in your minds; have them in your hands, and before your eyes, teach them to
your Children, Deuteronomy. 9.
that they may meditate on them: Meditate upon thy last end, says the Holy
Ghost, and thou shall never sin. Memorare novissima tua and in aeteraum non
peccabis. Eccles. 7.40.
This is also the wholesome Instruction which the holy Fathers have left us; this
is a beavenly Lesson which they would have us learn by all means. One while
speak to God, says St. Jerome, and another while give ear to what God speaks to
you. In speaking to God we beseech him to come to us with his Grace, in
hearkening to him we open our hearts to receive him. In speaking to God, says
St. Ambrose, St. Ambr. I Offic. ^0.
we demand of him his Lights and Favors, in hearkening to him, we receive
them, and shut them up in our hearts, to conserve, and practice them upon all
occasions. This is likewise my Friendly Advice to you, dear Reader; and I wish
you with all my heart, the Grace of God to make good use of this Book, that
your own Eternal Happiness may ensue.

A Table of the Chief Matters contained in this Diological Treatise with a C or
an M before the Numbers, which marks either a Subject of Consideration or
Meditation.
THat no exterior Agent without the interior word of God is able to work the
Conversion of a Sinner, C. Page 1.

That God is more free to impart his Graces and Favors to Sinners than they
are sollicitous to improve them. C. p. 4.

The manifold Obstacles which hinder the Sinners Conversion, and how strong and
numerous are th'allurements to Sin, C. p. 9.

The motives to Virtue are far more pressing and more in number, C. p. 11.

The humble acknowledgment of man's innate weakness, and the wonderful effects
of Divine Love, C. p. 19.

The nature and properties of Divine Love, and how it may be obtained, C. p. 26.

That Man cannot so easily attain to Divine Love by reason of the manifold and
great oppositions which are betwixt nature and grace. C. p. 32.

The examples of Christ, and of his beloved Apostles on Earth, together with
Gods formal Precept, and th'assured promise of his grace; lays a weighty
obligation on all men to lead a Virtuous and Godly Life, C. p. 42.

Why Sinners do often and earnestly implore the assistance of Gods grace without
obtaining their request, C. p. 50.

That God never refuses any one the concurrence of his grace nor the effects of
his Prayers, if they be of decent and necessary things, and that he is firmly
resolved to break off with Vice, C. P. 52.

How a Sinner by his frequent relapse into Sin may reasonably fear he never was
really contrite for his Sins, C. p. 56.

That a Sinner must fix his hope in God of whose mercy he cannot despair without
a mortal offense, C. p. 57.

The nature and necessary conditions of a true and perfect contrition, p. 60.

The fatal consequences of Venial Sins, and how by degrees they bring a Man to
commit Mortals, C p. 65.

The greatness of Gods Love for Man is a most pressing motive to a sorrowful
contrition, M. p 67.

The means which God was pleased to take in order to redeem Mankind is another
pressing motive to a sorrowful contrition, M. p. 71.

What Christ has suffered from his Cradle to the Cross was only for the love of
Man, M. p. 74.

His Death and Passion should breed in our hearts a mortal hatred and
abhorrence of Sin, M. p. 78.

Several other Considerations upon the same subject, able to move even a Heart
of Steel to love God above all Creatures, M. p. 82.

The benefits of our Justification lays a weighty obligation on us to love God
with all our hearts, p. 88.

Several other deep considerations of the same benefit, Mp. 91.

The manifold disasters and miseries occasioned by Sin, and how we are happily
delivered from 'em all by the benefit of our Justification, M. p. 95.

The manifold and wonderful advantages of a Justified Soul. M. p. 99.

The benefit of our Justification exceeds that of our Creation and Redemption,
M. p. 103.

The certainty of Death, and th'uncertainty of the hour of Death with the
several and dreadful circumstances thereof is a most pressing motive to detest
Sin, M. p. 106.

The particular Judgment which is given of the Soul at her departing the Body,
M. p. 114.

How dreadful will the sight of her Judge be to her, and what anguishes she
shall suffer at her Trial, M. p. 120.

Of the most strict account which will be taken of the Soul in this particular
Judgment, M. p. 126.

How remote is the Judgment of God from that of Man, and of the severity of his
Chastisements even in this Life, by which we may easily conceive th'unspeakable
rigor of his punishments in the other, M. p. 133.

Of the Torments which the Damned suffer in Hell, M. p. 140.

Of the Glory of Heaven, in what it consists, of its great estimate, and what
we ought to suffer for the everlasting purchase thereof, M. p. 148.

Of th'everlasting happiness of the Saints in Heaven, and of their glorious
Prerogatives, M. p. 162.

The little value that Christians set upon Virtue, and how their dissolutions
surpass the debauchery even of the worst of Heathens, M. p. 173.

The Godly feelings and Heroic exploits of Heathen Philosophers will certainly
confound the Christians in the Day of Judgment, M. p. 188.

Of Hell, and of th'unspeakable and various Torments which the Damned shall
suffer there for an Eternity, M. p. 201

Of the severity of Gods Justice, the rage and malice of the Devils, and the
horrid confusion of the Damned, occasioned by the full Knowledge of their
Vanities, main Folly and wilful neglect of their Salvation, M. p. 217.

The wonderful Austerities of Gods Servants as well in the Old as in the New
Testament in order to avoid the Torments of Hell will be a main confusion to
such Christians as live deliciously in this World, M. p. 226.

If men be so outragiously cruel one to the other, how excessive cruel must the
Devil be to the Damned in Hell being a professed enemy to all mankind even from
the Creation, M. p. 234.

An habitual Sinner that puts off his Conversion to the hour of Death in
expectation of a good Peccavi lies under a moral impossibility to be saved, M.
p. 248.

The Love of God should replenish our hearts to that degree to leave no place
for any terrene or carnal affection, M. p. 266.

An ample description of th'ingratitude, inconstancy, treachery, cruelty, and
vanity of the World, with several presidents relating thereunto, M. p. 278.

The Lust of the Flesh with its fatal attendance and branches, are most
abominable in themselves, most odious to God, and the most destructive enemies
of our Souls, M. p. 293.

The Only thing that the Nobility should value themselves upon is Virtue, how
vain is the Wisdom of the World? Of Corporal Beauty and Rich Apparel, and how
the one as well as the other has been the ruin of many Millions of Souls, M. p.
310.

That the State of Poverty is far more advantageous to the Soul than that of
Riches, though it may not be so pleasant to the mind, which is never content,
M. p. 327.

The Charming expressions of Christ, and the several employments he takes upon
himself in order to save our Souls are able to withdraw all our scattered
affections from the World, and settle them upon him alone, M. p. 346.

That the World is both a Cheat and a Liar, for his Promises ars false, his
Honors are vain, his Pleasures are Poison, and his Treasures are Soul-Killing
Thorns, M. p. 368.

That they who after all Gods sweet Inspirations, loving Invitations, and
gracious Admonitions, do not love him reciprocally shall be in danger of
eternal Destruction, M. p. 384.

A Check to Man, p. 391.

A Check to the Christian Man, p. 395.

A Check to the Religious Man, p. 402.

A Wholesome Advice to Mankind in general, p 410.

Errata.
P. 10. L. ult. R. remit. P. 26. M, N. R. hac. P. 249. L. 4. R. double. P. 254.
M. N. R. transiit messis. P. 255. M. N. R. quo. P. 259. L. 12. R. axiom. P.
265. L. 27. R. Prophet. P. 271. L. 13. R. no more. P. 315. M. N. R. putredini.
p. 329. L. 26. R. not. P. 336. L. 8. R. the. P. 344. L. 27. R. be. P. 352. L.
18. R. so P. 368. L. 22. R. doorkeeper. P. 371. L. 6. R. martial. P. 374. L.
17. R. Micheas. P. 376. L. 21. R. were P. 384. L. 6. R. as.

A Dialogical Discourse betwixt the Savior and Man, wherein all Souls desirous
of the Love of God, are copiously supplied with means powerful to attain it,
and to gain the happy accomplishment of their Salvation.
MAN. SPeak O Lord! for thy Servant hears thee, 1. Reg. 3.
grant me a right Understanding to know thy ways, and lead my will to walk
therein; let the sacred Dew of thy divine Inspirations flow down from thy
heavenly Throne into my obdurate Heart: Psalm. 118.
that I may more easily observe thy Commands, and steer my course directly
without any Remora toward the Region of everlasting Bliss, Loquere t^ nobis
and audiemus: non loquatur nobis Dominus, ne ^orte moriamur. Exodus 20.
for which thou did Create my Soul.

Heretofore the Children of Israel would have Moises only speak to them, not
thou O Lord! fearing thy words might strike such a terror to their Hearts as
would occasion their death; but I am wholly an Alien to their feelings, and do
choose rather to side with the Prophet Samuel, and in all humility do entreat,
that thou O Lord, wilt be graciously pleased to speak to me; Not Moises, no,
nor any of thy Prophets; for the instructions and lights they may give me, be
but gifts and Rays borrowed of thy incomprehensible Splendour, thou alone
without their Ministry can perfectly instruct me; alas, their endeavors in
my regard will signify just nothing, without thy gracious concurrence: They may
indeed utter some words, but unless thou do influence them, they will never
mollify my stony Heart, nor lodge thy Spirit within my bowels: Their words may
be indeed placed to admiration; their Rhetoric Charming, their Eloquence
exceeding that of the very best Orators, their Periods managed in
extraordinary good order, but if they relish not of thy divine Spirit, my heart
alas, will remain as cold as the very Ice.

They may Cite Scripture fluently to confirm their discourse, and quote both
Councels and Fathers to the astonishment of their Hearers; but they cannot work
so far on their understanding as to make 'em conceive the thing they aim at,
nor bring their Will to the practice of it: that enterprise is out of their
Province, it is a Prerogative pertaining alone to thee, O Lord, no mortal Man,
no, the very Angels cannot pretend to it, unless they have thy Commission to
that effect. They may entertain us with a learned and pleasant discourse of thy
great and adorable Mysteries, but thou alone can render our understanding
capable to conceive them; they may tell us of thy Precepts and Counsels, but
thou alone can help us to fulfill them: They can show to us the ready road
leading to Salvation, but thou alone can comfort us in our failings, and
give us then greater courage to walk therein, till we arrive at our journeys
end.

The most they can boast of, is to be thy Sollicitors, and Agents which thou
make use of, to exhort us to the practice of this or that other Virtue, they
may describe unto us the many evil consequences of a wicked and Licentious
life, Ego plantavi, Apollo rigavit, Deus autem incrementum dedit. 1 Epist.
Pauli ad C^rint^ios. c. 3. v. 6. Tanquam a facie Colubri fuge peccatum Eccl. c.
21. v 2.
they may thunder from their Pulpits thy dreadful threatenings, and the horrid
effects of thy divine wrath, but it is thy Sanctifying Grace, that alone can
soften, instruct, and illustrate our Hearts: They can exteriously water our
barren and rebellous Souls, but thou alone can give the increase and cause
them happily to comply with the sweet Influences of thy holy Inspirations: They
may cry out and warn us to fly from sin as from the venom of a Serpent, but
thou alone make our understanding, and will prompt to conceive and practice
what they say. Let Moises then for bear speaking to me, it is from thee, my God,
I do expect the word which can subdue, reform, and clear my heart from all
terrene and sordid affections; If I only be outwardly admonished, and not
inwardly inflamed with the ardent fire of thy divine Love, my Souls death may
ensue, or at best I shall be but a barren and withered tree. Let me then hear
thee speak, O Lord and let thy word be no sooner heard, but put in execution by
me; no sooner known but loved, no sooner pronounced but deeply fixed in the
Center of my heart; there to produce the worthy fruits of a sincere, sorrowful
and constant repentance. 1 Reg. 3. Verba enim vi^ae eternae habes. Jo. 6.
Speak then O Lord, for thy Servant hears thee, thy words are the happy seed of
eternal life; let me then hear them to the comfort of my Soul, and to the
reformation and perfect amendment of my whole life; this is a work that will
really be for thy greater Glory, and my eternal Salvation.


SAVIOVR. HEar my words, O Man, they are most sweet, efficacious and vivifying,
far exceeding the science of the Philosophers, and wise of this World; my words
are both spirit and life, they are beyond the reach of humane understanding;
they don't affect a vain complacency, but delight to be received rather in
silence, with all humility, and with all the tenderness of love and affection,
that can be expressed. My Servant David was thoroughly convinced of this
undeniable assertion, when he sent forth these seraphical expressions to my
heavenly Throne; Beatus, quem tu erudieris Domine, and de^ege tua eum docueris,
ut mitiges ei a die bus malis, etc. Psalm. 93. v. 12.
Blessed is the man, O Lord, whom thou shall instruct in thy Law, and teach how
he may in the evil days of his mortal life, heap up a vast treasure of merits
for an Eternity. I am the Lord who have taught the Prophets from the beginning,
and since have never ceased to speak unto all Men; but alas, few answer my
expectation: Satan has so blinded their understanding, so perverted their will,
and so benumbed their senses, that the most part of them make nothing of my
words, take no notice of my corrections, and set no value on my most amorous
invitations, in order to revive their poor Souls, and shelter them under the
wings of my paternal and powerful protection, from the rage and fury of that
infernal and devouring Dragon. The most of them are so infatuate as to be more
inclined to give ear to the deluding Sirens of the world, then to the
inspirations of their God; to the fatal persuasions of the flesh, then to the
salutary dictates of the Holy Ghost; to the ruinous suggestions of the Devil,
then to the amorous invitations of their Creator, and Redeemer. What the world
does promise 'em is but temporal and of no (...), and yet for that small
satisfaction, they are content to become slaves to it; and to lose that
glorious title of Children of God, and all pretentions to Heaven. What I
promise 'em is of an unspeakable estimate, and of an everlasting continuance;
yet their hearts are strangely averse to it; and seem to conceive as great an
abhorrence of it, as the people of Israel had against that food, which I
showered down upon them in the Desert. Their obedience to the world and their
other mortal enemies, and their care of pleasing them, is more prompt, and far
greater, then what they show in my service. Esaias. 23.
Let Sidon blush; and why? because that for a small Sallery, for a trifle, she
will run a long way, but for the purchase of Heaven, for the gain of an
everlasting and happy life, she will hardly raise up her foot from the ground.
A man shall labor a whole day to get sixpence at night, and perhaps less, he
will undertake the most vile work that can be named, and be at it both night
and day, and weary himself so extremely as to be nigh breathing out his life,
and all this to get the good will of his Master; but alas! to purchase a summum
bonum, to be seated among the Saints and Angels in Heaven, to enjoy
th'intuitive vision of God, and his interminable glory, he is so much a friend
to his body, and so fond of his ease, that he will not undergo the least
mortification. O slothful and peevish Creature! thou should be ashamed to
see Worldlings more ready to concur to their utter ruin, then thou to procure
to thy self a Crown of Glory; that they take more pleasure in their vanitys,
then thou do to hear and practice my Commandments, and Counsels. Romans 1.
Matt. 14. Apoc. 2.
They often fail of their expectation, and seldom enjoy perfectly what they
propose to themselves; but what I promise is always fulfilled, and none was
ever disappointed that placed his confidence in me; and whoever has my word for
a favor, shall be sure to obtain it, if that he continues a faithful Servant
to me, even to the very last respiration of his breath, for it is the end, not
the beginning and progress, that crowns the work, Finis coronat opus. Matthew. 5.
and 25.
and makes the man be either a Saint, or a Devil. I do faithfully reward all,
and the least of my servants good works; I am likewise a Touchstone to try
their true and constant affection, I suffer them now and then to groan under
the heavy load of many tribulations and Crosses, but it is with a design to
cleanse their Souls of all earthly corruption, and make them fit to sit at my
table in Heaven.

Hear then O Man! my words, and print them in the midst of thy Heart, ruminate
on them often, and with all possible Attention, for they will be most useful in
time of temptation; and though thou do not understand them at present, yet thou
shall comprehend their full meaning in the day of my visitation. Thou must know
when, and after what manner I do visit my faithful Servants; first, I visit
them with Temptations of all sorts, to train them up in that School of Heaven,
in which I had the credit of being both Master, and Conqueror; I suffer
temptations to teach my followers, they must expect the same; but I conquered
also all my temptations, to show them how to behave themselves in the like
occasion; but if I see them stagger and fail in courage, I visit them with the
sweetness of my consolation, and enable them to stand firm, not to desert from
my Colors. I am likewise a Teacher to my Elect, and read unto them every day
two Lessons; the one is a sharp reprehension, if I see them fail in their duty,
in order to suppress their evil inclinations, and habits; and the other is a
potent exhortation to stir up their hearts to a fervent desire of a greater
increase in virtue. In fine, whoever hears my words, and will not regard them,
but rather deride and contemn them, he shall at the last day find me a severe
Judge, from whom he is to expect no favor, but the same measure he gave me in
his life, shall be exactly dealt him and worse, that is, to turn him off to the
left hand, and there leave him as a prey to the Devil for all Eternity.


MAN. REmember O most merciful Lord, that we are of our own nature but misery,
weakness, and in a word, as little to be regarded as the meanest of thy
Creatures, for what are we in our greatest splendor, but so many vessels of
nasty stuff, fit for no other use but to be cast out, and set so many foot
under ground, lest the noisome smell of our rotten Carcasses should infect the
house, or family wherein we depart this life. Our frailty is so great that it
cannot be paralel'd in any other creature of whatever State or Condition; our
vanity is no less, if not surpassing our frailty. What shall such a poor
Creature do amidst so strong and so many allurements to sin; of one side the
world sollicites him to be of his faction, and taste of his pleasures at will,
the Flesh inclines him another way, the Devil persuades him to slight his own
proper interest, i. e. to be happy eternally by adhering to his Creator, and to
side with him against God. Moreover he sees that the wicked are the Darlings
of Fortune, and have all earthly pleasures at command, but he beholds the
righteous and faithful followers of God groaning under the weighty burden of
great tribulations; nay, he verily thinks thee to look on the wicked with a
pleasing aspect, and to frown on the Just; what confirms him in this opinion,
is, the assurance thou give them of pardon, whenever they shall with true
repentance come to thee: this, they take as an encouragement for sinners to
continue their licentious and wicked life; and even so it falls out with many;
they spend their youth in all manner of unlawful pleasures, nay, they will
entrench upon old age, rather then desist their long continued disorders; yet
when by thy Decree a violent Sickness seizes them and confines them to their
bed, then they continually implore thee for mercy; Peccavi is their deplorable
ditty, which they incessantly repeat till they expire; must we not piously
believe that such are saved? notwithstanding the long Series of their
wickedness and sins; yes, and this consideration holds us in our rambling and
vicious humors; and likewise, it expells all thoughts of recanting from our
mind; the frequent Presidents of thy mercy exhibited to far more wicked livers,
retards our conversion; so does the conceit of that narrow and craggy Passage,
which (as thou say) can only lead us to Heaven: Moreover why should we impose
that heavy yoke upon our younger days, seeing that Heaven is promised to us at
any time, when we shall cry Peccavi, though we should omit it, even to our
decrepid Age.


SAVIOVR. OF Man! the more frail thou art, and the more prone to sin, the more
vigilant, and careful should thou be and timorous, not to fall into sin,
lest thou should be foiled, overcom'd, and fall from the state of Grace,
into that of damnation; for it is a point of extreme folly, that a weak,
unskilful and filly man, should undertake to encounter such strong, cunning,
expert and fierce Enemies, as thou haft to fight withal; whoever is so far over
seen, will certainly be worsted, and loose his life to boot: This is thy case,
OF Man! the Devil thy mortal enemy will easily get the better of thee, and soon
overthrow thee, if thou art not well fortified with virtue, and shielded with
Gods grace and protection, and assisted by his holy Angels. The Prince of the
Apostles was not ignorant of this truth; he experienced it in his own person,
and therefore being highly interest'd in the welfare of his Masters flock, he
leaves unto them this wholesome instruction; 1. Pet. 5.8.
my Brethren, be Sober, be Vigilant, but why? because your Adversary the Devil,
as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour: I do grant that the
allurements to sin are great, and numerous, but the motives that I lay before
all mortals, to adhere to, and make use of, on all such occasions, are
incomparably more in number, and of greater force to repulse all temptations;
they are also very prevalent to induce 'em to lead a virtuous and godly life.
The world thou say, invitest thee to unlawful and wicked actions, but God
prohibits them, nay, he commands the contrary, and if thou do obey him, he
intails on thee a glorious and everlasting inheritance, but if thou have so
little regard of his commands, as to trangress them, he threatens thee with
everlasting damnation, and torments. The flesh inclines thee to evil, but the
spirit and reason too, bids thee resist manfully such base and rebellious
motions: the one tells thee that the body is created to be a slave to the Soul,
not the Soul to the body; the other informs thee what a madness it is to forfeit
an eternal happiness for a passing pleasure, which ever leaves a sting to
pierce and gall thy heart. Sodom and Gomorrha were too much led by the flesh,
but consider well, the terrible chastisement they suffered in this world; yet
it is but a shadow, to what they shall suffer for an eternity. Moreover, that
gnawing worm of a guilty Conscience should quell in thee all such foul and
unlawful pleasures. Thou will plead, that Satan, with the rest of his infernal
Confederates, never desist perplexing thee, with their frequent and strong
suggestions; and art thou the only man that he assaults? no, no, his quarrel is
with all mankind, and since that fatal overthrow which he gave our first
Progonitors in the garden of Eden, he never ceased, neither will he ever leave
off pestering and plaguing their descendants with suggestions to evil; Latrare
potest, Sollicitare potest, sed mordere non potest nifi volentem. Aug. Angelis
suis Deus, mandavit de te. Mat. 4.6.
for nothing makes them so furious and cruel, as to see men in a fair way of
possessing their forfeited and glorious Seats; but thy chief comfort and
security lies within thy own breast; he is like a Mastive-Dog at a chain, he
may indeed bark at thee, but can never bite thee, unless thou do come within
his reach, and consent to thy own destruction. Moreover God has deputed an
Angel even from thy Mothers womb, to protect and defend thee from all such
accidents, and he will perform his charge, if thou will but obey him, and
listen to his wholesome inspirations, and dictates; If Satan does spur thee on
to the Precipice of Sin, thy good Angel will teach thee, Non coronabitur nisi
qui legirtime certaverit. 2. Timo. 2.5.
how thou may in thy conflict secure thy self, either by a vigorous
opposition, or an immediate flight to God for Sanctuary; He will also tell
thee; that thou art created to fight the mortal enemy of mankind, and must foil
him too, if thou hopest to gain a crown in Heaven.

As for the wicked, whom thou think to be of the number of Gods happy
favorites, because thou see them prosper in all their ways, and that nothing
crosses them; that they have plenty of Gold and Silver; Horses and all other
Cattle in abundance, no mortality visits them; Prosperitas Stultorum perdet
ilios. Prove. 1. Non audivit populus men's vocem meam, and Israel non intendit
mihi, and dimisi eos secundum desideria cordis eorum, ibunt, in adinventionibus
suis. Psalm. 80. Multae tribulationes Justorum. Psalm. 7.20. Non sunt condig^ae
passiones hujus temporis ad fu turam gloriam quae revelabitur in nobis. Romans
8.18.
Rain, Wind, Storms Thunder, Lightnings, do pass by them, and by all they
possess, as well abroad, as at home; but believe me says the wise Solomon, that
this Prosperity of the wicked which thou do so much extol, and make so great
an estimate of, as to think them in that to be the Minnious of God, will at the
cancelling of their life, hurry their Souls to the Abbiss of Hell. Let the
Stiff-necked people of Israel serve for a president to convince thee, that I
delight not in the wicked; They would not hearken to my voice, neither would
they acknowledge me to be their God; and what was the effect of their
disobedience and infidelity, I withdrew, and wholly left them to be guided by
their own sensual appetites: and they took their self-pleasing courses, and
followed the directions of their own Councels. This is the greatest punishment
that can be inflicted on a Nation, for then their reprobation is signed, never
to be recalled.

Many indeed, are the tribulations of the Just, but my worthy Apostle tells
thee from me, that the sufferings of this present time, are infinitely less,
then the Glory which shall be revealed in my faithful and devoted Servants
hereafter. I deal with them on earth as a skilful Physician with his Patients,
I cleanse their Souls of all their sinful spots, by giving them to drink of
that bitter Chalice of tribulations, by which they are disposed to partake of a
more abundant grace, and brought to a nearer conformity with me, who exhausted
the same Chalice of its very dregs; by this remedy they are secured from the
everlasting pains of hell, which are incomparably greater, and of a longer
tract, then all the tribulations and crosses, that were suffered by all
mankind in this world; and the same intitleth them my Associates in Heaven, to
sit at my table, to enjoy my presence for ever, and all the happiness that my
celestial Court can afford. Ego quos diligo arguo and castigo Apoc. 3.
Thou see by this what unspeakable advantages the Just do reap by their
tribulations, and how the tenderness of my love to them appears, even in the
severity of my chastisements.

No Father can be more indulgent to his Child then I am to the Sinner, for though
the greatness and multitude of his heinous offenses deserve no mercy at my
hands, but rather the utter severity of my Justice, yet commonly I for bear
with him, still expecting his amendment; but the longer I let him run in the
way of iniquity, the more he should be terrified, for sins never escape without
condign punishment, and the longer it is deferred, the heavier it will fall at
last. It Is true, the sinner has my parole for a pardon at any time when he comes
to me with true repentance, Qui poenitenti veniam promisi Eundem de die
crastino nequaquam certificavi. 12. Aug. Terra miseriae and terra tenebrarum,
ubi nulius ordo, sed sempiternus horror inhabitat. Job. 10.12
that is a gift from God, and which he is not sure to receive, no more then he
is certain to live till next day.

That fatal delay of repentance has replenished the Dominion of Satan with
millions of poor Souls, and if any should set them the question, what brought
them to that Land of everlasting darkness and misery, where there is neither
rest, union, comfort or order; but a perpetual toil, hatred, sorrow, confusion
and horror? they all will unanimously answer, our procrastinate conversion,
our delai'd repentance, and our groundless hopes to have a peccavi at will,
though Death should on a sudden surprise us with an Arrest, this was the fatal
overture, through which we fell into this endless misery. And it stands with a
great deal of reason, for the longer a man loiters in his vicious and wicked
ways, the more obdurate his heart will be, and the less inclined to produce an
act of Contrition; nay should his Confessarius break his brain to bring him to
it, his answer will be that which David gave to Saul, when he was to encounter
the Philistian Giant; Saul would have him to put on his own Armor, and to
fight with his Sword, Usum non habeo. 1. Reg. 17.39.
but David made answer, that he was never accustomed to it, and therefore would
not accept of his offer; its the same with an inveterate Sinner, let his
Confessor cry out, Sir, one Act of contrition, one sincere and hearty Peccavi,
for God is mercyful, and will be the same to thee, if thou will reclaim, and
beg him most heartily pardon; Ah Sir! he will reply, I was never bred to that
divine Art, it is a lesson I never learned; it is a strong weapon against the
Devil, and all his power I must confess, yet I never made use of it, and
therefore it is but a folly to pretend to it at present.

Thou see by this example, O Man! that the longer a sinner perseveres in sin,
the farther he will be from any desire of a true Contrition; his heart will
grow the more obdurate, his Conscience more blind, his Soul so oppressed with
evil custom, even as with a huge and weighty Stone, that makes her wholly
insensible of what concerns her Salvation.

But if any of such like reprobates should seem to repent, it is to be feared,
that his chief and only motive, is the fear of Hellfire, not the real product
of Justice, nor any true Contrition, Nolo mortem impii, sed ut convertatur
impius a via sua, and vivat. Ezekiel. 33.11.
however I would not have any inveterate Sinner despair; neither would I have
him be so careless of his Salvation, as to neglect it, whilst he has time and
leisure to secure it, and a saving God who is so easily moved to compassionate
him, and so ready to grant him so grateful a request, as is the remission of
his Sins, and Life everlasting.

For a resolve of thy last objection, that the way which leads to Heaven, is
both narrow, difficult and craggy; consequently that thy nature, which is very
fond of her own ease, can hardly be brought to walk therein; I answer, that it
is a million of times more tolerable to strike into that road, (though never so
irksome to thy corrupt nature) then to suffer the pains of Hell for an
eternity; Quam areta est via, and angusta porta, quae ducit ad vitam, and pauci
inveniunt eam. Mat. 7.14. Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, and onerati estis,
and ego reficiam vos jugum enim meum suave est, and onus meum leve. Matt. 11.28.
nay, even the pains of Purgatory; which are but temporal. It Is true, I told
thee, and am still of the same opinion, that Strait is the gate, and Narrow is
the way which leads unto life, and few there be that find it; I told thee
moreover, that from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force. But thou did
likewise hear me say, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and
humble in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your Souls; for my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light. For what is of it self burdensome to nature, is made
easy by the assistance of my grace, and is sweetened by custom; for wherever
the Love of God is lodged, and increased to the height and prime of its
fervor, all Tribulations, Persecutions, Crosses, Losses, nay, Death it self,
will be looked upon as the chiefest favors, and blessings of a most loving
Father; so that there is nothing in the world more to be hated, and abhorred
then Sin, which alone can cause the displeasure of God, and his fatal
Separation from man.


MAN. O Lord my God! thou art my Life, my Treasure, and all my happiness; but
what am I, that I should prefume to speak to thee? what? but a poor and
despicable servant, a most vile and abject worm, far more miserable and
contemptible in thy sight, then I can or dare imagine. Remember therefore of
Lord! that I am nothing, have nothing, and am absolutely the most indigent, and
sordid, of all thy Creatures. Thou alone art good, thou only art both just and
holy. Thou alone can do all, can give all, can fill all; and I poor Soul
am void of all that can be called good; for nothing but misery is to be found
where Sin predominates. Forget not then of Lord! thy miserations to me, and
vouchsafe to replenish my heart with thy grace, that I may carry my Cross
cheerfully, and follow thy steps with all alacrity; whilst I continue my
Pilgrimage in this tempestuous and miserable life. Thou know that of my self
I can perform nothing, that may be grateful to thee, or any way meritorious,
Psalm. 142.
to my own Salvation; wherefore of Lord! assist me with thy grace on all
occasions; turn not away thy face from thy poor and wretched Creature; delay
not thy gracious visit, withdraw not thy consolations from me, lest my Soul
should remain a barren and dry Tree, and become fuel for that unquenchable fire
of Hell.

OF Lord! teach me how I may fulfill thy blessed will; instruct me in thy ways,
that I may walk therein with safety, and in all humility. Thou have indeed
resolved all my objections, and have broke all the chains which might detain
both me, and all other Sinners in the bondage of Sin, and Slavery of the Devil:
thou said as much of virtue and vice, as much of Satan's rage, and of thine
own clemency to all poor Sinners; as much of the joys of Heaven, and of the
torments of Hell, as are able to move the most obdurate hearts and hasten them
out of hand to give an everlasting farewell to the one, and to make their
constant and happy choice of the other.

But alas! I know by a fatal experience how weak I am in my resolutions, how
far from the love of God, how much a stranger to virtue, and therefore have
great need of comfort and strength from thee, to go through with what I resolve
for the future. Thou art my heavenly Physician, from thee I do expect a cure
for all my Spiritual diseases; nothing can be hid from thine eyes; thou know
the evil passions that do predominate within my breast, deliver me therefore of
Lord, from their tyrannical government, cleanse my heart from all evil and
inordinate affections, to the end that being inwardly healed, and purged, of
all the sinful products of my corrupt nature, I may be the more apt to love
thee, the more ready to suffer for thee, and the more stable to persevere in
thy service.

When I read in thy holy Writ, and hear what the learned Doctors of thy Church
say of the love of God, I conceive an ardent desire to partake in some measure
thereof; for to pretend to the full perfection of it, is a thing beyond my
reach, unless thou give thy helping hand to my poor endeavors. It Is
absolutely the Summum bonum, Matt. 11.
that only can make the burdensome, and weighty things light; that can bear
equally all unequal things, that can carry a burden without any toil; that can
make sweet and pleasant, what of its own nature is bitter, and uneasy. The love
of God presses men on to perform great and heroic actions; and does excite
them to aim always at what is most perfect, and pleasing to his divine
Majesty. Love is never content to fix its tabernacle on earth, nor to be
concerned with any terrene object; it must have a more noble Subject to
entertain its flames: It must be totally free, and absolutely a stranger to all
worldly affections, lest they should diminish its Luster, and force it out of
its natural Centure, to lodge with our blind and unruly passions.

There Is nothing more sweet, and attractive then the love of God, nothing more
active and strong; nothing more eminent and generous, nothing can exceed it in
latitude, extent and altitude, there is nothing more pleasant and affable; In
fine, there is nothing in Heaven, or on Earth that can excel it in goodness,
in beauty or perfection, and why? because it does proceed from God, and that it
cannot repose in any created thing, but in God alone. A divine Lover will fly,
run and rejoice, though he were condemned to lodge with Daniel among the hungry,
and devouring Lions. He is free, and enjoys his liberty though he were in chains,
and laden with Irons as another Manasses.

He gives with St. Francis, All for All; and finds his whole delight and
comfort in that very All, which he makes choice of; And in that one supreme All
the fountainhead of all goodness, he sweetly reposeth with the Spouse void of
disturbance.

A divine Lover never looks upon the gifts, though never so excellent, but has
his eyes always fixed upon the giver, neither is he content with what graces
and favors he receives from God, but will strive to purchase more, though it
were even with the loss of his sweet life. For Love admits of no bounds, and
its flames will rise above all limitation and measure. It feels no weight,
values no labor, invents new ways of mortifications, and oftentimes affects to
suffer for his beloved, more then flesh and blood is able to bear. The divine
Lover will not regard impossibilities, for he thinks that all the Austerities,
and rigours imaginable are both lawful and possible to him, he is able
therefore in his own ardent and elevated conceit, to vanquish all difficultys,
and does indeed perform more then can be expected from Nature alone; In fine,
his good will never fails him, though his body should ly half dead upon the
ground.

Love is watchful; if Sleeping it is always awake, if harrass'd it is never
weary, in dangers it is never fearful, when frightened it is never troubled, but
even as a fierce blaze, and a lively flame; it passes by all such events, and
mounts up toward the very throne of God, where it lies safe from all
disasters, and evil accidents. This language perhaps is unknown to many; but he
who really loves God, will easily understand it. The fervent desire alone of a
Seraphick Soul makes a pleasing noise in the hearing of God; Deus meus and
omnia. S. Fr^n^. Deus meus amormeus Idem. In odororem unguenterum tuorum
c^rrimus. Cant. 1.4. Hoc est praeceptum meum ut diligatis invicem. Jer. 15.12.
such was that of St. Francis. My God (says he) and my all; my God, and my
Love; thou art all mine, and I am all thine; dilate my heart in thy love, that
I may taste inwardly how sweet it is to love thee, and how pleasant it is to
melt, and consume in thy love. Let thy love support me, when I surpass my
ability, and when in the depth of my meditations, in the excess of my fervor,
and in the serious consideration of thy great love for man, I am beyond my
senses. Let my Soul praise thee for ever, of Lord, and let me run with the
Daughters of Sion after the odoriferous savor of thy sweet perfumes. Let me
never love any creature, nay not my self, but for thee, let me also love in
thee, all them that love thee sincerely and with their whole heart; this is a
Christian devoir, which the law of true love requires, and which Jesus the
perfect model and first promoter thereof, does absolutely require from all
mankind, and under the penalty of forfieting an eternity of Joy, and the Vision
of God for ever.

Love, says thy beloved Apostle, is swift, Qui non diligit fratrem suum non est
ex Deo. Jen. 3.10.
sincere, pious, well disposed, and pleasant; It is strong, patient, faithful,
prudent, lasting, manly, and never fond of its self, nor its proper Interest;
for when ever a man begins to touch that string, he immediately falls from the
perfection of true love, and is become no better then a Heathen, who is totally
a Stranger both to the love and laws of God. Love is always circumspect,
humble, 1 Cor. 15.
and righteous, not sluggish, nor light, nor addicted to foolish and idle
things, neither does it busy it self about vain and frivolous imploys; but is
sober, chaste, Stable, quiet, watchful, and extraordinary well guarded in all
its senses: 1 Cor. 10. and Phil. 2.
Love is subject and obedient to its Prelates and Elders, but has no manner of
esteem for it self, for it is both vile and despicable in its own eyes. Love is
devout to God, full of trust and hopes in him, though he afford it not the least
consolation, he knows full well that love cannot appear in its full splendor,
but where it meets with a mixture of sorrow; for St. Paul says, that whoever is
not in a readiness to suffer all manner of Crosses, that God is pleased to
afflict him with, in this world, is not at all worthy of the name of a true
lover. In fine, Romans 8.8.
a true Lover of God must embrace manfully, and with a cheerful heart and
countenance, whatever comes upon him either by the commission, or permission of
his divine will, let it be never so harsh, violent, or displeasing to nature,
he must not in respect of any tribulation, decline from his beloved, but rather
adhere closely to his colors, as well in the troubles of war, as in the
prosperity, and pleasure of a joyful peace.


SAVIOVR. O Man! Thou art well read I see, and to hear thee speak, Tues
Magister in Israel, and hic ignoras Jo. 3 10.
thou may be taken for a Master in Israel; but I am certain thou art mistaken
in the practice of thy knowledge. Thou speak admirably of the love of God,
but thou can not perceive the motions and operations thereof within thy own
heart, by reason of its predominate inclinations to the carnal, and fading
objects of the world. Therefore, Diliges Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo.
Matthew. 22.37.
for thy better understanding, I will in the first place tell thee, that the
principal and chief Command, is to love God with thy whole heart. Secondly,
that to be a proficient, is to obtain a farther increase, as well in all
virtues, as in the Seven gifts of the Holy Ghost. Thirdly, that without
Charity, nothing can be meritorious, no, nor acceptable to God. Fourthly, that
Charity, of all other virtues, is the most worthy; because it is the Primum
mobile, the Life, the Queen, the first beginning, and end of them all; and that
no other virtue, or thing whatever, can so efficaciously move a Soul to all
acts of Piety, nor so speedily and powerfully withdraw her from sin, and
vicious habits, as the Love of God. Fifthly, because the Intuitive vision of
God, (which is the essential reward of the Blessed) has a perfect reference to
the highest degree, and sublimest perfection of Charity.

Now to give thee a perfect demonstration of thy own weakness, and to let thee
know how much thou art a stranger to the love of God; I must tell thee that
this heavenly Charity, is a most resplendent and glorious Pearl; a most
precious and charming gem; a most pure and noble Balm; a most sweet and
fragrant herb; and consequently does require a most clean and spotless
residence, and a Seat adorned with all the rarest and most precious ornaments,
that can be imagined; I mean a Soul cleans'd from all mortal spots, decked with
all moral virtues, thoroughly lined with the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and
supported on each side with the Strong pillars of a firm and constant Hope, and
Faith.

I must tell thee likewise of the degrees of Charity, the first of them is
infused into the Soul by her Baptismal grace, and this is not to be hid idly,
but to be improved with a great deal of care, and brought to its ultimate
perfection; O what a deal of care is to be taken in so great an enterprise the
mind must be kept pure and clean, free from all mortal spots, and beautified
with all the virtues and gifts aforesaid (as far as the condition and state of
a new beginner will admit.) It Is an incumbent duty on all Mortals that are
lodged within this inferior degree of Charity, to wish ardently for the sight
and perfect enjoyment of the Summum bonum, to labor hardly for an utter
extirpation of all their imperfections and vicious habits; to reclaim and
utterly subdue their unruly passions; to be constantly employed in the painful
exercise and worthy works of Penance; to keep their minds from all
distractions in prayers; to reform the exterior man, and keep it still in a
modest and decent posture in all their communications and conferences with God.
To divert their eyes from all unclean and dishonest objects, to restrain their
tongues from overmuch talking; Vir linguosus non derigetur in terra. Psalm.
139.12.
for any man that gives himself the liberty of uttering words at random, and to
no good intent, cannot be free from sin, neither is he in the right way to the
land of promise, says my Prophet. In fine, they must decline from all evil, and
fly from Sin, Tanquam a facie Colubri fuge peccatum. Eccl. 21.
even as from the dangerous sight of an infernal Serpent.

All these cleansing herbs, together with several others of the same nature,
well seasoned with the fear and love of God, must be carefully handled,
dexterously shifted, and exactly distilled into a Salutary compound for the
happy complement of a purgative life. All these Ingredients, I must confess,
are extraordinary bitter, and irksome to thy corrupt nature, however thou must
endeavor with all thy might to swallow down those ill-pallat-pleasing Pills,
not for once, but so often, until thou do acquire a habit of using them
without any difficulty, and then thou shall perceive the great benefit thy Soul
will reap by the constant practice of so divine a remedy. Then thou will
without any compulsion or contradiction from either the outward or inward man,
freely and constantly bewail thy former sinful life; thou will earnestly dive
into the most reclus'd and hidden corners of thy heart, to find out therein
what may be displeasing to God, with a resolution either to smother them in
their cradle by a contrite Confession, or to drown them all in the bitter tears
of a sorrowful repentance. Thy daily entertainment will be to meditate on my
bloody Passion, to think often of the dreadful day of Judgment, of Death, of
the everlasting pains of Hell, and of the many favors and graces which thou
have received at the most liberal hands of thy most merciful God; firmly
grounding thy self in a profound humility, in patience, in a full resignation
to Gods Decrees, in the fear and love of thy dearly beloved Maker. After this
heavenly exercise, thou art to proceed to a farther increase in virtue, to a
more accomplished Charity, to Spiritual exercises, and to devout meditations;
thereby to fix thy heart in God alone, and to avoid Idleness which is the seat
of iniquity; thou must give some time to thy Studys, some to Prayer, some to
writing, some to the practice of charitable Deeds, as visiting the Sick,
relieving Prisoners, comforting the Poor, and distressed, as well with thy good
advices, as with a share of thy substance, but in all thy actions be sure to
have thy mind always fixed upon God, for whose sake alone thou must begin, go
on, and end all thy good works; thou must often raise up thy thoughts toward
Heaven, that happy residence, for the enjoying of which thou were created, and
be never wearied with labor; or think the time long e're you gain it. All this
belongs to the illuminative life, to the State of Proficients, to the degree of
purifying virtues, and to those private friends that do sweetly adhere unto
their God, and embrace him with arms of Charity.

Being perfectly grounded in this kind of life, thou must ascend to a higher
School, where thou art to begin the rudiments of the perfective and unitive
life; which are, pure contemplations, most ardent, most sweet, and most loving
Embraces of thy beloved; the inseparable and continual unions with thy Spouse;
the practice of mistical Theology; a Transformation into God; Raptures,
Ecstasies, Acts of heroical virtue; the immovable quietness, and peace of the
mind in God; then by a supreme degree of the gift of Wisdom, thou art made, as
it were, one of Gods Secretarys, and Cabinet-Councel, so that being come to
this height, thou art made privy to all the hidden mysteries of his eternal
Wisdom, and raised to that pitch of honor, as to lodge him sweetly within thy
breast.

Then thou shall sincerely, and sweetly contemplate with a clear understanding
what are of Faith, and the reasons for believing them. Thou shall behold the
glory, the Emanation, the inbred Communication, the mutual intuition,
dilection, fruition, and eternal consistance of the ever Blessed and
superglorious Trinity. Then all creatures, compared to the infinite, and
incomprehensible Majesty of God, will appear to thee as Pismires, nay, even as
nothing. In fine, then will all thy comfort, all thy pleasure, all thy
satisfaction and affection be lodged after a most solid manner in thy God
alone. I leave thee now to judge whether this be not a most noble life, and
worthy of so much pains taken to purchase it.


MAN. THy words of Lord, are as dreadful to me, as Thunder and lightning are
to the timorous and pregnant Hind. Thy Doctrine is so sublime, and surpasses
so much my understanding, that I cannot conceive it. Do thou think that man
in his frail, and mortal flesh can lead the life of an Angel? that a Pilgrim
can pretend to the prerogatives of the Blessed? or that he can live on earth so
conformable to the Rules and Rites of the Saints in Heaven. What man alive can
pass over his mortal days without Sin. Thou know that there is nothing more
unsettled, and more inconstant then the mind of man, and will thou require of
him, as an incumbent duty, to be always in contemplation of heavenly things, to
have his thoughts always fixed upon thee, to stand at all hours in the presence
of God, and never to have the least correspondence with the world, or with any
earthly affairs? I know that with the powerful assistance of thy Grace, he
might easily comply with thy will in all these prescriptions; and I know
likewise that Nature will never bear the rigor of such weighty impositions, so
contrary to her inbred inclinations; for the motions of Grace and Nature, are
directly opposite in operations; both tend to good, but the good that one aims
at, is a great evil to the other, so that many may be deceived in their
election of this, or that other good. Grace walks on innocently, and without
any disguise; she is ignorant of all Quibbles, and fallacies, she declines from
all things that bear, even the shadow of evil, and does all her actions purely
for the love of God, whom she owns to be her bountiful headspring, Prototype,
and final end; this is very good in her thoughts; yet Nature looks upon it to
be quite contrary, for she is subtle, politic, alluring, and with her charms,
she draws, insnares, and deceives many; as for her last end, she will admit of
none, but of self-interest. Grace delights to mortify and pull down the Flesh,
to curb, and utterly suppress all the Insurrections and Rebellious motions of
the old man, to resist all sensuality, she loves to be kept under, to be
Crossed in her inclinations, to be deprived of her proper will, and barred of
her liberty; to be under correction, rather then have the command of others; to
be always submissive to God, and for his sake to become an humble Servant, and
even a slave to all mankind; but Nature is directly contrary in her temper, she
is desirous of all manner of pleasure, and has an abhorrence for mortification,
and hates to be curbed, to be oppressed, or debarred from her inclinations, she
will command, rather then obey; for she detests discipline, and will not (if
she can possibly avoid it) submit her self to any higher Power.

Grace will rather choose to do what is beneficial to others, then what is
profitable and convenient for her self; but nature will labor for her own
advantage, and if she does any service to others she will expect to be
accordingly rewarded. Grace will return faithfully all honor and glory to God
(as being the Sovereign alone deserving of it) but Nature will thirst after
honors and reverence, after Supremacy and dignitys, and thinks that Cap and
Knee is for her alone. Grace will rejoice to be debass'd, and to suffer
reproaches, and injuries for the name of Jesus, but Nature abhors the very
thoughts of such sufferings, and will use all means possible she can to avoid
them. Grace cannot endure to be idle, but ever thirsts after action, but Nature
is so well pleased with ease, and quietness, that the conceit alone of toil,
and disturbance, is to her as odious, as the Plague it self. Grace delights in
low and sordid employments, and will not repine at a course and thredbare
garment; but Nature does place her comfort, and whole satisfaction in curious
and costly Apparel, and will be strangely disturbed, when humbled and brought
to any mean exercise. Grace is absolutely for heavenly things, she passes by
the temporal, she values not their loss, neither is she disturbed at evil
accidents: because she has placed all her treasure and pleasure in Heaven,
where nothing can suffer any loss or detriment, but Nature has all her
attention to temporal things, puts all her satisfaction in Earthly wealth, is
sad for the loss of them, and cannot bear the least affront or injury.

Grace is piously inclined, and free to communicate her favors to all, without
any exception, but Nature is greedy, and covetous, she is wholly for proper and
private interest; she cannot see the way to the poor man's house, but she is all
eyes to find out the rich and liberal; she is not willing to stretch her hand
to the needy, but she is pleasant when she is touched in the hand with a
weighty gift. Grace draws all Creatures to God, not for her own Interest, for
she is an absolute Enemy to the World, she abhors all sensual desires,
excursions are odious to her, and blushes to appear in public; but Nature's
delight, and greatest pleasure is to be conversant with the Creatures, to
pamper her own flesh, to discourse of vain and idle matters, and if a heavy
word casually fall in by the by of a neighbor, Quod ti by non vis fieri alteri
non fecris.
she will enlarge upon it, contrary to that fundamental rule, of her own proper
and positive law, what you would not be done to, don't do it to another.

Grace seeks for her comfort in God alone, and finds in that Summum bonum more
fatisfaction and pleasure, then in all visible and delightful objects of this
world. Grace expects no temporal reward for what favors she exhibits, for God
alone is her retribution, and of all temporal necessaries, she covets none, but
what may exactly help her to the acquisition of eternal Bliss; but Nature does
all her actions for lucre of future gain; for she can do nothing gratis, no,
she must have a more ample, or at least an equal return for her work, and that
must be paid her down in Specie; if that fails her, she will expect a large
commendation, or the cast of a considerable favor on occasion.

Grace loves even her mortal enemies, she becomes not proud of her rich, and
well-qualified friends, she is nothing extolled with the height of her
extraction, and noble blood of her Ancestors, if virtue do not accompany them;
she favors more the poor, then she does the rich; and has more compassion of
the innocent Criminal, then of the Potent Malefactor; she is a friend to truth,
and an enemy to falsehood; she is never weary to exhort the good to a more
eminent perfection, and to become the faithful followers of their gracious
Redeemer; but Nature is overjoyed to see her self amongst an abundance of
friends, and relations, she glories in her noble extraction, and speaks highly
of the antiquity of her family; she is complesant to the powerful, flatters the
Rich, applands her fellows in Iniquity, and pushes them on to a further
acquisition of vice, she makes virtue to seem rediculous to them, that she may
the easier have a full Empire in their hearts, and sit the safer in her throne.
Grace will be nothing surpised to see her self reduced from a high and
plentiful State, to a low and indigent condition; but Nature will grumble,
repine, and snarl at Gods Providence for so great, and so unexpected a downfall.

Grace attributes all goodness to God, as being the chief Source, and offspring
thereof, she will brag of no good, that she can do of her self; she is content
with the bare notion of Gods packet-bearer, that brings his Commissions from
Heaven, to the wicked and rebellious of the World, and to solicit them, to a
new and speedy reform, both of their lives and manners; she is nothing
arrogant, nothing clamorous, or contentiously given, but has her understanding,
and senses submissive to the eternal Wisdom's examination, direction, and
conduct; but Nature covets to be informed of all Secrets, to know all
novelties, to be much abroad, to be present where the greatest resort is, her
senses must all be at hot work, she must know all people, and all must be
acquainted with her; Grace is quite contrary in her disposition; she is for a
more sublime employment: she values not those Trifles, that Nature is so
enamored with, neither is she curious to know those silly intrigues, and
foolish formalities of the World, because they are all the products of a long
standing corruption, and therefore they cannot be grateful to her, for she will
have us not to busy our senses with them; but to avoid all manner of
ostentation, and vain complacency, nay she will have us abscond in all
humility, what is really commendable, and worthy of all men's admiration, she is
much of the nature of a Be that gathers honey out of the most poisonous herbs,
if she sees any thing praiseworthy in men (though never so wicked) she gathers
it, into her honeycomb, and considering it to be a participation of Gods
goodness, she makes an oblation of it to his greater honor and glory: she
abhors that her self, or any good work she does, should be published, or
applauded, but that the Almighty should be ever blessed in all his gifts; and
since we have nothing of our own that can be called good, if any good work we
do, God must be the Promoter of it, consequently Grace will have us to refer it
to him alone, and not boast of it, as of our own production.

It Is this great distance betwixt Nature and Grace, and their main opposition
in matter of Government, that makes me, in a manner despair of ever getting the
better of my depraved nature, prone to evil, even from her Cradle; for she had
her downfall by Adam's Transgression, and the punishment thereof by a Decree
from Heaven, was entailed upon all her Posterity, so that Nature, which (as
first created) walked uprightly in all her ways, became vicious by his sin, and
to that degree, that all her motions are bent to evil, and is her self so
blind, that she leads her poor Pupils, I mean the poor Souls that are Lodged
within her precincts, into the Precipice of eternal Damnation.

The little strength that remained in her after this fatal overthrow, may be
very well compared to a small sparkle, that lies glowing under the Cinders, and
this I call natural Reason, which is altogether overclouded, notwithstanding
she can discern what is true, and what is false; what is good, and what is
evil; but has not the power to fulfill all that she approves, for she is both
sick, and crazy, as well in all her Senses, as in all her affections.

Wherefore O my most gracious Lord! Genesis 1.1.
who have created me to thine own Image and likeness, grant me I beseech thee,
that great grace of thine, so necessary to my Salvation, that I may overcome my
poor, frail, and corrupt nature, which leads me to sin, and even to perdition.
Romans 7.23.
For I feel within my own flesh the law of sin, which does contradict, and
control the law of my mind; and drives me on Captive to all manner of vice;
Insomuch that I cannot resist its unruly Passions, unless thou do infuse thy
all-conquering grace into my heart. It Is true I find my self interiourly
inclined toward the practice of thy divine Law; I know thy Commands to be
good, just and holy; and that the evil of sin is to be avoided, above all the
miseries imaginable; yet in my self, I am still an obedient slave to the law of
Sin, and am more prone to obey the Dictates of Sensuality, then those of a
right understanding and reason. I know the good but I want the will to practice
it: I often purpose to do what is grateful to thee, and which may conduce to
my own eternal Salvation, but alas! the least obstacle brings me off from my
good resolutions. I know likewise the way to perfection, and do see full well
what I ought to do for to attain it, but alas! I am so pressed down with the
weight of of my corruptions, that I am not able to climb toward it. So that I
see clearly how necessary is thy Grace, to begin a good work, to go on with the
same, and to bring it to a complete end; for without thy Grace I can perform
nothing, but I shall be able to do all, if I be assisted with the same. Thy
Grace then O Lord, is our strength, our chief support, and the solid foundation
of all our merits. From it alone, all gifts of nature receive their estimate,
no human Arts, no Sciences, no Riches, no Beauty, no strength, no Wit, no
Eloquence, (though never so charming) is of any value without it.

The gifts of Nature are common, as well to the wicked, as to the Just; but
Grace is the proper Prerogative of the Elect, which gives them an assured title
to life everlasting. It Is so eminent a favor, that the gift of Prophecy, the
operation of Miracles, and even the most eminent Speculation, is of no worth
without it; nay, Faith, Hope, and all other Virtues can never be grateful to
thee O Lord, unless they have Grace and Charity along with them; it makes the
poor of Spirit, rich in virtues; and the most opulent in earthly Treasures,
humble and low in heart. She is the Mistress of Truth, the Teacher of
Discipline; the Light of our understanding, the Comfort of the afflicted, a
deliverer from all Sadness, a remedy against fear, a nurse of Devotion, and a
most powerful Instrument to draw sorrowful sighs, and bitter tears from our
hearts, and eyes; What am I without thy Grace O Lord? what? but a dry land and
a fruitless Tree, fit for no other use, then to be cast into the fire.
Wherefore O Lord let thy grace prevent me always, and go with me, in all my
ways, that I may be the more able to perform thy commands, and comply with thy
blessed will.


SAVIOVR. O Man, Sancti esto te quoniam ego Sanetus sum Dominus Deus vester.
Lev. 11.44.
will thou condemn me, that thou may be justified? will thou accuse me of too
much rigor, and want of discretion, that thou may be excused of thy
intolerable negligence, sloth, and transgressions? did thou not hear me
speak by my servant Moises to the People of Israel, Perfectus and absque macula
eris cum Domino Deo tuo. Deu. 18.13 Estore perfecti sicut and Pater vester
coelestis perfectus est. Matt. 5.48 Cum metu timore, and tremore, operamini
salutem vestram. Phil. 2.12. Nostra conversatio in coelis est. Phil. 3.20. Ubi
amor ibi oculus. St. Bern. Ubi Thesaurus tuus est ibi and Cor tuum erit. Matt.
6.21 Verius est anima ubi amat quam ubi animat. Aug.
that they should be all Saints, because that I the Lord their God am a Saint;
that they should be all perfect and without the least Spot in my presence. The
same command was often repeated to thee in the law of Grace; there thou shall
find what a weighty obligation thou lie under, to be perfect as thy Father
in heaven is. It Is a tribute due to the Divine Justice, and as thou have thy
life from him with that obligation, to spend it wholly in virtue, and in his
faithful Service, thou can not do otherways, without incurring his great
displeasure, my Apostle was ordered by me to warn thee, and all mankind, to
work your Salvation with fear, apprehension, and trembling; never to cease
praying, and to be always employed in some good work or other.

Thou tellest me of being a frail man; was not Peter, was not Paul, and the
rest of my Apostles made of the same stuff as thou art? yet they tell thee,
that their daily and hourly conversation was in Heaven. Thou have been often
told, that he is accursed who will either say, or believe that God has
commanded impossible things to Man. His very first Precept to him, is, that he
must love God with all his heart; and will thou tell me that this is an
impossible thing? thou beleivest, I suppose, this maxim, where the love is,
there the eye is, and that other; where thy creasure, there thy heart is. I
shall add another maxim, which is no less credible, that the Soul is more
assuredly there where she loves, then where she animates; now lay thy hand on
thy conscience, and tell me how often has that unruly and predominant love,
which thou have for a filly Creature, obliged thee to pay her a visit with all
humility, respect, patience, and with all the expressions imaginable of a most
tender affection; how often have thou entreated that object of thy lust to give
thee a favorable admittance into her presence? did thou ever think the time
long in her company? no, though it were a whole day, it seemed but a moment to
thy thoughts; would thou not undergo all the fatigues imaginable, to be
admitted into her favor? nay, to purchase a smile or an amourous glance of her
eye; thou would I am sure endanger, even thy sweet life. And will thou be
backward to do as much for me? who came from my Fathers breast, to my Servants
womb, from my heavenly Palace to a dirty Stable; from a seat of Glory, to a
Land of misery; from the company of Angels, to that of brute beasts; from a
peaceable and well-settled government, E^^erat snbditus illis. Luke 2.51.
to be subject to, and under the command of a poor Carpenter, and all this was
to retrieve thy lost Soul; will thou not, I say, do as much for me, who have
sustained labor and toil the full space of thirty three years, being all that
time needy and poor, as the Evangelists testify of me, going bear-headed and
without Shoes, destitute of lodging or Clothes to defend me against the
Weather; All this I suffered to lodge thy Soul in Heaven for an eternity, or
for me who have been betrayed by my own Disciple, delivered over into the hands
of my Enemies, Scourged, Crowned with thorns, condemned, and nailed to a
shameful Cross, and thereon died to purchase for thee, as well as for all
mankind, an Eternity of Glory. And shall I have no other return from thee, for
all my aforesaid kindnesses, then to tell me that thou art a frail man, and not
an Angel, as if the perfection which I require of thee, was rather to be
expected from those heavenly Spirits, then from so weak and frail a creature as
thou art. O ingratitude, beyond all expression, but alas! it is the common
distemper of all mankind, for they do generally despise the bounties of their
Maker; none is content with his State or condition, were he as strong as an
Elephant, as swift as a Buck, as light as a Bird, he shall complain that he
wants the Sagacity of Dogs; the sight of Eagles, the long life of Ravens, nay,
he will repine that he is not immortal, endu'd with the knowledge of things to
come; his ingratitude will not be content with the enjoyment of that neither;
no, he takes it ill that he is not a God upon Earth. He never considers the
advantages of his condition, much less the goodness and love of God to him in
the benefits he enjoys. The benignity of Providence was so great in his regard,
as to give him power to subdue the strongest of Creatures, overtake the
fleetest, reclaim the fiercest, and outwit the craftiest. He is within one
degree of Heaven it self, and yet he is not Satisfied, he would fain have
Heaven for his inheritance, and the glory of Saints for his Patrimony, without
any further trouble. O man, take notice of thy great folly; will thou pretend
to have Heaven at a cheaper rate, then I have had it, who am the only and the
undoubted Heir of that blessed Kingdom. No, that must not be; I have
sufficiently suffered to come to the enjoyments of a crown of glory, and thou
shall enjoy it upon no other terms. Thou must labor for it, and if thou do
but begin the work, my grace shall help thee to bring it to its full
accomplishment.

Let not the frailty of thy nature overballance thy courage, Angelus Domini
Exercitium est. Mal. 2.7.
let not the difficulty which thou art to encounter, oblige thee to a shameful
retreat, for I shall be present with thee in all thy conflicts, to cast dust in
thine enemies face, Constitui te Deum Pharaonis. Exodus 7. Ego dixi Dij estis.
Psalm. 48.
and to put them all to a shameful rout. Remember that thou art not only an
Angel, but even a God upon Earth, for thou have heard me say by my Prophet, of
a Priest of the Levitical Law, that he was the Angel of the Lord of Hosts, and
thou art satisfied that I did appoint Moises to be the God of Pharaoh. Who can
deny but that Holy Men are Gods upon Earth, seeing that I have said it by one
of my Prophets; the perfections of man therefore may, and ought to be
proportionably suitable, to so great a dignity, and why should thou think it
strange that I should expect thee to lead an Angelical life on Earth, and to
raise thy self by contemplation, and spiritual dilection, above thy self, Homo
cum in honor effet non intellexit. Comparatus est in mentis infipientibus and
similis factus est illis. Ps. 48. Si dixerimus quia peccatum non habemus ipsi
nos seducimus. Isa. 1.8.
would thou have the words of my Prophet to be verified in thee? Man being in
honor abides not, he is like the beasts that perish. It Is certain that thou
may, with the assistance of my grace, make so great a Progress in virtue, as
to be equal with the very Angels, even in thy Pilgrimage, and to enjoy a more
excellent crown of Glory, then some of them in heaven. In answer to thy Second
objection, that it is impossible for man to live in the world without sin; it is
true that thou have Scripture for what thou say. For my beloved Disciple
avers, that if mortals will say that they have no sin, they deceive themselves
and that the truth is not in them; In multis offendimus omnes. Jac. 3. Quid est
homo ut immaculatus fit, and ut justus appareat natus demuliere. Job. 15. Non
est homo super terrum qui faciat bonum and non peccat. Eccl. 7. Justus septies
cadit de die. Prove. 24.
the same James my beloved Apostle, and worthy Brother confirms. In many
things, says he, we all offend; and Job, that perfect model of patience, and
worthy object of all men's imitation, sets this question, what is man that he
should be clean? and he which is born of a Woman, that he should be righteous.
But thou must understand, that Sin is properly called a transgression, either
of the divine, or of the natural, or of the positive law. A man by Gods grace,
may, and ought to be free from this, because it is a mortal sin, which he is
commanded and bound to avoid, for as much as it does give a deadly wound to his
Soul. It Is not like to a venial Sin, for the Wise will tell thee, that there is
not a just man upon Earth, that does good and sins not: no, for a just man
falls seven times a day, and rises up again.

As for the instableness of man's heart, thou may be very well satisfied with
my Apostles answer; for I must allow him to be a better Judge in that case,
then thou art; having had a far greater trial of the world, and more
experience in the hearts of men, then thou can pretend to. For he was first a
grand Persecutor of my Church, and after a Vessel of Election, to bring my name
and preach my Doctrine over all the World. If thou will ask him what it was
that wrought that great alteration in him? he will tell thee, Stabiles and
immobiles estote abundantes in opere Domini semper. 1 Cor. 15.
by the grace of God I am what I am; and his Grace which was bestowed upon me,
was not in vain, wherefore my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.

The wise Solomon is much of the same opinion, Justus ejus fundamentum
aeternum. Prove. 10.
for he says that the Righteous is an everlasting foundation; take notice how
my Servants all agree in their Doctrine, they all have it from the same spirit.
Therefore I tell thee, that whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does
them, I will liken him unto a Wise man which built his house upon a Rock: The
rain descended, the Floods came, the winds blew, and beat upon that House: and
it fell not, for it was founded upon a Rock: hence thou may conclude that the
mind of man, which of her own nature, or rather by her own evil custom, is
mighty instable, and turns every way like a Windmill, will with the help of my
grace be easily made steadfast; fortified by the constant practice of virtue,
Optimum est gratia stabilire Cor. Hebr. 13.
and by frequent Acts of Charity become as unmovable as a Rock: therefore my
Apostle says, it is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace.
Experience will give it further Evidence. Thou know that the more fervent
love is, the more it settles the Lover in the Beloved; moreover Custom, being
as it were a second nature; there is nothing so difficult but may be overcome,
and made pleasant, and easy by continual practice: even, so thy mind, if it be
once adorned with divine and spiritual exercises, it will not only with ease,
but fervently also and with very great satisfaction adhere firmly to me, with
more assurance and comfort, then ever the rich Glutton did delight in his
unlawful pleasure and treasures. Thou have as many, and as authentic
Witnesses of this truth, as have been Saints and perfect men in the world.


MAN. O Most gracious Savior, Quid est homo quod memores ejus, aut filius
hominis quoniam visitas eum. Ps. 8.
the Eternal wisdom of God! I return thee my hearty thanks for all thy favors,
and for this wholesome instruction, which thou were pleased to give me. O Lord,
what is man that thou art so mindful of him, or what service do thou expect
from the Son of man, that thou do vouchsafe to visit him so often with the
sweetness of thy frequent consolations? what has he deserved that thou should
be so free to impart thy grace unto him. Nay, if thou should deny him that
great favor, and even abandon him, to his unruly passions, he would have no
cause to complain of thee, for his Sins have justly deserved it. And if thou
should refuse to grant him thy protection, yet has he no reason to repine at
it. But grant me leave O Lord, to make known my grievances unto thee; when I
tell thee of my great difficulty to attain perfection, and the impossibility I
ly under to depress my evilinclinations. Thou do remit me to the powerful
help of thy grace, as if it were even at hand, and in my power to make use of
upon all occasions; whereas I am always imploring it, nay, and often with
weeping eyes do I crave thy mercy; yet all my prayers are ineffectual, I still
being what I was, an empty vessel, void of all grace, cold in my devotion,
weak, frail, and as prone to vice, as ever I was; where is now thy promise O
Lord? where are thy manyfold and often reiterated protestations to give a
favorable hearing to all poor Sinners at any time, when they make their
Addresses to thee. Ask thou say, and it shall be given you. Mat. 7.
Seek and you shall find: Knock and it shall be opened unto you; For every one
that asks, receives, and he that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks,
it shall be opened.

These are thy promises, here are thine own invitations; however, in all
submission, I presume to say what the holy Job confessed in the height of his
afflictions, and what he expressed in the bitterness of his sorrowful and
troubled heart; Job. 30.
I cry unto thee, says he, and thou do not hear me: I stand up, and thou
regardest me not. Jer. Lament. 3.
I may lament with the Prophet Jeremy, and say, that thou have builded against
me, and hedged thy self about with a thick cloud, so that when I cry and shout,
Esai. 63.
thou hear not my prayer. I may likewise complain with the Prophet Isaiah,
that the multitude of thy mercies are restrained from me. O Lord! if what these
great and holy men have said be true, how can I, poor sinful Soul, expect that
my prayers will be heard; or that thou will comply with my earnest and humble
request? I have more reason to apprehend the severity of thy Justice, then to
expect the products of thy mercy, Esdr. 9.
for I may well say with Esdras, O Lord! I am confounded and ashamed before thy
face, for my Sins are multiplied above my head, and my iniquitys have reached
up to Heaven.


SAVIOVR. I Am the searcher of all Hearts, there can be nothing therein, that
is not visible to my eyes. I have all their thoughts in my prospect, and all
the actions of men are registered in my book of accounts, I know that thy fears
and querelous complaints do proceed from a pious, and upright mind, and
therefore am resolved to give a favorable answer to every particular objection
of thine. I know thou do not doubt of the truth of my words, but thou
would fain have the right meaning of them, and conceive at full how my
words, and promises (which seem to be contradictory) may be justified in thee.
Wherefore take it for a certain truth, and an infallible Rule, that none, who
does what lies in him, shall perish, or ever be abandoned by God; no, He is so
merciful a Creator, that He will refuse no body the concurrence of his grace,
for he ardently desires the Salvation of all, without any exception of persons,
as thou may easily conclude by that solemn invitation which he gives to all
mankind; Come unto me, says he, all ye that are heavy, and I will give you
rest; as also by that great care which he takes of every particular man, even
from his Mothers womb, Mat. 11. Angelis suis mandavit de te ut custodiant te in
omnibus vijs tuis. Mat. 4.6.
to dispatch one of his heavenly Courtiers, with express orders to keep,
protect and defend him, as well from the rage of his insulting enemies, as from
all other sinister accidents which poor Mortals are incident to. This and many
more Instances I might produce, of the great tenderness that God has for man,
so that none who is truly a Christian, has the least ground to doubt, but that
he, and his only and dearly beloved Son also, who has suffered so much for men,
and gave even his very Life to save them from Death everlasting, will be ready,
not only to hear their prayers at all times, but also most free, to comply with
their request.

But I must give thee to understand that prayer is an act of virtue, and
therefore it is called, Latria, so that it is not every petition that can be
rightly termed a prayer, for this is an humble demand of decent and necessary
things to Salvation. As thou art obliged to be firmly fixed in the constant
practice of other virtues, thou must be the same in prayer, thou must never
give over, but still continue upon the same subject with God. And withal if
thou do expect to be heard, and to obtain the effects of thy prayer from him,
thou must add the following council to my former, that is, utterly to break off
with vice, and fall into a virtuous life. For what a ridiculous thing it is to
think, that God will remit thee thy Sins, whilst thou art resolved, not to
forsake them, but rather to increase them daily. To hope for any mercy at his
hands, whom thou do dishonor, provoke and offend hourly, what do thou
think of it? is it not to laugh at the Almighty, and to ridicule the
Omnipotent? If thou had dealt so with a terene King, or with one of an
inferior degree, certainly he would be highly displeased with thee, and take
it as a great affront, that thou should crave his pardon for the wrong thou
have done him, and which thou art resolved not to repent; how much more should
the God of infinite Justice, the Lord of unspeakable Majesty, and the Judge of
illuminate Wisdom, be incensed against a poor, wretched creature, that would go
so barefaced to affront him.

By what is said thou may understand that the duty of a well-meaning Orator,
is first to be inwardly grieved to have ever offended his God, secondly to make
him condign satisfaction for all his past offenses, thirdly to purpose firmly
not only to avoid Sin, but also the occasion which may bring him to it. After
this worthy preparation, he then must make a sorrowful, entire, and sincere
confession of all his Sins, to his spiritual Father, and fulfill exactly what
satisfaction he shall enjoin him. If thou do perform this, and live ever
after according to these dictates, thou shall undoubtedly obtain from God the
effect of thy prayer, let it be what thou will, either the remission of thy
sins, or a further increase of Grace, or any other rational request. I must
confess, that he does sometimes, even as a wise and provident Father, delay the
performance thereof, but it is to try, the faith, and patience of his Orators,
and to exercise his Elect, even the most holy among them, that they may be
worthy Presidents to others; or it is to practice their virtue and perfect
resignation to his holy will, in order to gratify them with a more eminent
degree of glory.


MAN. O My most gracious Lord! thou have now made a full and Satisfactory
answer to all my complaints, objections, and Queries, but notwithstanding I am
still so perplexed with anguishes, and so troubled in mind, that I do not know
what to make of my self; or where I may be eased of this worm that gnaws my
guilty conscience, and all my trouble proceeds from a well-grounded
apprehension, that I was never really contrite for my Sins, never made a
sincere and sorrowful confession of them, and that I never prayed to my God as
I ought, or had that great care to amend my Life, and to avoid the occasion of
Sin.


SAVIOVR. O Man be not at all dismayed, thou have often heard that virtue does
consist in the middle, nay it is the middle of too vicious extremes, even as
liberality is a medium betwixt prodigality and tenacity, and therefore I would
have thee to place thy self betwixt despair and presumption; betwixt an
impertinent Security, and an immoderate fear; fix a firm hope in thy God, of
whose mercy thou can not despair without a mortal offense.

However I do not disallow thy fear, when it is in a reasonable degree; for the
wise man will fear upon all occasions, but especially where the matter is in
doubt, whether it will go well or ill with him; as in this case, thou do not
know for certain, whether thou art worthy of Gods love, or deserving of his
hatred; whether thou art in the state of Grace, or in that of Sin; whether
predestinate, or damned for ever.


MAN. O My Savior, to consider seriously how strait is the gate, and narrow is
the way which leads to Salvation! no rational man can choose but admire the
blindness, the vanity, the great folly, or rather madness of wicked men; they
know that they have a Soul which informs, and gives motion to their body; that
this Soul is stamped with the likeness and Image of her Creator; that she is
entailed to an eternity of glory, and yet they run like so many mad wild Boars,
seeking where to satisfy their lustful, and evil inclinations, without the
least thoughts of that ever-blessed Mansion, Heaven: of that radient day of
Eternity, of that day which never will admit of any darkness. But let the
wicked (if they will be so obstinate) run their course; as for my self, I shall
never desist sighing after that Land of Promise, whilst I remain in this vail
of misery, where poor man is environed with so many afflictions, and crosses,
tainted with so many Spots of Sin, pestered with so many brutal passions,
plagued with so many fears and cares; disturbed with so many foolish and vain
curiosities; subject to so many changes, and errors; consumed with so many
labors and toils, liable to so many temptations and snares, sometimes sick
with overmuch eating and drinking, and sometimes also famishing with hunger
and thirst.

O Lord! when shall I see an end put to all these evils? when shall I be freed
from the intolerable slavery of vice; when shall I have thee for the sole
object of all my thoughts? when shall I thoroughly rejoice in thee, Quis me
liberabit de corpore morcis hujus. Romans 7.24.
or when will thou deliver me out of this mortal prison, to enjoy the liberty
of thy beloved in heaven? when shall I be blessed with a solid peace, void of
all trouble, as well of mind, as of body.

O Sweet Jesu! when shall I be so happy as to see thee, and to stand for ever
in the deep contemplation of the glory of thy heavenly Court, and Kingdom? when
shall thou be to me all in all? when shall I sit at that magnificent table
which thou have prepared from all Eternity for thy beloved? Alas! here I am
left a poor and banished creature in an enemies land, where nothing is to be
seen but constant mutinies, daily wars, and great miscarriages.

O Lord! be graciously pleased to Comfort me in my banishment, and to lessen my
sorrow; for all the pleasures of this world seem now a burden to me, and not
any satisfaction; it is therefore that I long to be intimately united with thee,
but my weakness will not admit of that great happiness. I would willingly hear,
and think of heavenly things, but my worldly affairs will not allow it, no more
will my immortifi'd inclinations, and brutish passions: my mind would fain be
above the World, and look with a disdaining eye on all it is allurements, but my
flesh depresses my Spirit, and keeps all my senses captive. Hasten then, O
Lord, and set an end to this intestine War, take my Soul to thee her Creator,
and my Body to its primitive nothing.

Thus do I unfortunate man fight against my self, both night and day, the
Spirit would fain have an absolute supremacy over the flesh, but the flesh does
thwart her, and will dispute the matter with the dint of her furious and
headstrong passions, and I poor Wretch must be the fatal field where these two
mortal foes do fight hand to hand, but alas! the flesh always remains
Conqueror, and marches off with displayed colors. There is no likelihood of a
peace without thy grace: grant therefore O Lord, that these two adversaries may
join in a right understanding, and come to thee with a true sense of their long
and obstinate rebellion; with a sorrowful and contrite heart, and with a firm
resolution to live submissive to thy divine laws, for the remainder of their
mortal life.


SAVIOVR. O Man! even as thou art obliged to love thy God with all thy heart,
and to that degree, that thou would sooner loose, even thy life, and suffer
all the losses and afflictions imaginable, rather then to offend him by giving
consent to the least of mortal Sins; so thou art bound to grieve more for the
committing of one mortal Sin, then for any painful evil, or earthly damage,
though it were the total destruction and ruin of thy Family. This is the grief
which I call contrition, and which may be absolutely accounted the greatest in
nature. Conc. Trent. Sess. 14. c. 4.
My Council of Trent gives thee a perfect Idea of this great and sorrowful
Sacrifice, when it defines it to be a grief of mind; and detestation of Sin,
with a resolution to avoid it for the future.

It is a grief of mind, Sacrificium Deo Spiritus contribulatus. Psalm. 50.19.
that is a great regret, and an inward displeasure, which is conceived in the
heart of man, for having offended his God. It Is also a detestation, which is
hatred, and an aversion which one has to Sin, when he considers it to be a most
wicked thing, a mortal enemy to God, and destructive to his own Salvation. But
there must be a firm resolution made to avoid Sin for the future, and likewise
the occasion which leads to it, this is a necessary consequence of that grief
and hatred of sin; for if thou be'st heartily sorry for the evil committed; and
do truly detest it, thou will also have a will to avoid it, if not, it is most
evident, that thou have neither sorrow nor aversion.

This contrition, to be perfect and effectual, must have four conditions, it
must be interior, Supernatural, universal and Sovereign. It must be interior,
I mean from the heart; for the outward expression of grief, is at best, but a
complement, and a mere illusion, whereby many poor Souls are basely deceived
and utterly ruined. Deuteronomy. 4.
The heart must be sensibly touched with compunction, it must be an act of the
will, thou must convert thy self to God with all thy heart, and seek for him
with the sorrow and tribulation of thy Soul. See how I reprehended the Penance
of the Jews, Scindite cordis vestra and non vestimenta vestra ait Dominus. Joel
2.
they made great exterior signs, even to rent their cloths, but they were not
at all moved in their hearts, and therefore I told them by my Prophet, that
they should convert themselves to me with all their hearts, in tears and
lamentations, and that they should tear their hearts, and not their garments.
Both Scripture and Reason does manifest this truth, that this sorrow for thy
Sins must be lodged in thy heart, and as thy will was the principal cause of
thy Sin, so it must be the chief actor in thy sorrow. Thy heart must renounce
the evil which it has wilfully committed, and detest the sin which it had
formerly affected.

Thy Grief must issue from a supernatural motive, and the reason of it is, that
an action purely natural cannot be a condign satisfaction to me, for thy mortal
transgression of my positive commandment, thou may see by the sorrow of Saul,
who did not grieve for his sin, but for the loss of his Kingdom, which God had
resolved to take from him, to give it to a more faithful, and obedient servant.
Antiochus's sorrow was grounded upon the like motive; for he did not weep for
his sins, but by reason of his great misfortunes. Afflictions may indeed stir
up a Sinner to return to God, but they shall never be able to reclaim him from
his wickedness without my Grace. To obtain which he must detest his sins,
because they are infinitely offensive to God, and a great obstacle to his own
Salvation; these are supernatural motives, without which thy contrition will
signify nothing in order to receive the grace of God.

Thy grief must be also sovereign, that is most powerful. And the reason for it
is, that it is not enough to detest Sin upon a supernatural motive, but that
this motive must overrule all other, that come into thy mind, and rather
detest sin by reason of the damage it brings to thy Salvation, or the injury
done to God thereby, then for any natural evils which it may produce, and be
ready to suffer them all, rather then commit one mortal Sin. This is what
Divines call detesting Sin, Supra omne detestabile, that is, to detest it more
then all which in the world is capable to stir up thy hatred and detestation.

In fine, Ezech. 18.
thy grief must be universal, as to all mortal sins, without excepting any;
it is therefore I ordered my Prophet to tell my People, that they must do
Penance for all the Sins which they had committed; and if the Sinner shall do
Penance for all his Sins he shall live. The reason of it is, that mortal Sins
cannot be remitted, but totally, not one without the rest, for if thou should
reserve an affection for one mortal Sin, though thou should have an abhorrence
against all the rest, thou art still an enemy to God, and a worthy object of
his highest displeasure. By this thou may perceive how grossly they are
mistaken, who pretend to be perfectly contrite, and yet refuse to pardon
injuries, to be reconciled to their Enemies, to restore unlawful goods, to
avoid the immediate occasions of Sin. In a word, all those that have any wilful
tie, to any particular sin, shall have the same measure from my hands, as
Antiochus had, for their Penance as well as his is but imaginary.


MAN O My most merciful Lord! have pity upon me, and let my poor Soul partake
of the wonderful effects of thy great clemency. I acknowledge now the great
evil which I have done; now I see the grievousness of my Sins, now I see how
few have that true and perfect contrition which is so necessary to Salvation;
seeing they relapse into their habitual offenses so soon; and so easily, for
had they that great sorrow for their Sins, they would be certainly more
vigilant to avoid them, then to prevent the greatest of all misfortunes.

They would be also more eager to set a stop to the dangerous current of venial
Sins, since they are the preludes of a vicious habit, and that by degrees they
bring us to make nothing of mortals; for they do notably diminish the lights of
our understanding, the sincerity of our mind is overclouded by them; our heart
overruled; the strength of grace, and the vigor of virtue made weaker, our
Soul disordered, and laid open to all evil impressions.

It Is true, they don't destroy sanctifying grace; but they dispose us very much
to lose it. All together they don't make a mortal sin, but they dispose the
Soul to fall into it. They don't directly cause death; but they create those
spiritual weaknesses, and maladies which bring death with them. In a word, though
venial Sins don't break the league and unity betwixt God and the Soul, which is
grounded upon that happy foundation of grace, yet inperceptably they diminish
it, and by this diminution Charity is weakened in us, and God by degrees
withdraws from us, the chief favors of his assistance in all our spiritual
necessities; consequently having less strength, we fall more easily into mortal
Sin, when we are assaulted by any temptation.

By this I may easily conclude, that whoever is careless to avoid venial sins,
has not a sufficient abhorrence of mortals, for there is nothing so venial but
may be, through an immoderate complacency, dissolution, or recreation, become
of the number of mortals, and perhaps of the most capital Sins. How then is it
possible, for those that continue whole hours, nay from morning till night in
Taverns, and Tipling-houses, Ranting, Drinking, Vae qui cogitatis inutile.
Mich. 2. Vae vobis qui ridetis quia flebitis.
Dancing, and other such like dissolutions to be excused from mortal Sins,
since that God threatens with a woe, even those who think of unprofitable
things. He does the same to those that place all their consolation and felicity
in Riches. As also to those that in any thing belonging to nature take pleasure
to excess. Ah! Vae vobis divitibus qui habetis consolationem vestram. Et vae
vobis qui saturati estis. Luke 6
These are my familiars, O Lord, wherewith I have so often displeased thee;
rebellious, ungrateful, and perfidious creature, as I am. I have been created
to thy Image and likeness, but alas! by my Sins I have made my Soul most like
unto the Devils, those monsters of ingratitude.

By my Sins I have often renewed the bitter Death and Passion of Jesus thy
beloved Son, Quis dabit Capitimeo aquam, and oculis meis fontem lachrimarum?
and plorabo die ac nocte. Jer. 9.1
O how can I worthily deplore so great an evil! who will give water to my head,
and a fountain of tears to my eyes, to lament both night and day my misery and
malice? To have contributed to thy death O Lord, is of all other motives the
most powerful to replenish my mind with grief and sorrow; and therefore do
desire to hear from thy self the particulars of it.


SAVIOVR. KNow then, that after I had taken man out of the bowels of the Earth
with a Faciamnus, and created him, to my own Image and likeness; in order to
make him sole Lord and absolute Monarch of the whole Universe, with full power
to take and taste of all things that a most pleasant paradise could afford, (the
fruit of Life only excepted). He the ungrateful and rebellious creature,
considering the great advantage of his condition, and the greatness of his
dignity, which should be to him a sufficient motive to love, obey, respect and
praise me for ever; took thence occasion to mutiny, rebel and desert me, and
enter into a league against me with Lucifer, whom I had a little before
expelled Heaven for his thoughts of Pride and Ambition; and who, from that very
moment made a vow to deface and destroy my Picture, being that he could not
annoy my Person. This so heinous an offense, deserved he should be immediately
commanded out of that Terrestrial Paradise, where he was created and lived like
a petty Prince, and where he had all other creatures, even the most furious
among them, at his beck, to do with them as he thought fit. Accepisti argentum
and vestes a Naaman sed and Lepra Naaman adhaerebit tibi, and semini tuo usque
in sempiternum. 4 Reg. 5.


He was therefore turned off as a vagabond, cast into exile, and made liable to
suffer the punishment, even of the damned, for as he became an associate to the
Devil in Sin, 'twas fit he should be his companion in torment. Thou have heard
of my Judgment inflicted on Gehazi my Prophets servant, and how, for taking
Naaman's money and cloths, for the cure of his Leprosy; I ordered that for his
covetous transgression, both he and all his generation to the worlds end,
should share in his Leprosy, as he did in his garments. Even so have I decreed
against man, who had so much affected Lucifers Pride and Ambition, that he
should be likewise infected with his Leprosy, and as he was obedient to his
suggestions, he should partake of his punishments also. Behold the fatal
Metamorphosis of man, and how for imitating the Devil in his rebellion, he
forfieted my resemblance, to put on that of this most horrid and hideous
Monster of Hell.

Man being made so abominable by sin, and so great an eyesore to my divine
Essence, I in mercy was moved, not to reflect so much upon the injury done to
my Supreme Majesty, as not to condole the greatness of his deplorable misery,
and was more inclined to compassionate his weakness; then to be revenged of his
crime. Whereupon to repair his loss, I undertook to mediate his peace with my
heavenly Father, and in order to so great a work, I contracted with humane
nature so strict an alliance, that I became both God and man, which was so
grateful to my Father, that he not only forgave man all his past
transgressions, but also received him into favor with all the demonstrations
of joy that could be expressed. Who would ever expect that so large and so
dangerous a breach should ever be repaired? who would ever imagine that two
things so opposite one to the other, as is the divine, to humane nature; should
come to subsist and remain together, not in one house, not at one table, nor in
one bed, but in one and the self-same person. This is a miracle beyond the
expectation of man, and indeed beyond th'expression of an Angel, for there
cannot be any two more contrary then is God and the Sinner: yet now what two
can be more firmly united, or have greater influence, then God and man. There
is nothing more sublime then God, Pulvis es and in pulverem reverteris. Genesis 1.
and nothing more vile, and despicable then man. Notwithstanding, God with all
humility descends from Heaven to man; and man ascends to Heaven with God; so
that the action of man is the same with that of God, and whatever God is said
to have done, may be justly imputed to man, because that I am both God and man.

Who would ever believe that man, to see him naked after his dismal fall, and
absconding in one corner or other in Paradise for to keep himself from Gods
indignation and wrath, who would believe I say, that such a fordid and
contemptable substance, should be in time united to God in one and the same
Person?

This was a strange union indeed, and a true lovers knot, for when it was upon
the dissolution at the time of my Passion, it did not in the least fail, but
was rather violently separated, to show what an amorous inclination I had to be
still united to humane nature. Death indeed might have taken my Soul from my
body, and break off that union of nature which kept them together; Quod semel
assumpsit nunquam dimisit. Aug.
but had not the power to withdraw my Godhead from either of them, for that was
an union of the divine person, which I shall never relinquish, having once
fixed upon it with all the tenderness of a most ardent love.


MAN. O Lord! I am so much obliged to thee, for this extraordinary great
favor, that I am not able to return thee sufficient thanks, for the way and
means which thou have taken to redeem me, and my very redemption is so great a
benefit, that no Angelical tongue is able to express it. All that I can say,
is, that I am bound by all the ties both of nature and conscience to love thee,
and stand submissive to thy laws for ever: Thou have delivered my Soul out of
the infernal Dragon's jaws: and without any merit of mine, but merely through
the multitude of thy mercies, thou have reconciled me to thy self, This is
eternally worthy of praise. But if I consider how, and after what manner thou
have done me that unspeakable favor, I shall find that it does exceed even
that great work of my redemption. Thy works are wonderful in all their
circumstances; Mirabilis Deus in Sanctis suis
and though man when he considers one, does really believe that nothing can go
beyond it, it is so prodigious in his eye, yet when he brings his mind to the
serious contemplation of another of thy wonders, his former amazement is over,
and his eyes are totally fixed upon this, Et Sanctus in omnibus operibus suis.
even to the annihilation of his senses. This his judgment of the matter does
not at all diminish the greatness of thy glory, but rather gives it a more
resplendent luster, and makes appear how wonderful and holy thou art in all thy
works.

But by what means O Lord were thou pleased to release me out of my bondage,
Quis potest facere mnndum de immundo semine nonne tu qui solus es. Job.
to cleanse my Soul of all her iniquities? Thou might indeed have restored me
several ways to a perfect health of Soul, even by a word of thy mouth, without
any further labor or cost but thy liberality was so great, and so wonderful
toward me, that to give me a perfect demonstration of the excess of thy
goodness, and love, thou were pleased to help me out of my misery, with such
excessive pains and anguishes, that the very thoughts of them brought a bloody
Sweat over all thy limbs: and thy bitter Passion, which did immediately follow,
was of force to rent and split even the hardest Rocks with grief. Let the
Heavens therefore praise thee O Lord! and all the Saints and Angels extol thy
wonders and the greatness of thy mercy! Thou can live of thy self independent
of man, who is, at his best, but a handful of clay; and consequently could
neither be a hindrance to thy glory, nor give it any further increase; and if
the perpetual destruction of all mankind had ensued the dismal fall of Adam,
Si peccaveris, quid eum nocebis. and si multiplicatae fuerin^ iniquitates tuae
quid facies contra eum, porro si justus eris quid donabis ei, aut quid de manu
tua accipiet. Job. 35.
it could not have been in any respect prejudicial to thee; for as holy Job
says, if thou Sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy transgressions be
multiplied, what do thou unto him? If thou be righteous, what give thou
him? or what receives he of thine hand? Thou art O Lord, so rich, that thy
wealth cannot be increased; so potent, that thou can not be more powerful;
and so wise, that thou want not the counsel of any. Thou art neither greater
nor lesser, before, nor after the Creation of the World. Though all the orders of
Holy Angels should incessantly sing thy praises, and though all Sublunary
creatures should be constantly employed in the like affair, thou can not be
more glorious, then thou art, nor less though they should all combine to curse,
and Blaspheme thee. When we were all thy professed Enemies, thou were pleased
to debase thy self so low, as to descend from thy heavenly Throne, into this
Land of misery; to put on the habit of our mortality, make thy self liable to
all our debts, and for the satisfaction thereof, to suffer the greatest
torments, that the malice and rage of Man or Devil could ever invent.


SAVIOVR. THou say true, O Man, for thy Love I was content to be born in a
stable, laid in a manger, betwixt an Ox and an Ass, to receive a little heat by
their breathing; wrapped up in clouts, and was eight days after my Nativity
circumcised; so early did I make an effusion of part of my blood, and spent the
remainder to the last drop on the Cross for thy Redemption. It was for the love
of thee that I fled into Egypt, where I continued full Seven years in want and
misery, and after my return what Persecutions and troubles I suffered from the
hands of that ungrateful, and stiff-necked Nation of Israel, was merely for
Love of thee. My fasting, my watching, my journeys from one place to another,
and often disappointed (though weary and faint) of a place to shelter me from the
inconveniences of foul weather, was wholly for thy sake. In Fine, all the
miseries and tortures which thy Sins had deserved, were experienced by me
solely upon the account of thy Love. For I was innocent and without the least
spot of Sin, free from all fallacies or circumventions, and never offensive to
any, though I was wronged and highly injured by all.

For thy sake, O man, was I betrayed by my own Disciple, apprehended by an
unruly and Malignant Rabble, forsaken by my Friends, denied by the chief of my
Apostles, sold to my Enemies for a trifle, Arraigned before a Judge; accused as
a Criminal, Sentenced and condemned as a notorious Malefactor; exposed to the
Scoffs and derisions of the Multitude: Before my Execution I was scourged with
no less cruelty, then shame and disgrace: delivered over to th'insolence of
insulting, and bloody Soldiers, who Crowned me with Thorns as a Mock-King, in
derision and Scorn. In Fine, I was led to execution, nailed to a shameful
Cross, exposed to the view of all the World between two Thieves, as if I had
been an Impostor, a Cheat, and the worst of Men. At last, O man, amidst these
excessive pains of my Body, Pater in manus tuas commendo Spiritum meum. Ecce
ego mitte me.
and far greater anguishes of my Soul, over whelmed with sorrow and confusion,
I poured out my last Breath in th'arms of the Cross, recommending my Spirit
into the hands of him that sent me, at my own request to purchase thy
Redemption.

Give ear, O man, to the sorrowful description which my Prophet gives thee, as
well of my Person, as of the torments which I have suffered for thee. There was
no beauty in him, says he, nor comeliness, and we have seen him despised, and
made the most abject of Men; he was a man of sorrow, and knowing infirmities.
We hid, as it were, our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him
not. He surely has born our infirmities, and our sorrows he has carried,
Propter Scelus populi mei percussi eum. Isa 53
and we have thought him to be, as it were, a Leper and stricken of God, and
humbled: and he was wounded for our iniquities, he was broken for our Sins: The
discipline of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed: God,
says he again, has laid on him all our iniquities, and has stricken him for
the Sins of his People.

Acknowledge therefore, Agnosce homo quam gravia sunt vulnera pro quibus
necesse fuit unigenitum Dei filium vulnerari. Sinon essent haec ad mortem, and
ad mortem sempiternam, nunquam pro his filius Dei moreretur. Bern. Ser. 3. de
nati. Dom. Pudet itaque dilectissimi propriam negligenter dissimulare
passionem, cui rantum a Majestate tanta video exhiberi: Compassionem compatitur
filius Dei and plorat, Homo patitur and ridebit. Bern. ibid.
O man, how great those thy evils were, that obliged me the only and dearly
beloved Son of God to be thus wounded, mangled, and bruised to cure them.
Certainly, if those Sores had not been mortal, and even the fatal causes of the
eternal death of thy Soul, I had never suffered so cruel a death for her
recovery. Can there be a more considerable or a pressing motive to lament and
abhor thy Sins, then to remember that they were the only cause of all my
sufferances, and even of my most bitter death upon the Cross. The Jews went
once through Jerusalem, and bewailed the destruction of that Royal City, and
the loss of their King: how much more reason have thou to lament thy great
misfortune, to have occasioned my death, who am thy King, thy Redeemer, and he
only that can either pardon thee thy sins, or condemn thee for them to an
eternity of pains.

O man, let this consideration be the constant subject of thy serious
meditations; it will pierce thy heart, unless it be harder and more obdurate
then the very Stones. This very consideration made one of my faithful servants
to say, that it is a shameful thing for Christians not to acknowledge the
evils, which sin has brought upon them, when they consider, what so supreme a
Majesty, as that of the Son of God, has been obliged to suffer for them. The
Son of God says he, takes compassion on the miseries of man, and weeps for
sorrow; whilst insensible man, who is overwhelmed with his own sins, is not
concerned at all.


MAN. O My dear Lord and Master, thou have said enough to conquer my heart, and
to bring also the whole universe to admire the greatness of thy love for man.
For what can be more worthy of our admiration then to behold a God of so
infinite a Majesty finish his life under the notion of a notorious malefactor,
upon a shameful Cross, and betwixt two Thieves. Had I seen a man (though he were
the basest and most vile amongst the People) brought to that misfortune, as to
be condemned (for his crime) to die so cruel a death, certainly I could not
choose but compassionate his condition, and condole that his misdemeanors
should have brought him to so great a distress. If it be then a subject worthy
our compassion to see a man of that inferior rank and condition, for his own
crimes in so deplorable a state, what will it be, I pray, to see, not a man,
but the Lord of all created things, (for the Sins of his servants) reduced to
that extremity? Can there be any thing more wonderful, then to see even God
himself plunged into so great an abyss of anguishes and pains for the sins and
wickedness of wretched Men? If the calamity, and misfortune suffered, must be
retaliated with a trembling and astonishment, proportionable to the worth and
dignity of the person that suffers, O ye Angels of Heaven! who have a perfect
knowledge of the greatness, and excellency of my benign Jesus, our gracious
Redeemer, and your Creator; tell me how great was your grief, how stupendous
your astonishment, how excessive was your lamentation and trouble, when you
have seen him hang on that hard and uneasy cross? The Cherubins, (whose
figures) God had ordered in the old Law to be placed on each side of the Arck
of Alliance, looked then at each other with admiration, to behold this bloody
Sacrifice of that innocent and immaculate Lamb for the redemption of mankind,
Nature it self stood amazed, and all creatures were interdicted their inbred
inclinations and functions. The Principalities, and Powers of Heaven trembled
at the very consideration of the unspeakable goodness of God, though so
intimately acquainted therewith. What then shall become of those that do not
swim in the waves of so great an ocean of admiration? Dominator Domine Deus
misericors and clemens patiens and multae miserationis. Exodus 34.
or what of those that are not drowned in the Seas of so great a bounty? are
not they deprived of their senses, even as Moises was on Mount Sinai? where the
figure of this bloody sacrifice was so lively represented to him, that he cried
out with a loud voice, the Lord; the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth. So much Surpised was he at the
view of thine excessive goodness, O Lord, that he could not forbear praising
thy mercy in the hearing of all the multitude of Israel. The Prophet Helias
covered his face as God passed by him in the splendour of his glory, much more
then should all mortals cover theirs to behold Gods profound humility and
annihilation. Now not overthrowing mountains, and spliting Rocks with his
infinite power; but exposed to the view of a malignant and most wicked Nation,
and in so terrible and dismal a posture, that even the Rocks and Temple were
rent asunder with an excess of compassion. What man of Steel, what heart of
brass will not relent, and open his breast to lodge therein the love of so
charming, so gracious, and so bountiful a God. O height of charity! O
profoundness of humility, never to be paralel'd! O unspeakable mercy! O Abiss
of incomprehensible bounty! O my most gracious Lord! If I be so much obliged to
thee for redeeming me, how much more am I bound to thee for the means which
thou have taken to redeem me? Thou have redeemed me with pains, with sorrow,
with scorns, with reproaches, with nails and thorns, and have been made the
derision of men, and even the most vile of the whole world. However O Lord, by
thy contumelies, thou have honored me; by thy false accusations thou have
defended me; with thy blood thou have washed me, by thy death thou have revived
me: and by thy tears thou have delivered me from a perpetual weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

O heavenly Father! how tenderly thou love thy Children: thou art indeed that
good, and faithful Pastor, thou give thy self as food to thy flock. O
faithful keeper, who have laid down even thy precious life for to protect and
defend thy Sheep which thou had in thy keeping, what thanks, or what service
can I return thee for so great a favor? with what tears can I recompense thy
weeping, or what life shall I bestow upon thee, for that pure and holy one
which thou have given for me? Alas! there is no proportion betwixt the life of
man, and that of God; betwixt the tears of a silly creature, and that of an
omnipotent Creator. It Is true, thou have not suffered for me alone, but for all
the world; shall I therefore think my obligation the less to thee, no, no, for
though thou sned'st thy most precious blood for all mankind, yet it was after
such a manner, that every particular man received the benefit from thy
sufferings. In fine, thou did suffer thy bitter and bloody passion as well
for me in particular, as thou have for all in general. O my God, thy charity
was so immense, that if but one alone of all mankind were criminal, even for
that one man, thou would have suffered what thou did for all; how much then
am I obliged to thee who have bestowed so many, and such great favors upon me,
and who would have done far greater things to purchase my Salvation, if
necessity had required it.


SAVIOVR. I Would have thee, and all other creatures of the same Species to
tell me, whether there was, or can be any benefit, obligation or grace greater;
then what I have conferred upon thee; let all the Choires of Angels declare,
whether I had exhibited the like favors to them, or given them any such proofs
of my excessive kindeness, and of my ardent love, and after all, will thou
refuse to consecrate thy self wholly unto me? will thou deny to sacrifice all
thine actions, inclinations and passions to my divine will and pleasure? Thou
can not deny but that thou art wholly mine by three several titles. First,
because I created thee, thou, with all that thou have belongest to me:
Secondly, because I redeemed thee, thou art mine as aforesaid, but by a more
strict title: Thirdly, because thou have promised in thy Baptism to be mine for
ever; and therefore, without committing a Sacrilege, thou can not dispose of
thy self otherwise: why then do thou delay to give thy self wholly to me, and
without any reserve, being thou art mine already by so many just titles? O
Ingratitude never to be paralel'd! O hardness of neart never to be sufficiently
admired! Thou art certainly more obdurate, then ever the most impenetrable
Rocks, since that thou will not relent and suffer thy self to be gained by so
many, and such extraordinary great favors. There is nothing so hard but may be
mollifi'd by some art or another; the most obdurate mettle is mollifi'd by
fire; Iron is made pliable by the same element; the hardness of an Adamant is
overcome and made soft with the blood of a Buck; but thy heart, O man, is
harder then any rock, harder then steel, harder then the very Adamant; being
neither the fire of Hell, nor the charms of thy heavenly Father, no, nor the
blood of the most immaculate Lamb can mollify it, and make it tractable and
submissive to my commands. How do thou think I can bear such horrid
ingratitude? I loved thee, and thou do hate me; I have laid several
obligations on thee, and thou do forget them all, being thou art not ashamed
or afraid to offend me at all hours, and upon all occasions. O man! what can
thou love if thou do not love me? what favor can move thee to a kind
return, if my benefits cannot prevail? how can thou but love, serve and
worship me, who am so much enamored with thee, who have sought thee when thou
were lost, with so much care and diligence; and who have redeemed thee from all
evil with so much labor and toil.

Thou have heard me say, Si exaltatus fuero a terra omnia traham ad me ipsum.
Joa. 13. In funibus Adam traham vos. Osee. 1. Qui non diligit manet in morte.
1. Jea. 3.15.
if I be lifted up from the Earth, I will draw all men unto me; but with what
chains, with what violence do thou think? with the violence of my
Superabundant charity, and with the chains of my manyfold favors. Who will be
so great an enemy to his own Salvation, as to refuse to be tied with those
cords, and bound fast with those chains. If it be death for a man not to love
me, what will his punishment be if he hates me, and makes nothing to transgress
my commandments? Is it possible O man, that thou should be so Tyger-like as
to stretch thy hands to nail mine to the shameful cross of thy wicked passions;
mine I say, which were so liberal to thee, and so accessory to thy Salvation,
that they freely and without compulsion offered to be transpeirc'd to the wood
of the Cross.

A lascivious woman having solicited the Patriarch Joseph to dishonor his
Master, by commiting adultery with her; was frustrated of her intention by his
worthy defense, in these words, behold, Genesis 39.
my Master knows not what is with me in the house, and he has committed all
that he has to my charge; there is none greater in this house then I, neither
has he kept any thing from me, but thee, because thou art his Wife: How then
can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God? as if he had said, seeing
my Lord and Master was so good, and so liberal to me, since he has entrusted me
with his affairs, and that he has so great an esteem for me as to make me his
favorite, and sole overseer of his house, and fortune; how can I be so
ungrateful to him, after so many great favors, as to defile his bed with so
horrid a crime; no, I cannot attempt it. If these terrene favors have deserved
so worthy a return of gratitude, what love, what service, what submission
should I expect from thee for thy Creation, for thy Redemption, for all the
labors and toils I endured in the space of full thirty three years to procure
thy Salvation. Joseph's Master did entrust him only with what earthly substance
he had, but I gave thee both my self, and all that I had, which is infinitely
more then what Joseph received from his Master: Heaven, Earth, Sun, Moon,
Stars, Seas, Floods, Fowls, Fishes, Trees, Beasts, of all kinds: In a word,
all that is precious under or above the Heavens, are my free gifts to thee,
says my beloved Apostle: Omnia vestra sunt, sive Paulus, five Apollos, sive
Cephas, sive mundus five vita, sive mors sive presentia, sive futura^? omnia
cnim vestra sunt. 1 Cor. 3.
All things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or
life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours; that is to
say, All have I created in order to thy Salvation, nay, to indear thee more to
me, I have given my self to thee in several respects; for I am thy Father, thy
Pastor, thy Savior, thy Master, thy Physician, and the Price of thy Redemption.

Since it is so certain that I have given all into thy hands, how can thou
have the hands or face to offend me? how can thou be so impious to so good a
Father? so ungrateful to so liberal a benefactor? and so obstinate a Rebel to
so bountiful a God. O unhappy man! thou art more ungrateful then the very
beasts, more headstrong then the most fierce among them, and more insensible
then the very Stones. Is it possible that thou art not moved at all this? and
that thou art resolved never to relinquish thy wickedness? what wild Boar, what
Lion, what Tiger would be so unmindful of benefits, as to injure him from whom
they received them? St. Ambrose will tell thee of a Dog that rambl'd a whole
night barking and howling for the death of his Master who had been murdered in
the Road; St. Ambr. lib. 6. Hexame.
next morning a multitude of People came to view the Corpse among which was the
man who had killed his Master; this animal runs at him, and holds him fast,
looking on the bystanders with such a mournful countenance, as if he had
desired Justice, whereupon the murderer was apprehended, and forced to confess
his crime, for which he was immediately sentenced to die. O man! If a Dog for a
piece of bread, had so great a love for his master; and was so faithful to him,
as to lament and vindicate his death, will thou not be displeased at thine
ingratitude, and principally when a dumb beast reprehends it, and teaches thee
to be grateful? If that irrational creature was so much incensed against the
murderer of his Master; why art thou not displeased with those that have slain
thy gracious Lord and Master? and what are they but thy Sins? It Is true, O man!
thy Sins have taken me, have tied me, have scourged me, have crowned me, have
nailed me to the Cross, and were the sole occasion of my bitter death; for the
Jews could never have the power to crucify me, but that thy Sins did both arm
and encourage 'em to it. Wherefore then art thou not highly displeased with
them? why do thou not bend all thy wrath and fury against them, seeing thy
divine Master crucified by them before thine eyes? and especially since my
Death and Passion was designed to breed in thy heart an eternal hatred of Sin.
It was in order to destroy Sin that I suffered death; It was to set a stop to
thy feet and hands, which are so prone to evil even from thy very cradle, that
mine (as an oblation for their evils) were nailed to the Cross. How art thou so
impious, as to live after such a manner, that all my pains taken for thy
Salvation, will signify nothing. Why do thou not tremble at the very mention
of Sin? seeing me suffer such cruel torments to destroy, and root it clean out
of the world. How can thou be so rash, and so great an enemy to thy poor
Soul, as to dare to offend me, seeing Heaven open to cast forth its thunder
bolts upon thy criminal head, and Hell with a dilated mouth ready to swallow
thee both body and Soul?


MAN. O My God, my King, my Savior, my Judge, and my only comfort! Thou art I
confess the Eternal Wisdom, and thy words to me are Spirit and Life, for they
have made me resolve to bid adieu for ever to Sin, and to plant virtue where
vice was before in great request; but give me leave to ask thee what would the
benefit of my redemption avail me, if that of my Justification had not ensued?
for by this it is, that the virtue of the former is applied to the diseases of
my Soul; and even as a plaster (though never so sovereign) will signify nothing
except it be laid unto the wound, so that heavenly medicine would be of no use
or advantage to me, if it had not been applied, by the mediation of this
unspeakable benefit, to the bruises which I received in that fatal field of
Eden, where all mankind were shamefully foiled, and quite overthrown in the
Person of Adam. The Sanctification of man does chiefly appertain to the Holy
Ghost: It Is his prerogative to prevent the Sinner with the sweetness of his
mercy, then to call him, being called, to justify him, and being justified to
direct him, and lead him on to the end of his course, and then to gratify him
with a crown of glory: wherefore I may justly say, that this very benefit is
the happy complement of all others; for by this man is registered in the number
of Gods children, discharged of the main weight of his iniquities, delivered
from the dominion and Tyranny of the Devil; revived from Death to Life, brought
from the state of Sin, to that of Justice, and of a child of malediction and
woe, he becomes the Son of God and Coheir with thee in thy Glory. Nemo potest
venire ad me nisi Pater meus traxerit illum. Joa. 44.
But this cannot be performed without the peculiar help and assistance of the
holy Ghost; as thou have declared to thy beloved Disciple in these words, No
man can come to me, except the Father who has sent me, draw him: whereby I
conceive that neither free will, nor the power of humane nature, can withdraw a
man from Sin, and bring him to Grace, unless he be helped on by the virtue of
thy divine power.

The Angelical Doctor St. Thomas commenting upon these words, says, even as a
Stone by its nature still falls downwards, and can never ascend without some
exterior assistance; so man overpress'd by the corruption of Sin, tends always
downwards, and is powerfully hurried on by his inbred inclinations to the love
and desire of terene, and transitory things; but if he be minded to aim higher,
that is, at the love, and supernatural desire of heavenly things, he must
implore the assistance of thy Divine Spirit, without which, he shall never be
able to make any progress in virtue.


SAVIOVR. O Man thou say well, but I would have thee practice well what thou
say, for it is the practice and not the discourse of good things that can make
thee grateful to me; the serious consdieration of this unspeakable benefit,
should indeed press thee to it, and make thee most diligent to atchieve it,
which is a matter of greatest moment to thee; for by this, thou art reconciled
to me, and cleans'd from Sin, which is the worst of all evils, and the only
evil I most hate and abhor; it alone is able to bring my indignation and wrath
upon thee, Odisti omnes qui operantur iniquitatem; perdes omnes qui loquntur
mendacium. Psalm. 5.
as thou may unerstand by my Prophet who says of me; Thou art not a God which
takes pleasure in wickedness; neither shall evil dwell with thee. The foorish
shall not stand in thy sight. Thou hate all workers of iniquity. Thou shall
destroy them that speak leasing; the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful
man. Thou see by this that Sin is the greatest of all evils; nay, it is the
very root and origin of them all. On the contrary, to be in my favor and the
object of my most tender affection is a real happiness, the fountain of all
goodness and the solid foundation of all other favors and virtues. Why do
thou then delay thy endeavors, and refuse to concur with my holy inspirations?
If thou would once firmly resolve an amendment, and employ all thy faculties
to destroy Sin in thee, thou should then receive the benefit of
Justification, by which thou art delivered from that pernicious evil; and of a
mortal enemy thou art made my friend, not in a common degree of friendship, but
in the most supreme that can be thought of; which is that of a Father to his
Son. Videte qualem charitatem nobis dedit pater, ut filii Dei nominemur and
fimus. 1. Jo. 3.
My Evangelist extols this extraordinary favor very highly, where he says,
behold what a manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be
called the Sons of God, and be so too.

Take notice of this O man! and consider seriously how I am not content to give
thee the bare denomination of my Son; for a man may belly his name, and act
contrary to his qualification; and therefore I say thou art not only my Son by
name, or by any other groundless title; but really and in truth thou art so
when justified. This is a prime favor indeed, for if it is so great an evil to
be a reprobate, and consequently odious to God, what an unspeakable happiness
it is to be loved by him and confirmed in his grace. It Is a maxim of
Philosophy that the more a thing pertakes of goodness, the more its contrary
will have of evil, the Love of God above all things is the Summum bonum of man,
therefore the greatest evil must be Sin, which makes him odious to God, and the
fatal object of his just indignation and wrath. It were a great happiness if
thou were a favorite to thy Superiors, to thy King, or to some other crowned
head, thou would think thy self made for ever, but it is a far greater
happyness to be in my favor, who am the Ruler of all earthly Potentates, the
best of Fathers, and the chiefest of Lords; for all the Powers, Principalitys
and Dignitys of the world, in reference to me, are no more then just nothing. O
Man, Cum Inimici effemus. Romans 5.10.
thou should therefore value thy self upon this account, and the more,
because thou have received it gratis, and when thou were my mortal enemy. For
as it is most certain that before thy Creation thou could do nothing that
might induce me to create thee, Rudis indigesteque moles (...)
for then thou were but a rude lump of clay, without any form or fashion, even
so it is most evident, that after thy relapse into sin, thou could do nothing,
which might move me to grant thee the benefit of thy Justification, not because
thou were nothing, but by reason thou were an ill man, and therefore most
odious, and abominable to me.

O Man, consider seriously these evil consequences of Sin; by it thou art clear
out of my favor, thou art villified in my sight; and banished from my
presence, thou art cast from the converse, and company of my Saints, and
Angels; thou art forbidden my heavenly Palace, and because thou have a far
greater love for the Creatures then for me, who am thy Creator, it is just thou
should be dealt with accordingly; thou have forsaken me to serve them and the
Devil too, who is the worst of Masters, therefore he is licensed to torment
thee for an Eternity, and it is but what thou have deserved for offending so
good, and so gracious a Lord as I have been to thee. To this great disaster may
be added another altogether as dreadful if not more, which is the immortal worm
which shall perpetually gnaw the consciences of those miserable and unfortunate
wretches in Hell. Terra miserae and tenebrarum ubi nulius ordo, sed sempiternus
horor in habiter. Job. 10.22.
A place full of woe, and misery, the Region of everlasting darkness and
confusion, where there is no order, no rule, no union, no friendship, no joy,
no comfort, no peace, no rest, no satisfaction, no hopes; but perpetual
horror, lamentation, gnashing of teeth, rage, blasphemy, cursing and also all
other cruelties imaginable; these are the fatal products and punishments of
Sin; but of all these I discharge those whom I do Justify, for when they are
reconciled to me, and whilst they remain in my favor, they are no more the
Children of wrath, and perdition, no more Servants and Slaves to the Devil, no
more inclined to obey the dictates of the world, and the flesh; In fine, they
are under the wings of my protection, sheltered from the rage of Satan, and
from the most dreadful rigor of his everlasting torments.


MAN O Most gracious Savior! I am thoroughly convinced of the truth of thy
words; I confess that Sin is the greatest of all evils, and that the greatest
misfortune that can befall a poor man in this world, is to lie under the
tyranny of so hellish a monster; for it does not only deprive his Soul of thy
grace, but also robs her of all the supernatural treasures and gifts of the
Holy Ghost, which she had received in her Baptism, and which brought her to
that height of honor, as to become thy beautiful and dearly beloved Spouse. No
sooner is she degraded thus, and forced out of that super-eminent and glorious
Station, but Sin sets on her again to finish what it had left undone, he wounds
her even to death, and after he has taken the most precious of her goods, he
plunders her of the least considerable, as are her natural gifts. For man being
a rational creature, and Sin being an act contrary to reason, it is consonant to
nature that one contrary should strive to destroy to 'ther; consequently the
oftener Sin is multiplied, the more it disturbs, and destroys the powers and
faculties of the Soul, not in themselves, but in their operations. It Is by this
means that Sin gets dominion of the Soul, and makes her run what course he
pleases; if she has any remaining inclination to virtue; Alas, she is become so
weak, so sloathful, and so inconstant that she cannot attain to the practice of
it; Rursum crucifigentes Christum in cordibvs vestris. Heb. 6.6. Faciamus
hominem ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram. Genesis 2.6. Cecidit Babylon
Civitas illa Sancta and facta est habitatio Daemonum. Isa. 21.9.
but if she be solicited to evil, she flies at it with as much eagerness, as we
may see a Cat run at a mouse; If any temptation knocks at her door for her
consent to a rebellion against thee O Lord, she likes of the proposal, and
gives her assent to the evil (though she be convinced that it is the renewing of
thy Passion) But Sin stops not here; it strips the Soul of her liberty to pay
unto thee O Lord, the daily tribute of her submission, and holds her fast in a
chain, to follow the beck of her mortal enemies, the world, the flesh and the
Devil, and also to please the gust of her unruly Appetites. Thus that noble
Princess which has her extraction from Heaven, and which was heretofore thy
charming Spouse, the beautiful Daughter of thy eternal Father, and the faithful
resemblance of the most Blessed Trinity; is now by Sin brought to a Babylonish
Captivity worse by a thousand degrees, and more unsufferable then that of Egypt
was to the Children of Israel. But alas, I find her condition to be yet worse,
for all her spiritual senses are wholly Stupifi'd, and to that degree that they
cannot hear thy voice, nor see the radiant light of thy divine Inspirations:
They cannot smell the sulpherous scent of thy dreadful thunderbolts which are
ready to drop down upon their criminal and guilty heads; the sweet perfumes of
thy divine virtues, and the rare examples of thy Saints cannot prevail with
them; no, they cannot taste of thy Chalice, nor feel thy Scorges, nor
acknowledge thy Benefits (though they are sufficient to melt a heart of Steel,)
In fine, Sin, takes quite away the peace, the joy and the tranquillity of a good
eonscience, it does extinguish the fervor of the Spirit, and leaves poor man
sordid, maculate, deformed, and abominable in the sight of God, and of all his
Saints. Yet by the benefit of thy Justification we are happily delivered from
all these plagues, and evil consequences of Sin; and the abyss of thy divine
mercies is not content to have forgiven us our offenses, and receive us into
favor; but does also expel all those evils which are inseparable from Sin,
leaving our interior man, in the real possession of his former prerogatives,
and likeness to God. Thou do heal up our wounds, wash off our spots, break
loofe the fetters and chains of our iniquitys, destroy the yoke of our evil
desires; retrieve us from the slavery of Satan, qualify the fury of our unruly
passions, and the heat of our vicious affections: Thou do likewise restore to
the Soul her former freedom, and beauty, revive her interior fenses, dispose
them to the exercise of all good works, and to the abhorrence of any that is
bad. Thou give strength to resist manfully all the temptations of the Devil,
and to go through all the difficulties that might hinder the practice of
virtue, and their increase of devotion. In fine, my Sweet Savior, thou do so
absolutely revive, and repair our interior man, and all his faculties, that
thy Apostle Scruples not to call such men, Justified Souls; metamorphos'd
natures, new modeled Spirits, and Creatures of another stamp. This innovation
is so great, and so much to be admired, that it is worth our labor to find out
how, and after what manner it is performed. O my Savior, thou alone can tell
me truly the nature of it, and the only one that can impart so great a blessing
to my poor and languishing Soul; wherefore let me hear thy solution to the
matter.


SAVIOVR. THou must know then, O man! that this so great a renovation, when
it is performed by the means of Baptism, may be called Regeneration; but if it
be done by Contrition, and with the assistance of Penance, then it is called
resurrection, not only because the Soul is raised from the Death of Sin, to the
Life of Grace, but by reason it resembles so nearly the glorious beauty of
future Resurrection. No mortal tongue is able to express the radiant Splendour,
and supereminent beauty of a Justified Soul; it is a mystery reserved to my Holy
Spirit, who made her so glorious, with a design she should be his own Temple
and place of residence. Were all the wealth of the World, all the imaginable
dignities and honors of this life, all the natural Graces and gifts, together
with all the acquired virtues, and all other earthly advantages that can be
thought of; conferred with the beauty and treasures of a Justified Soul; all,
in comparison with her, is vile, obscure, ill-favored, and of no value: No,
for there is as much difference betwixt the life of Grace, and the life of
Nature, betwixt the beauty of the Soul Justified, and that of the body; betwixt
the interior Riches of such a Soul, and the exterior of the body, as there is
betwixt Heaven and Earth, betwixt the Spirit and the body, or betwixt Time and
Eternity. Because all these are circumscribed with certain limits, they are
temporal, they appear handsome to corporal eyes, and require only my general
concourse to support them, whereas the other depends on my particular and
supernatural influence; and have no prefixed bounds, because I am their object,
and they are so precious in my sight, and of so great an estimate, that they
provoke even my divine Essence to be ardently enamored with their beauty. I
might have wrought all these wonders with my sole presence, yet I would not;
but was pleased to adorn the Soul with my infused virtues, and the Seven gifts
of my Holy Ghost, whereby not only her Essence, but even her very faculties are
clothed and adorned with those habitual and heavenly dresses.

Besides all these divine favors and benefits she is made happy with the
constant presence of my divine Spirit, and of the most adorable Trinity, for
all resides in a justified Soul to teach her how to manage so great a treasure
to her best advantage; Matt. 12.
wherein I act the part of a most loving Father, who is not satisfied to have
given Riches to his Son, but gives him withal a Futor that knows how to
Administer them well. Luc. 11.
Thou know that a multitude of vipors, Serpents, and Dragons, I mean of evil
Spirits, enter into the Soul of a Sinner, and makes her their habitation, as
thou may read in my Gospel, but it is otherwise with a justified Soul, for I
with my Father, and Holy Spirit dwell there, and having banished thence all
evil, Si quis diligit me, Sermonem meum servabit, and Pater meus diliget eum,
and ad eum veniomus, and mansionem apud eum faciemus. Joan. 14.
and Infernal Spirits, we make her our temple, our throne, and Garden of
pleasure; as thou may find in St. John, where I say, if a man love me he
will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him.

All the Doctors of my Holy Church, as well Ecclesiastic, as Scholastic,
grounded upon these my words, do firmly believe that my Holy Ghost dwells in a
justified Soul after a certain and peculiar manner, and say moreover that he
does not only confer his Gifts upon her, but comes himself along with them,
with a fixed resolution to cleanse, Sanctify and adorn her, as well with his
constant presence, as with all his heavenly treasures.

O man! if all these extraordinary favors be not able to mollify thy flinty
heart, and force it to leave and forsake the paths of Sin, and to gather also
all thy Scattered affections, and lead them toward me, who am the most
deserving of them, I shall add more pressing motives to bring thee to so good,
so gracious, and so benificial a resolution.

The First that occurs is, that all the justified are my living members, so
that I love and cherish them as my own, and am no less careful to provide for
them, to protect and comfort them, then were they all parts of my proper body;
nay, without any intermission I influence them with my inspirations and graces,
even as the head communicates his vital Spirits into all the rest of its
members; moreover my Eternal Father beholds them with a gracious eye, as being
my living members, united, and concorporate with me by the participation of his
divine Spirit, and therefore all their deeds are grateful and meritorious to
him, as being the worthy products of my lively loving and gracious Children,
and because that all their virtue, and power of doing well, proceeds from me
alone.

This certainly is a great encouragement to all justified Souls to crave what
favors they stand in need of, and to ask of my heavenly Father, with a great
deal of confidence, and hopes to obtain their requests: being it is not only
for themselves they ask it, but also for me, who am highly honored in them,
and with them; for no man will deny but what the members do, the head does the
same, and what is conferred upon the one, is also conferred upon the other;
consequently being that I am the head of the justified, what they ask for
themselves, they ask the same for me.

My Apostle says, Quam diu fecistis uni ex his fratribus meis miaimis, mihi
fecisti. Matthew. 25.40.
that whoever offends and wrongs my members, wrongs me likewise, and whoever
persecutes them persecutes me also; and whoever honors them, or gives them any
relief in their distress, I own the favor as done to my Self; what a main
comfort this is to a Just man? when he considers that what boon he begs from
the Father of Heaven for himself, he begs the same for me, who am his dearly
beloved Son; sure this is a principal ground for thee to hope that thou will
not be refused what favor thou do request of him. For when a kindeness is
exhibited to one for the love of another, the favor is chiefly done to him,
for whose sake it was granted, and indeed thou ought to believe that when
thou show mercy to the poor for Gods sake, thou art not only merciful to
them, but even to God himself.


MAN. BLessed be thy holy name for ever, my dear Jesus, Capio dissoivi and esse
cum Christo. Philip. 1.23.
for thou have replenished my heart with unspeakable joy, and my Soul does
thirst so much after thee, the Fountain of life, that she often desires with
St. Paul, to be delivered from the Prison of her frail, ungrateful, and
rebellious flesh, to stand in thy glorious presence for ever. This I know is
the reward of all justified Souls; For as thou make use of thy Justice
against Sinners who depart this life without Penance, and do cast them
headlong into the extremity of Hellfire: so thy mercy receives all true
penitent Souls into life everlasting: And though thou can forgive them their
Sins, Non sunt condignae passiones hujus temporis ad futuram gloriam quae
revelabitu^ in nobis. Rom 8.18. quod Momentaneum est in praesenti, ct leve
tribulationis nostrae, supra modum in sublimitate aeternum gloriae pondus
operat 2 Cor. 4.17.
and receive them into thy favor without communicating thy Glory; yet thou
would not deprive them of so great an advantage, for those that thy mercy
does absolve of their Sins, thou do Justify, and those whom thou do
justify, thou make them thy Children, and those whom thou do take for thy
Children, thou make them thy Heirs, and jointheirs with thy self in thy
Kingdom of Glory.

This is the grand foundation of that lively hope, which does rejoice and
comfort the just in all their tribulation, for when they see themselves
oppressed with any disasters, laden with afflictions, depressed with
infirmities, reflected upon by their Neighbors, Persecuted by their Enemies:
they consider seriously, and believe, that the sufferings of this present time,
are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in them.
They firmly believe also, that their light affliction, which is but for a
moment, will work for them a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.
All these favors and graces they receive from thee by the means of their
Justification, wherefore I must of necessity conclude with St. Augustine, that
benefit is of a far greater estimate, then is that of our Creation; and the
reason for it is, that thou have Created both Heaven and Earth with one sole
word, whereas to Sanctify man, thou have suffered all the torments that the
malice of men, and the fury of Hell could invent; thou have spilt thy precious
blood, and gave even thy sweet life to purchase his Salvation. If we poor
Mortals, be so much obliged to thee for our Creation; how much more are we thy
Debtors for the benefit of our Justification, for the obligation must be the
greater, by how much the purchase is dearer.

I must confess, O Lord, Nemo scit utrum amore an odio dignus sit. Eccle 9.1.
that a man does not know for certain whether he be Justified or not, being he
cannot tell whether he be worthy of thy love or hatred; however he may have
very probable marks of his Justification, whereof one and not the meanest, is,
the reformation of ones life; If he who was accuftom'd heretofore to commit
several Sins in a day, now commits none; that man whoever he be, is obliged to
thee O Lord, in a high measure, in as much as thou have delivered him from so
many, and such great evils, and also have gratified him with all the eminent
favors that We even now discoursed of. But if any should be so great an enemy
to his own Salvation, as to continue his sinful and wicked life,
notwithstanding these most pressing motives which should oblige the most
obedurat of men to love, serve, and obey thee, Terribilium omnium
terribilissimum mors. Aristot.
O Lord, I beg that thou will begin a discourse of Death, which is the most
terrible of all terrible motives, in hopes it may retrive such poor, wilful and
obstinate sinners; and force them to comply with thy grace, which is never
wanting to any that purpose to amend.


SAVIOVR. REmember, O man, that thou art a Christian, and don't forget that
thou art a mortal man, and consequently that thou must surely die, for thy fate
is already decreed, and the decree is unavoidable. The Sons of mortal Parents
must expect a mortal Posterity; Death is the end of great and small: Thou art
born helpless, and exposed to the injuries of all Creatures, and of all
weathers. The very necessaries of life may procure thy death, for thou may
meet with thy fate in thy dish, in thy cup, and in the very Air that refreshes
thee; nay, thy very Birth is inauspicious, for thou came into the world
weeping; and in the middle of thy designs, while thou art meditating great
matters, and stretching thy thoughts to after Ages, Death will cut thee off,
and perhaps thy longest date is only the Revolution of a few days.

Death is common to all Men, it is a tribute, Mors omnibus communis est. Senec.
Testamentum hujus mundi, morte morietur. Eccle. 14.12.
that all mankind must pay to Nature (though not after the same manner) for one
may dye at his table, another in his sleep, a third in the heat of his unlawful
pleasures; a fourth with a glass of wine in his hand, and Blasphemy in his
mouth; another may be stabbed in a quarrel, another crushed with the fall of a
horse: In fine, they have several ways to their end, but the end it self (which
is Death,) is still the same. For whether they dye by a sword, by a halter, by
a potion, or by a disease, it is all but Death, which is so certain that thou
can not doubt of it, without a blemish to thy Faith; none is exempted from
drinking of this Chalice; Regum Turres, pauperumque Tabernas aeque pede pulsat
Mors. Vir.
Popes, Kings and Princes must taste of it. If there were any immunity, or
privilege in the case, surely I might have been exempted from Death, as being
the Lawmakers, and Promoter of that unavoidable sentence which I had pronounced
against thy Progenitour for his transgression of my Commandment.

No, the day shall come that thou will be alive in the morning and dead at
night, It will come sometime, but when? whether this day or to morrow, it is
uncertain. Thou art now in perfect health, strong of body, and found of mind,
thou do measure thy life by the length of thy desires, and by the multitude
of thy business, but the day will come that thou shall be stretched on a bed,
candles lighted about thee, thy Relations and Friends lamenting and weeping,
thy whole family in a great consternation, expecting thee to breath out thy
Soul every moment; but when this day shall come, it is uncertain, perhaps when
thou do least expect it, perhaps when thou think thy self secure from all
dangers, and when all thy thoughts are busi'd about building of Houses,
purchasing Lands, matching thy Children, settling their Fortunes; it is
therefore said of Death, These. 5.23.
that it comes like a Thief, who takes that time to seize on his prey, when men
are in their dead sleep, secure, and without the least apprehension of being
robbed: The day of the Lord, says St. Paul, shall come as a Thief in the night,
upon thee; and when thou shall say, peace and security, then sudden destruction
shall come upon thee, as Travail upon a Woman with Child, and thou shall not
escape.

To consider seriously the preludes of death, with their attendents, which are
a grievous sickness, Aches and pains over all thy Limbs, thy Stomach loaded
with Apothecarys Stuffs, so many sorts of loathsome drugs on a table before thy
face, which thou must of necessity swallow, because thy Physician has ordered
it so; then art thou peevish and fretful, continually tumbling and tossing from
one place to another, always restless; this with several other emergencies,
weakens thy body, and opens the gate for Death to come in; even as when an
enemy is resolved to Storm a City, he first batters down its walls with his
great Cannons, and makes a breach large enough for a general assault; then he
commands his forces to stand to their Arms, and he at the head of them marches
on, and makes himself Master of the place. So before Death, a mortal infirmity
leads the van, beats down thy natural Strength, dismounts all thy senses, gives
thee no rest night or day, batters down thy body with its violent fits, so that
the Soul is at last forced to withdraw from her old habitation to take up her
quarters, the Lord knows where.

But when the Infirmity is come to that height, that thy Physician and thy self
too, have no hopes of further life, O what Anguishes, what apprehensions, what
grief, what trouble seizes thy poor heart; and tares it asunder, Videbunt
quibus sacrificaverunt. Eccl.
then the whole series of thy former life comes into thy mind, and thy dearest
objects will then become the subjects of thy greatest sorrow; thy Wife and
Children, thy Friends, and Relations, thy Riches, thy Honors, thy Titles, thy
Employments, with the rest which thou have made thy Gods on Earth, shall come
in a crowd to discompose thy Soul.

Soon after this alteration of thy mind, comes another which is the forerunner
of death; thy forehead is hardened and thy skin cleaves close to thy skull, a
cold sweat trickles down thy face, thy eye-strings are already broken, and thy
eyelids are fallen down, thy ears are deaf, thy nose grows thin and sharp, thy
nostrils stuffed up with corruption, thy face turns to its original color,
which is that of clay; thy mouth is contracted, thy tongue is stupifi'd, and
can no more perform its duty, thy taste is gone, thy lips are pale; thy breath
finks down to the bottom of thy breast, thy hands are cold, thy nails black,
thy pulse slow and weak; sometimes at a stop, and now and then revives; thy
feet have no more life, they have lost their natural heat; Infine, all thy
flesh is in a short space to be turned into corruption. This is thy end O man,
but as thou art a Christian, hear what shall enfue before the Separation of thy
Soul from thy Body.

Then thou shall imagine the Judgment of God to be at hand, then thou shall
have a full view of all thy fins, both great and small, then all thy
abominations and crimes shall come in a body to accuse thee before the dreadful
Tribunal of my divine Justice: Then thou shall acknowledge (though too late) how
sordid, how heinous, and how horrid were the crimes which thou had so easily,
and so desperately committed against me, without the least apprehension of my
indignation and wrath. O what curses, what bitter imprecations will thou utter
at that fatal hour against the day in which thou have offended me; thou will
curse even the place, the occasion, and accomplices of thy sins. Thou will curse
and condemn thine own folly, and the wickedness of those which brought thee by
their ill examples to forfiet the everlasting joys of Heaven for such trifles,
as are all the false and treacherous pleasures of this world. pereat dies inqua
natus sum etc. Job. 3.3.
The afflictions of Job were nothing to those that shall be heaped upon thee in
that dreadful day of my visitation; yet he cries out, let the day perish
wherein I was born, and the night in which it was said, there is a manchilde
conceived; and what will thy feeling be, when thou shall see thy self deprived
of all happiness, and excluded from Heaven for an Eternity, by the means of
those vain, sordid, and transitory pleasures which thou have taken in thy
lifetime? when thou shall behold thy self surrounded on all sides with
tribulations and anguishes, without any hopes of a longer life, when there
shall be no place for penance, when the days of grace are past, when even
those whom thou have loved beyond all measure and reason cannot afford unto
thee the least comfort, but rather will kill thee with displeasure, because
they were thy beloved Idols, and the only objects of thy adorations, but now
they shall become the subject of thy Eternal confusion.

Tell me, O man, when thou shall see thy self brought to this deprorable state
and condition, where will thou go? what will thou do? to whom will thou call
for help? To return to life, it is impossible, and to ease thy self thou will
not be able; In illa die occidet Sol in meridie and tenebrescere faciam terram
in die luminis etc. Amos. 8.
what shall become of thee, when I will cause the Sun to go down at noon, and
when I will darken the Earth at midday? what will thou say, when I shall turn
thy feasts into mourning, and all thy Songs into lamentation, when I will bring
up Sackcloth upon all men's loins, and baldness upon every head, and when I
shall make it as the morning for an only Son, and the end thereof as a bitter
day? have thou not therefore a far greater subject then Job to curse the day
wherein thou were born, for he was so just a man, that my eternal Father
glori'd in having so good, so gracious and faithful a Servant; nay, In omnibus
his non peccavit Job labiis suis, etc. Job. 1.22.
the Holy Ghost avers that he sinned not in all what he had spoken in his
troubles and calamities, which I had permitted to come upon him, not as a
punishment for his Sins, but as a trial of his patience, to make him a worthy
president to all mortals of virtue, of constancy, and of perfect resignation to
my holy will in all their afflictions. He himself does protest that his
conscience did not accuse him; yet he was so apprehensive of the strict
judgment which a Soul is to undergo at her departing the body, that amazed at
the severity of my Justice, he cries out, protect me, O Lord, Dionys. Rikel.
Art. 16. de novis.
and hide me in hell, whilst thy fury passes. Whereupon one of my devout
Servants affirms, that the instant, wherein I give judgment of a Soul, is not
only more terrible then Death, but more terrible then to suffer even the pains
of hell for a certain time, not only to those who are to be damned, but even
unto my very Elect.

O man! reflect seriously upon this, and Judge, what will become of a Sinner at
the hour of his Death, and at the lively representation of all his offenses and
crimes, what a consternation he will be in? how he will tremble and shake every
limb of him at the very sight of me, his Creator and Redeemer, whom he had so
often offended and injured in the course of his sinful life; that very presence
will be more dreadful to him then the suffering of the pains of hell it self.


MAN. O Most gracious Redeemer? I cannot deny what thou say of a dying man,
and of the Anguishes which he shall suffer at the departing of the Soul from
his body; she shall enter into Judgment alone, naked, poor, and without any to
patronize her cause, except her good works, (if she has any to show;) her
Conscience will be the Deponent, the Trial will be either for life, or death
not temporal, but eternal, and thou an injured Judge, shall appear to her in a
dreadful Throne to give sentence for her, or against her, either of Salvation,
or of her everlasting damnation. If she be grievously indebted, and not able to
balance her accounts, O what a horrible confusion she will be in, grief and
sorrow, sighs and tears, dreadful lamentations and cries, will be her woeful
entertainment, and the only motives she can produce to mollify thee O Lord, but
all will be to no purpose, her repentance comes too late, it is totally
fruitless at that hour; all her protestations of amendment will be in vain, no
bills or bonds of performance will be accepted of, no bail shall be taken, her
lease is out, she must remove: her nobility, her riches, her honors cannot
obtain for her a further respite of time; the sentence is pronounced, the
decree is unavoidable; she must submit.

O the unfortunate Sinner, what will he do? what will he say? how can he
express the greatness of his misfortune, otherwise then by these words of thy
Prophet. Psa. 18.4.5
The sorrows of Death have compassed me, and the floods of iniquity have made
me afraid. The sorrows of hell have compassed me about, and the snares of Death
have prevented me.

O what a woeful circle is that into which his Sins have brought him, and
unexpected too! when he had not the least thought of death; what will his
friends avail him now, his dignities, his riches, his lands and all that he
took most delight in? they will remain after him, to other Masters, that will
soon wast and consume 'em, in a worse way perhaps then ever he gathered them,
(though that perchance was bad enough.) The Sins which he had committed in
heaping them up, are the only companions he is like to have along with him to
another world, where he is to be tormented for them according to their enormity.

If I should make my addresses to worldlings, in hopes to be farther instructed
in this so necessary a matter to Salvation, Alas! they know nothing of it, and
which is worse, they will not believe it, for they live, as if they had no
account at all to give after death; and why should I think it strange, being
they live in Egypt, that is in a land of darkness, in a willful blindness,
overwhelmed with all sorts of errors, where scarcely two are found of one
opinion in matters of Faith and manners.

I am then resolved to go farther off, and straight into the land of Geshen,
where the light of verity is allways in its full splendor, Non intres in
Judicium cum servo tuo Domine, quia non justiflcabitur in conspectu tuo omnis
vivens. Psa. 143.
and to consult with the Inhabitants thereof in this case; they will certainly
teach me, not only by their words, but also by their examples, how much this
dreadful day of so strict an account is to be feared. The first I meet with, is
the holy'st man of his age, a man according to thine own heart, O Lord; yet he
is so terrified, even at the very remembrance of this accompting day, that he
begs thee with all the tenderness of a contrite heart, not to enter into
Judgment with thy Servant: and the reason he gives for his request is, that in
thy sight shall no man living be justified.

The second that appears to me, In vitis Patrum. Sect. 2.153
is that most renowned and holy Arsenius, a man of wonderful austerity, a man
always in prayer, always in contemplation, yet though he was so virtuous, and so
great a Saint, tears were seen to trickle down his cheeks when he was a dying,
and all his body to tremble in his deep consideration of this reckoning day:
His Disciples that stood round his poor and hard bed, setting him the question
why he cried, and whether he was afraid of death? he made answer; yes, my
dearly beloved Children, I fear Death, and I tremble at the approach of my
dreadful Judge, for though I cannot say that I am guilty of any Sin that might
deprive me of his grace; yet he will scearch so narrowly into the most hidden
corners of men's hearts, at that departing day, that I have great reason to fear
he may find some subject of his displeasure within my breast.

Another no less commendable for the holiness of his life; tells me of a most
dreadful example which was in his days exhibited on the Person of one Stephen a
Monk, a great lover of a quiet and Solatary life; This holy man, after he had
passed over several years in a monastical conflict, and adorned his Soul with
extraordinary graces and virtues, by his continual fasting, weeping, and
chastising his body, with St. Paul, lest it should bring his Soul to
subjection, he went into the desert, and built a little cell for himself at the
foot of that famous mountain, where the Prophet Helias had formerly a most
Sacred and heavenly vision; a place remote from all worldly consolation, almost
inaccessible to men, and very near a hundred miles distant from any human
habitation; After he had continued there a long tract of time, in the height of
all manner of mortification and Penance, and being in his declining Age, he
returned to his former habitation, where in a few days he fell into a fit of
sickness whereof he died; Joan. Climachus in Schola Parad. graduer.
but the day before his death, he awaked suddenly out of his slumber, and
looking frightfully toward the right, and left side of his bed, he was heard
by all that were about him, to say, (as if he were brought to an account for
his past life) it is true that is so, but for that Sin, I have fasted so many
years. To another objection he answered, that is true likewise, but for that
fault, I often shed most bitter tears. To another he would reply, that is a
grand lie, I am innocent of that crime. Again, he would answer, it is so indeed,
I have nothing to say against it, but leave my self wholly to God's mercy.
Certainly this was a spectacle able to terrify the hearts of all them that were
by, and especially, for that the poor man was accused of what he never
committed; so eager his mortal Enemies were to get possession of his Soul, by
endeavoring to push him into despair. He was indeed a lover of retired and
solitary places, and a Monk of forty years approbation, endu'd with the gift of
working miracles, yet he trembles at the hearing of his accounts, some he
denis, and some he owns, but he relys upon Gods great mercy for a pardon; and
in this conflict he dies without leaving any certainty of what became of him,
or how favorable his Judge was to him at the end of his trial.

O Savior of mankind, if such great Saints were so much terrified at the
sight of death, and so apprehensive of thy dreadful Judgments, what will
become of Sinners at that hour? and of such Sinners as do spend their whole
life in the vanities, and transitory pleasures of the world; of Sinners that
make nothing to offend thee by all manner of wickedness; of Sinners that live
in so great a neglect of their Salvation as if they had no Souls to be saved,
and no account to be given after death. If the Just are seized with so great a
terror at the hour of Death, what a deplorable condition will the habitual
Sinner be in? what will become of the weak shrubs of the desert that have no
shelter from the raging storms of Death and Judgment, when the tall Cedars of
Liban are laid even with the ground. Si Justus vix salvabitur, Impius and
peccator ubi ap^r^b^nt. 1 Pet. 4.3. and 18.
If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungoldy and the Sinner
appear; who walked all his life in Lasciviousness, Lust, excess of Wine,
Revellings, Banquetings, and all abominable Idolatries? what can be safe in
Babylon, when there is so strict a search made in Jerusalem?


SAVIOVR. THou say well, O man! what will become of a Sinner indeed at the
hour of death; when I, who am the spotless Lamb, was seized with so great an
apprehension of it, Tristis est anima mea usque ad mortem Mar. 14.34.
that my Soul was sad even to death, and terrified to that degree, that my body
was all in a bloody sweat. But what will become of a Sinner, when I shall
appear to him, who am to be not only his Judge, but also a most irrefragable
witness against him. St. Augustine will tell thee, he had rather suffer even the
unspeakable torments of Hell, Chrysostom. hom. 24. in Matthew.
then to behold the face of his angry Judge. And St. Chrysostom declares, it
were better for Sinners to be struck with as many thunderbolts as the magazine
of Heaven can afford, then to see that countenance so meek and so full of
sweetness heretofore, altogether estranged from them at that most dreadful
hour. And if thou will give credit to the deposition of a learned Author; he
will tell thee that even an Image, which was only my representation on the
Cross, appeared with such wrathful and incensed eyes to a congregation of
People, that they all fell unto the ground senseless and without any motion,
and that they cuntinued in that amazement several hours. What a consternation
then will Sinners be in, when they shall behold not my Image, (which is at best
but a dead figure) but my self alive, not in the humility of my Cross, but
seated on a Throne of Justice and Majesty; not in a time of mercy, but in the
due season of a just vengeance; not with naked hands pierced through with
nails, but armed against them with the Sword of Justice. Thus I shall come to
Judge and revenge the injuries which they have done unto me: I am righteous in
my Justice, as I am in my mercy, and as I have allotted a time for mercy, so I
will for Justice; and as in this life the rigor of my justice is as it were
repressed and suspended, so in that point of Death, when the Sinners are to
receive their final Sentence, I will suffer it to break forth like an
inundation, and drown them all in the deluge of my indignation and wrath.

Imagine with thy self a great and rapid River that has had it is current
violently stopped these forty years, Dan. 7.
and now it were to have free passage, what a condition the Country round about
would be in? with what a fury would it overrun the whole land, and beat down
all before it. Citys, Towns, Villages, Castles, Trees, Walls, Houses, Men,
Cattle and all without any resistance. Thou know that my Prophet Daniel
compares my Justice not to an ordinary River, but to a River of fire, to
express the greatness and severity of it; thou know likewise that the
current of this River is frequently repressed thirty, forty years, nay,
sometimes during the whole life of Man; O what an infinite deal of wrath will
it have heaped together, with what an impetuous fury will it burst out upon a
wretched sinner, at the point of his death? Tunc incipient dicere montibus
cadite super nos. Luke 23.50.
The same Prophet goes on with his description of this dreadful River which
shall issue from my Countenance; and says, that it shall be so terrible, that
the wicked will invite even the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon them, and
shelter them from it is scorching waves. The Prophet Isaiah sets forth my
Justice in a more dreadful manner, Isa. 56.
he says, that I will come clothed in garments of vengeance, and covered with a
Robe of zeal; and that I will give unto my Adversaries my Indignation, and that
my Enemies shall have their reward.

The Wiseman comes yet closer to the matter, for he says, that my zeal shall
take up arms, and that I shall animate all creatures to revenge me of my
Enemies: that I shall put on Justice as a breast plate, take the headpiece of
righteous Judgment, and shall sharpen my wrath as a lance; nay I shall not only
appear to Sinners at the hour of death as an enraged armed man, Ose. 13.
but as a Bear that has been robbed of her whelps; that I shall tear their
entrails in pieces, and devour them as a Lion.

It Is certain there is not among the Beasts a more fierce by nature then a
Lion, or a more furious then a Bear, especially when she has lost her young
ones; and that I who am by nature infinitely good, mild, and loving, should
compare my self to such monsters of nature for fierceness, and cruelty, is to
express sensibly the terrors of my Justice and rigor against Sinners in that
day of wrath, full of calamity and misery, Dies irae dies illa calamitatis and
miseriae dies magna and amara valde miss de req.
in that great, sorrowful and most bitter day. O man, take notice of this
dreadful expression, it is able to terrify thy heart, and to bring a trembling
over all thy body: Consider well how many poor Souls have thou led astray from
my paths, by thy poisonous doctrine, and evil examples, how many poor Souls are
now in Hellfire solely upon the account of the damnable principles which thou
have stilled into their ears and hearts, and which they carried along with them
to their graves? How many innocent, and virtuous young Maids, and Women, have
thou forced out of my service to satisfy thy lustful desires; I say forced
them, because that perceiving them in a wanting condition, thou have wrought
upon their necessity, and weakness both, by giving them what thou should have
kept for the maintenance of thy proper Wife and Children. Assure thy self, that
in the hour of thy death, I shall appear unto thee as a Bear whom thou have
robbed of so many young ones, yea, and shall tear thy entrails in pieces, for
all thy misdemeanors, extortions, and oppressions. I will devour thee as a
Lion, as well for working the destruction of thy own Soul, as for contributing
to the loss of many others by thy bad examples.

It Is by reason of the severity of my Justice against Sinners in the hour of
their death that Daniel says, there shall proceed from my face a River of fire,
because this Element of all others is the most active, and so pure that it will
not admit of any mixture; whereas Earth will lodge in its bosom Mines of
several metals, and Quarries of diverse sorts of Stone; Water will entertain a
pleasant variety of Fishes, the Air gives liberty to all sorts of Fowl to fly
through all it is region, and does also harbor a vast multitude of vapors,
exhalations and several other bodies; but Fire endures nothing, it melts the
hardest metals, reduces even stones into Cinders, consumes living Creatures,
converts Trees into its own Substance, and turns all that is contrary to it,
into its own nature. The same shall happen in that day of my wrath; all shall
be rigor and Justice, without any mixture of mercy; nay, the very mercies
which I have exhibited to sinners in their life time, shall then be both a
motive to kindle my indignation, and fuel to blaze up my incensed Justice
against them.

O man! consider therefore whilst thou have time to repent, nay, and
seriouslytoo, what a sad condition thou shall see thy self in, at that instant,
when neither my blood shed for thee, nor my self crucified for thy sake, nor
the powerful intercession of my most blessed Mother, nor the prayers of my
Saints, no, nor my divine mercy it self, shall contribute any thing to thy
safety. No, this life once past, thou art to expect no Patron, no Protector,
but thy virtuous actions; thy Angel Guardian, and all the Saints thy Advocates
shall abandone thee: thy vast riches, the greatness of thy Authority, thy
numerous Servants, thy learned Counsels will not avail thee, nor defend thy
Process; thy good works alone will defend thee from the rigor of my Justice,
when the Treasures thou have heaped up in the world, and been so careful to
preserve, shall fail thee; Thine Alms bestowed upon the poor shall stick close
to thee, and plead for thy pardon in a powerful manner. Thy Wife, thy
Children, thy Kindred, Friends, and Followers, shall go no farther then the
grave with thee; but the Strangers which thou have lodged, the sick which thou
have visited, and the needy which thou have succored will bear thee company
even before my dreadful Throne, and place thee at my right hand, among the
number of my blessed for ever.


MAN. O My most gracious Savior! withdraw thy hand far from me: and let not
thy dread make me afraid. Job. 13.
Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thy Enemy? will thou break
a leaf that is driven to and fro with every little puff of wind? and will thou
so rigorously pursue the dry stubble? for thou writest bitter things against
me, and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth: Thou put my feet
also in the stocks, and look narrowly unto all my paths; thou set a
print upon the heels of my feet, who am to be consumed as a rotten thing, and
as a garment that is motheaten.

Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble; He comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down; He vanishes also as a shadow, and
continues not; And do thou fix thine eyes upon such an one, and bring me
into Judgment with thee? Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? These
are the words of the most afflicted of mortals, and Mirror of Patience,
admiring the severity of thy Justice against Man, a creature so weak, so frail,
and so prone to all manner of evil; against a wretch viciously inclined from
his cradle, that drinks up iniquity with as much pleasure, and case, as he
would a glass of Spring Water in his greatest drougth on a hot Summers day. It
were a subject of less admiration had thou dealt so rigorously with Angels,
that are spiritual creatures, and of a far more eminent perfection then men can
ever attain to; To be so severe with poor man, who lies groaning under the
weight of so many predominant passions, and such a number of evil inclinations,
which do wholly estrange him from the desire and practice of virtue; To bring
him, I say, to so strict an account of all his actions, that thou will not pass
by, even the least idle word that ever he spoke, nor the least moment of time
that he has misspent; O most gracious Savior! give me leave to tell thee; that
the rigor of thy Justice herein does transcend my admiration, Amen amen dico
vobis, de omni verbo otioso quod locuti fuerint homines, reddent rationem in
die Judicij. Mat. 12.36.
and the more abundantly, because I hear thy self say, every Idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment.

If that be so, (as without doubt it is) what a rigourous account must be taken
of all dishonest, impertinent, and scurrulous words? what of lies, and
perjuries, what of horrid and abominable oaths? what of all hellish
imprecations, and blasphemys? what of all wanton and lacivious thoughts, and
looks? what of Adulterers, murderers, and highway robbers? In fine, what a
rigourous account must be given of the whole time of life spent in the works of
iniquity? All that the best of Orators is able to say of the severity and
rigor of thy Judgment, will be far short of what it will really be in that
dreadful day of thy wrath; nay, it will not be so much as an empty shadow to
the substance of the matter. O what a confusion poor man will be in, when he
must appear before thy dreadful Throne, in the presence of that great assembly
of all mankind, and give an exact account of the least idle word he had spoken
at this or that time; who would not be astonished and totally stupify'd at such
a reckoning? who would dare speak of it, but that thou say it thy self? or
who would presume to affirm it, but that thou do thy self confirm it with an
Amen, Amen? What King was ever heard of, that called his Servants to question
for so slite an offense, as is an idle word? O Christian Religion, how sublime
is thy perfection? how great is the purity of mind which thou do require of
thy Professors? how strict is the reckoning which thou do exact from them,
and with what severity do thou chastise, even the very least of their evil
actions? how great will the shame and confusion of Sinners be, when all the
abominations, and sins which they had committed even from their Cradle, to the
hour of their death (were they never so privately acted, so carefully
concealed, or so secretly kept) shall be discovered, and laid open to the eyes
of the whole world?

If we be so much ashamed to discover our imperfections to a Ghostly Father
(who is obliged to secresy under a penalty full as bad, if not worse then that
of death) that sometimes we have not a word to say; Osee. 10.
how excessive great will our shame be in thy presence O Lord! and in the sight
of all ages past, present and to come? OF it will be so intolerable! that the
wicked shall entreat even the Mountains to cover them, and the hills to fall
upon them. Psalm. 89.
They shall say with thy prophet; We are dismayed O Lord! with thy wrath, and
troubled with thy fury; but for what reason? because thou have set our
wickedness before thee, and have placed them in thy sight.

It Is true, that in this life Sin does not appear so pernicious to our eyes,
which makes us be the less concerned for it, but at the instant of death, when
it shall show it self with all its deformity, Pereat dies inquo natus sum Job.
ibid.
the very sight of it will confound us to such an exremity, that we shall curse
the day that ever we were born. They seem in this life but light and trivial,
and that makes us not scruple them much, but in the day of thy wrath, O Lord,
we shall find them heavy, grevious, and insupportable. We know by experience
that a piece of Timber, though never so great, when it floats in a deep water,
may be moved, and drawn from place to place even by a Child; we know likewise
that the most part of it lies under the water, and clear out of our sight, but
when it is brought upon dry land, no less then half a dozen horses, will
suffice to bring it off, then we may perceive perfectly the whole bulk of it.
It Is even so with our Sins, in the tempestuous Seas of this unstable and
transitory life, they are concealed from our eyes, but in the hour of death, in
the day of Judgment, we shall clearly discover their bulk, number, and weight,
and shall groan under so heavy and so unsupportable a burden. Then we shall
find a number of our actions, which we thought very good, to be most grievous
Sins, it is therefore thou say by thy Prophet, when I shall take a proper
time, then I will Judge Righteousness. Who would imagine that the action of
Oza, 2 Reg. 6.6
when he upheld the Ark in danger of falling, was an offense; yet, O Lord, thou
have chastised it as a great Sin, with no less a punishment then that of a most
disastrous death? who would ever believe that David's numbering of his People was
an offense, 2 Reg. 24.13.
but rather an act of discretion and Policy, yet thou have punished him for it
with a Pestilence never to be paralel'd. 1 Reg. 15.18.
Saul was urged by his approaching Enemies, and by Samuel's long delay, to
offer Sacrifice, this was an act of Religion, which is the most heroic, and
greatest of virtues, consequently he thought it should be most acceptable to
thee, and of force to obtain him a victory against his Foes; yet it was a most
grievous Sin in thy presence, since for that alone, thou have reproved him,
degraded him from his Royal Dignity, and cast him off as a lost Soul for an
Eternity. Achabs action might be looked upon as the worthy product of a
masculine spirit, for what is more generous then to pardon an enemy, and what
can be more divine then to spare his life, the chief ground of David's promotion
to the Crown and Scepter of Israel, Diligite Inimicos vestros. Mat. 5.44. Pater
ignosce illis. Luc. 23.34.
was his Clemency to Saul; moreover, thou do expressly command it thy self,
and thou have also earnestly prayed thy Eternal Father to pardon thine enemies.
Achab, having conquered Benhadad, King of Syria, pardoned him, gave him his
life, and took him up to sit by him in his Royal Chariot; yet this action which
was so much praised, and so extolled by men, was so heinous, and so displeasing
to thee, that thou did send him word by thy Prophet, that he should die for
it, and that He and all his People should suffer the punishment which was to
fall upon the Syrians, and their King.

O my Sweet Savior! if thy judgment even in this life be so far distant from
that of men, what shall it be in that dreadful hour, which thou have reserved
for the executing of thy divine Justice?


SAVIOVR. MY Judgment is indeed far remote, Vas electionis est iste mihi ut
porter nomen meum coram Regibus and Gentibus. Act. 9.15.
not only from that of the common sort of men, but also from that of the
holiest among them. Paul was a Saint upon Earth, he was a vessel of Election,
and made privy to the Secrets of Heaven, yet he was deceived in his judgment of
Timothy, for he thought him to be a Saint, and worthy of the character, and
station of a Bishop, yet I found him otherwise, Apoc. 3.
and threatened to deprive him of his Church of Ephesus for falling from his
former zeal, and would certainly take away his Chair, but that he repented and
did Penance. My dearly beloved Disciple had a great veneration for all the
Seven Bishops of Asia; the whole Country looked upon them all as holy men, and
great lovers of virtue; yet in my sight the Bishop of Sardis was so far from
being a Saint, that his Soul was tainted with mortal Sin; the Bishop of
Laodicia was a miser, poor, blind and naked of all virtue; the Bishop of
Thiatira was indeed a faithful servant to me as to his own person, but in
performing his duty to those under his charge, I found him guilty in several
sins of omission. The Bishop of Philadelphia was not indeed fallen from his
first zeal, Utinam frigidus esses, aut calidus, sed quia tepidus es, incipiam
te evomere ex ore meo. Apo. 3.16.
yet I found wherewith to reprehend him, not for committing of evil, nor for
the omitting of good, nor for being remiss in his former fervor; but only for
his little virtue, and charity; with another I found fault, and told him, I
would thou were either hot or cold, but because thou art lukewarm, I shall
begin to vomit thee out of my mouth.

By this thou may see how far different my judgment is, from that of men in
this life. As for the severity of my Judgment even in this life, wherein for
the most part I make use of my mercy, it is very terrible as thou may well
perceive by what I said to the People of Israel by the mouth of my Prophet,
nay, it is able to drive thee, and even the most obstinate of Sinners, out of
the ways of iniquity into the path of mortification and Penance, which alone
can lead them to Salvation. Mark well my words, and lodge them within the
closet of thy heart as a divine treasure, their efficacy is such that (if often
minded) they will exempt thee from the following calamities: I will power out
all my Rage upon thee, and will accomplish my fury in thee; I will Judge thee
according to thy ways, and will lay forth all thy wickedness against thee; my
eyes shall not pardon thee, neither will I have mercy on thee. I will charge
thee with all thy misdeeds, and thy abominations shall be in the midst of thee;
and thou shall know that I am the Lord that smites.

Nay, my wrath shall be upon all the People, the Sword without, and Pestilence
within, and Famine too, they who fly to save themselves, shall all remain in
the mountains, as the Doves of the valleys trembling in their iniquities, their
hands shall be disjoynted, and their knees shall dissolve into water, for the
great fear and amazement which I shall send upon them in my wrath. Consider
seriously now, and conclude, if my Judgment be so severe, and so rigorous even
in this life, which is the only time for mercy, what will it be when mercy is
clear out of date, and when Justice will admit of no mixture of pity, of
tenderness, or of compassion; when the books of all men's consciences shall be
laid open to the view of the whole world, when the most secret Sins of their
hearts, those sordid acts committed in the dark, those Sins which through shame
were concealed in confession, or made less considerable with false and
Sacrilegious excuses; when all crooked and sinister intentions, hidden and
unknown Treacheries, counterfiet and dissembling virtues, feigned friends,
adulterous Wives, unfaithful Husbands, deceitful Servants, false witnesses, and
all such trash, shall be discovered to their great shame and confusion; when In
fine, Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, qui paratus est Di^boio and Angelis
ejus. Mat. 25. Job. 26.11.12.
they shall behold me feated on a dreadful Throne with a countenance full of
indignation and wrath, and hear from my mouth these dreadful words, depart from
me ye cursed into eternal fire prepared for Satan and his Angels.

This dreadful sentence shall overthrow them for ever, and cover them with
eternal sorrow and confusion: The Pillars of Heaven, says Job, do tremble and
are astonished at his reproofs. If we be not able to hear so few words from his
mouth without amazement, and in puncto ad inferna descendent Job. 21.
how shall we withstand the thunder of his omnipotent power? This voice shall
be horrible, and of so great a power, that the earth in the twinkling of an eye
shall open and swallow them down into the bottomless pit of Hell.

O Man! if Ananias and Saphira were struck dead only with hearing the angry
voice of my Disciple, what a terror will my dreadful and angry voice strike
into the hearts of the reprobate? Act. 5.1.2.3.4. etc.
S. Catharine of Sienna was reprehended by St. Paul for not employing her time
to more advantage for her Soul, this was at most but a charitable advice, and
givenprivately too: yet she said she had rather be disgraced before the whole
world, then once more to suffer what she did by that reprehension: but what is
this in reference to the horror and confusion which my dreadful words will
bring upon the wicked in the day of my vengeance. If when I suffered my self to
be taken and led to be judged with these two words, I am, I overthrew the
astonished multitude of Soldiers, and Rabble to the ground, what will my words
be when I come to Judge? what a terrible fall, and irrecoverable overthrow will
these dreadful words give to all the wicked, depart from me ye cursed into
eternal fire, prepared for Satan and his Angels; Psalm. 54.
for at that very instant the fire of that general burning shall invest those
misorable Creatures; the Earth shall open, and Hell shall enlarge his throat to
swallow them to all eternity: Psalm. 139.
Then they shall see the accomplishment of my malediction, let death come upon
them, and let them sink alive into hell; Coals of fire shall fall upon them,
Psalm. 10.
and I shall cast them into a burning fire, where they shall not subfist in
their miseries: nay, I shall pour down vengence, fire, and sulphur upon them,
fire, hail, snow, Ice, and the Spirit of tempests shall be but a small part of
their chalice.

This great misfortune of the wicked is perfectly represented by my beloved
Disciple in his Revelations; where he says, Revel. 18.1.2.5.6.7.
After these things, I saw another Angel come down from Heaven, having great
power; and the Earth was lightn'd with his glory; and he cried mightily with a
strong voice, saying, Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen; and is become the
habitation of Devils, and receptacle of every foul Spirit, and a Cage for every
unclean and hateful Bird. Her Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has
remembered her iniquities. He shall reward her even as she rewarded him, and
double upon double unto her according to her works; the Cup which she has
filled, he shall fill to her double. How much she has glorified her self, and
lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow he shall give her. Her Plagues
shall come in one day upon her, death, mourning, and famine, and she shall be
utterly burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord God who judges her. After this
a mighty Angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into the Sea,
saying, thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and
shall be never found more.

Thus the wicked (which are understood by Babylon) shall be cast into the
precipice of hell, into that dark Dungeon overwhelmed with horror, and all
manner of confusion. O what tongue is able to express the multitude of torments
which they shall suffer there for an Eternity! their bodies shall burn with
living flames, never to be extinguished; their Souls without any intermission
shall be gnawed with the worm of conscience, which shall never give them the
least respit of ease, there they shall continue perpetually weeping, sighing
and gnashing their teeth, without any hopes of jail-delivery. In this woeful
place of despair, those miserable damned wretches in a cruel fury full of rage,
will send forth their invectives against me, and turn their anger against
themselves, devouring their own flesh, tearing their bowels, incessantly
blaspheming me, who had condemned them to those unspeakable torments. There
every one of that damned crew will curse his grand misfortune, and the unhappy
day of his birth, always repeating that mournful lamentation of Job: let the
day perish wherein I was born, Job. 3.
and the night in which it was said, there is a man-child conceived, let that
day be darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine
upon it. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon
it; let the blackness of the day terrify it, As for that night, let darkness
seize upon it, let it not be joined unto the days of the year, let it not come
into the number of the months; let that night be solatary, let no joyful voice
come therein. Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up
their mourning; let the Stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for
light, but have none, neither let it see the dawning of the day. Because it
shut not the door of my Mother's womb, nor hid sorrow from mine eyes. Why died
I not from the womb? Why did I not give up the Ghost when I came out of the
belly? why did the knees prevent me? or why the breasts that I should suck? For
now should I have lain still, and been quiet; I should have slept, then had I
been at rest.

This shall be the music, these the Canticles, these will be the Morning and
Evening prayers of the damned for ever.


MAN. If it be so bad with the damned, (as without doubt it is, being thou
say it O Lord,) I think they have sufficient reason to curse eternally the
day that ever they were born, for as thou did say of Judas, foreseeing his
treachery, and his Damnation which was to ensue, it were better he had never
come into the world; I think the same of those wretched Souls, it were better
they had perished in their Mothers wombs, then to become by their own Sins the
fatal object of thy just Indignation and wrath. O most unfortunate Souls, if it
were lawful for me, or in the least available to you, I would commiserate your
condition; but your sentence can never be recalled; there you are lodged among
so many Legions of Devils, and there you are like to continue for an eternity.
O unfortunate tongues that bolt out nothing but blasphemies! O unhappy Eyes
that see nothing but miseries, calamities and new found torments at every
moment! O sad Ears that hear nothing but horrid cries, woeful screeks, mournful
lamentations, and constant gnashing of teeth; O deplorable bodies that have no
other refreshment then scorching flames. Whilst you were dwellers in this
world, you spent all your time in vanities, in sinful recreations, and
pleasures, increasing your fortunes, and heaping up of earthly treasures, far
from the least thought of heavenly things; but see now what is the end of all
your actions; what an infinite deal of miseries you have brought upon your
selves? O foolish and infatuated wretches! what does all your unlawful, and
transitory pleasures avail you now? for which you are condemned unto
everlasting sorrow, and woe; what is become of all your wealth? where are your
treasures? what is the end of all your joys and comforts? nothing but
everlasting misery, woe, tribulations and sorrow.

This is well illustrated in holy writ, by the great famine which came upon the
People of Egypt, and which continued for the space of seven years; O what an
extreme grief was it unto them that they did not in the seven former years of
abundance, provide for the seven following years of Dearth, they were like men
in despair for loosing the benefit of so favorable an opportunity; and were
vehemently troubled in mind for their misfortune and negligence herein; but
alas! their grief is not to be compared to that of the damned, it is no more,
then a shadow, that is compared with the truth: For the Famine of Egypt lasted
no longer then seven years; but that of hell shall never be at an end: there
was a remedy found for that of Egypt, though with vast expenses, but for this,
there is no remedy at all to be expected: That was soon releiv'd by selling
their Cattle, and lands to Joseph; but this can never be abated with any manner
of exchange, this punishment can never be recalled, this pain will never be
diminished. The People of Egypt after the seven years of Dearth were expired,
began a little to respire, and to wade out of their miseries; but in hell,
alas! the wicked shall never be quit of their misfortunes, they shall never
come to the least rest, or ease; they shall be both night and day in torments,
and tortures, and that for an Eternity. If the People of Egypt fell into
despair before the expiration of the seven years, Ex Inferno nulla est
redemptio. Facilis Descensus Averni, sed revocare gradum, hoc opus hic labor
est. Varg.
being sure of a relief soon after; what despair will the wicked be in, having
an assurance from thy mouth, O Lord, that their miseries shall never have an
end! O what miserable and unfortunate wretches are we! they will cry, what
time, what powerful means, what opportunities of working our eternal Salvation
have we neglected! The time was that with one cup of cold water we might have
purchased unto our selves a Crown of glory: we might by relieving the poor, and
other such like works of mercy, have merritted life everlasting; how great was
our blindness, our madness, and folly to have neglected those favorable
occasions of enriching our selves for ever, and to suffer those fruitful years
of such great abundance to pass away, without making any provision for our
Souls.

Had we been brought up amongst Infidels and Pagans, and believed that our
Souls were mortal, as well as our bodies, that we were in the same Category
with all brute animals, whose souls do perish at once with their bodies, we
might have some kind of excuse, and plead, that we knew nothing of what was
commanded, or what was forbidden by God; but being brought up Christians, and
holding for an Article of our belief that the hour shall come, wherein we must
give a strict account of all our transactions to God, we have been often told
by Preachers, and Teachers, that the kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and
that we could not attain to it otherways then by the passport of
Mortifications and Penance, that it was our incumbent duty to depress our
unruly Passions, and never to be drawn away by our evil inclinations; yet
unfortunate Souls! we were fondly persuaded that Heaven was for us without any
pains at all; that God was so merciful, that he would not condemn our Souls to
everlasting torments, ('though we were never so wicked:) and therefore we have
justly deserved that he should deal with us according to the full rigor of his
Justice. Come then ye Infernal Furies, come and rend us in pieces, come and
devour our unchristian bowels, for we have justly deserved to be so cruelly
dealt with; we have deserved to be hunger-starved for ever, being we have
neglected to provide for our selves while we had both the means, the time, and
convenience of doing it; we deserve not to reap, because we have not sown. We
deserve to fuffer want and misery, being we never laid up any thing in store:
we often refused the poor and needy their humble, and earnest request, and
therefore we deserve to be denied ours. We often have closed ears to the sighs
and groans of the poor and distressed, and therefore we deserve to sigh and
lament for an eternity in vain. We deserve that the worm of our conscience
should gnaw our intrails for ever by representing unto us our criminal and
transitory pleasures, the great happiness which we have lost by them, Erravimus
a via veritatis, and Justitiae lumen non illuxit nobis, and Sol intelligentiae
non est ortus nobis; lassati sumus in via iniquitat's and perditionis, and
ambulavimus vias difficiles. viam autem Domini ignoravimus. Sap. 5.6, 7, 8.
the unspeakable torments which we are to suffer for them, and their long
continuance which will be for an Eternity.

We erred and wandered from the ways of truth, and the light of Justice was not
with us, nor did the Sun of Wisdom shine upon us. We weari'd our selves in the
ways of wickedness and perdition, and walked in paths of difficulty, and knew
not the way of the Lord. What has our Pride profited us? and what has the pomp
of our Riches availed us? all those things have passed like a shadow, or like
a messenger who passes in have, or like a Ship which cuts the instable waves,
and leaves no mark where it went: even so we are now consumed in our wickedness.

The cruel and bloody Tyrants, who have afflicted and put to death thy holy
Martyrs, O Lord, shall be troubled with horrible fear when they shall behold
them, whom they had so unhumanely treated in this life, to be so highly
honored in Heaven; they shall wonder at their unexpected Salvation, and say
amongst themselves with great regret, with much grief and anguish of Spirit:
These are the men who sometime were unto us matter of Scorn and laughter. We
insipid wretches imagined their life to be madness, and that then end will be
without nonour, but behold how they are counted amongst the children of God,
and how their lot is amongst the Saints; such will be the amazement of those
mercenary Judges also, who have trampled under foot the justice and right of
thy poor servants on Earth; when they shall behold them Judges in Heaven, and
themselves condemned to Hellfire for their unjust Sentences. Solomon's words
verifies this, Eccl. c. 3. and 10.
where he says, I saw a great evil beneath the Sun, that in the Throne of
Judgment was Seated impiety, and wickedness in the place of Justice: And I
said in my heart, God shall Judge the good and evil, and then shall be seen who
every one is.

Here on Earth the wicked sometimes are exalted, and the Godly depressed, but
thou, O Lord, shall in the day of thy visitation rectify those great disorders
and grievances; thou shall Separate the wheat from the tares; thoushalt place
the good upon thy right hand, elevated in the Air, that all the world may
honor and reverence them, as being thy favorites; whereas the wicked shall
stand all in a confusion far off, at thy left, expecting their final Sentence,
and the immediate execution thereof; O how they shall at that dreadful hour
envy the happy state of the Just! seeing them so much honored, and themselves
so much despised: O how will the Potentates, and crowned heads of the Earth, be
astonished! when they shall behold their Vassals in Glory, their Slaves amongst
the Angels, and themselves in the same rank with the Devils.

O my Sweet Savior! St. Chrysostom. hom. 24. in Lucam. Armabit omnum creaturam ad
ultronem inimicorum, and pugnabit pro^eo orbis terrarum contra insensatos.
what shall I think of my self? what shall I say, what shall I do, or how shall
I be able to excuse my self in that day of thy wrath, when Heaven, Earth, Sun,
Moon, Stars, Night, and Day together with all that is contained within the
precincts of the whole world, shall accuse me, bear witness of all my evil, and
cry vengeance against me before thy dreadful Throne: nay, were they all silent,
mine own conscience shall fly in my face, and accuse me of all my offenses,
even of the least idle word that ever I have spoken; Woe's me then, says St.
Ambrose, St. Ambr. in Lucum.
if I do not weep and lament for my Sins while I have time, and convenience;
Woe's me, if I do not rise at midnight with the Prophet royal to confess unto
thee O Lord, Woe is me, if ever I wrong, belly, or bring My neighbor into any
evil inconvenience or trouble, woe's me if I do not speak truth at all times,
or if ever I be found in a ly. For the Ax of Death is now perhaps at the root
of my Tree of life, or at least will be ere long; it is the same case with every
one, therefore it behooves us all to be watchful, to be constantly in the
practice of Penance, and in the exercise of all good works, in hopes we may be
one day of the number of thy beloved in Heaven.


SAVIOVR. O Man! Omnia toleranda pro caelesti gloria. Aug.
had thou known what a Supreme happiness it is to be of the number of my
beloved in Heaven, thou would be of St. Augustins opinion, and say with him,
were I to suffer every day the greatest torments that the Rage and Malice of
the most bloody Tyrants could invent, nay, were I to endure even the anguishes
of Hell for a long time, to see Christ in his Glory, I would think my self
extraordinary well rewarded; nay, I would freely, and with all my heart undergo
all the afflictions imaginable, upon condition to be made Partaker of so great
a blessing. Let the Devils therefore ly in Ambushes for me let them prepare as
many temtations against me as they can contrive; let my body be even consumed
with abstinence, and constant fasting, let hair-cloth, and chains of Iron
depress my flesh; let labor and continual toil extenuate my body, let watching
and lying on the hard ground wither it, and make it as dry as a rotten tree;
let this man exclaim against me, and the other pursue me to death; let the cold
seize upon me, and make me stoop to the Earth, let my conscience murmr, let
the scorching heat of the Sun parch me, let my body grieve, let my breast burn,
let my stomach swell, let my countenance wax pale, let me from head to foot be
full of ulcers, let my whole life, hours, days, years pass over in tears, in
grief, and in sorrow; let the dust inter my bones, and cover me all over, so
that I be sheltered in the day of Tribulation; and placed at thy right hand, O
Lord, among the number of thy Elect. O how great will be the glory of the Just;
and how infinite will be the joy of the Saints, when every ones face will shine
as the Sun!

But thou must know O man! that the principal joy of the blessed is the
peaceable enjoyment and possession of me, whom they Behold clearly as I am in
my self; and that, as, Honorable, profitable, and delectable are not divided
in Heaven, so the blessed Souls have three gifts essential, and inseparable
from that happy state, which correspond to those three kind of Blessings,
which your Divines call vision, comprehension, and fruition. The first consists
in the clear and perfect sight of me, Ego Protector tuus Sum. and merces tua
magna nimis. Genesis 15.1.
which I give to the Just as a reward of their merits; and by this they receive
an unspeakable honor, in as much as their works and virtues are rewarded in
the presence of all my Archangels, Angels, and heavenly Spirits with no less a
recompense then my self. The second is the full and ample possession which the
Soul has of me, who am all her treasure, all her delight, and all inheritance.
And the third is the ineffable joy which evermore accompanies this blessed
sight, and ever-peaceable possession. This joy is adorned with two singular
qualities, the first whereof makes it so vigorous and powerful, that it
excludes all grief, all pain, and in a word, St. Aug. medita. 22.
all manner of evil; This is consonant to what St. Augustine says, where he cries
ont: O Lord! the life which thou have prepared for thy friends, is a blessed
life, a secure life, a quiet life, a life that knows no death, a life without
sadness, without labor, without grief, without trouble, without corruption,
without fear, without variety, without alteration: A life replenished with all
beauty and dignity, where there is neither Enemy that can offend, nor delight
that can annoy; where love admits of no mixture of hatred, or disdain, where
the day is everlasting, where the spirit of all is one, where God is seen face
to face, who is the only meat whereupon they feed, without any nauseating;
hitherto St. Augustine. Cicero de Fin. and 5. Tuscul.
Many of your ancient Philosphers were of opinion that the exemption from evil,
pain and grief, was the chief felicity of man; it is therefore that the best of
profane Orators, and Philosophers, did place the chief happiness of man in the
freedom from grief; Jero. Rodius and Diodorus Philoso. Perip.
but here lies their error; they Judged that to be the Summumbonum, which was
only the consequent and product thereof. For the love and joy which springs
from the clear vision of my divine Essence is so powerful, that it is enough to
convert even Hell into Heaven; in so much, as if to the most tormented Soul in
hell were added all the torments of the rest of the damned both men and Devils,
and that I should vouensafe him but one glimpse of my knowledge, that only
vision, though in the lowest degree, were sufficient to free him from all those
evils both of sin and pain; so that his Soul being extasi'd by that unspeakable
beauty which he beheld, would not be sensible of any grief or pain whatever. By
this thou may easily conceive the omnipotency of that joy which I confer upon
my beloved in Heaven, which if I should impart to the most damned in hell, it
would convert all his great torments into far greater consolations.

The Second stupendous wonder which the greatness of my joy produces in the
Souls of my beloved, is the manifold pleasures which spring from it, as from a
most fruitful root. Art thou not astonished to hear that the happiness of the
Souls should cause so many and mavelous effects in the bodies of my Blessed,
as St. Augustine relates, do thou not wonder when he tells thee, that my
beatifical vision carries so unspeakable a joy with it into their Souls, that
it wholly changes their bodies, makes them as beautiful as so many Angels,
resplendent as the Sun, immortal as a Spirit, and as impassible as even my
self. What miracles and prodigies it works in their bodies by the redundancy of
the unspeakable comfort which they feel in their spirits. Art thou not seized
with admiration, when St. Anselme tells thee, that if the body of one of my
Blessed, endowed with the four gifts of glory, full of clearness, splendour; and
beauty, were placed in any part, or corner of the world, it would perfume the
whole universe with a fragrancy infinitely more sweet unto their Senses, then
that of Musk and Amber; do thou not see how immense is that light and joy of
the Blessed Souls in Heaven, which transmits this so unspeakable a luster and
beauty unto their Bodies; and how can it be less, being it proceeds from my
beatifical vision, and that it is the very same joy which I have my self, and
which is sufficient to make me blessed with a blessedness equal to my self:
It Is therefore I say unto my beloved Servant; Euge serve bone and sidelis. quia
super fuisti sidelis super pauca multa te constituum intra in gandium Domini
tui. Mat. 25.21.
well done, thou good and faithful Servant; thou have been faithful over a few
things, I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord. Take notice, O man! that I do not simply say, enter into joy; but to show
the greatness thereof, I call it my own joy, and that very joy whereby I my
self become happy. Observe also that there is not a Creature in this world,
which has not for his final end some manner of perfection, and that those
Creatures which are indu'd with reason and knowledge, have in that perfection a
particular joy and complacency, which is greater or lesser according as their
end is more or less perfect; Now thou must of necessity acknowledge that my
perfection infinitely exceeds that of all Creatures, consequently the joy which
is in my self (for I have no end or perfection distinct from my self) is
infinitely greater then the joy of all Creatures; and this infinite joy out of
my infinite goodness I was pleased to impart as well to the Blessed Souls, as
to the Angels, though so great, and so special a felicity was in no way due unto
their humane nature; wherefore thou must confess that the joy of Saints, which
is that of my beatifical vision, and wherein my joy and happiness does consist,
is infinite, and that all the contents and pleasures of the world in comparison
to it, are Aloes, Gall, and Wormwood. The Philosophers will tell thee, that by
how much a dilectable object closes nearer to the faculty, by so much greater
is the joy and delight which it produces therein; natural reason will convince
thee that of all objects I am the most excellent, and the most delightful,
consequently being in the beatifical vision united to the Souls of my Saints in
heaven with the most intimate union that can be in a pure creature, must of
necessity cause an unspeakable joy, incomparably greater then all the joys
real or imaginable, which can be produced by all the creatures that were, are
at present, or will be extant to the end of the world: for as my Divine
perfection contains within it self the perfections of all created things,
possible, and imaginable, so the joy which it causes in the Souls of the
Blessed, must be infinitely greater then all other joys, which either have or
can be caused by the creature.

O man! here I must reflect upon the main weakness, the great folly, and the
wilful ignorance of Mortals; Helena the beauty of Greece did so inflame the
heart of Paris, that he made a vow to have her for his wife, though it should
cost the lives of millions of men, and utter destruction of his whole nation;
Jacob was so enamored of the fair Rachel, that he made nothing of fourteen
years continual Slavery to purchase the happiness of her enjoyment. The People
of Israel were so much taken with Absoloms beauty, and so charmed with the
sweetness of his discourse, that they all joined heart and hand with him to
dethrone David his own Father, their lawful King, the best of Princes, a man
according to my own heart, a Prince adorned with all virtues, a Prince so much
extolled for his mildness to his Subjects and for his great care of preserving
them in peace, with all foreign nations; A Prince that ventured his life to
fight a Goliath for the honor and redemption of Israel from the tyrannical yoke
of the Philistines: Non enim te abjecerunt, sed me, ne regnem super eos. 1 Reg.
8.7. Tulit Joab tres lanceas in manusua, and infixit eas in cord Absolem. 2
Reg. 18.14.
O that a whole nation should be so much infatuate! as to abdicate so worthy,
and so gracious a King for the love of a mortal and fading beauty, for the sake
of an ambitious, ungrateful, and deluding Absalom; but I account the injury is
done to me, and not to David, they have not rejected him, but me, that I should
no more rule over them; this is the height of ingratitude, and must have a
punishment equal to its demerit, for Absalom shall die by the hands even of one
of his greatest Admirers, and the chief of his favorites; as for the People of
Israel, that gave their concurrence to so unhumane, and barbarous an act, they
shall be ruled by Tyrants that shall keep them always in a curb: and make them
absolute Slaves for ever: Let all those who find themselves conscious of so
horrid a crime, tremble at the hearing of so dreadful a chastisement. Mulieres
sedebant plangentes Adonidem. Ezec. 18.14.
The beauty of Adonis had no better success than that of Absalom, for though the
very sight of him drew love and admiration from his beholders, yet at length he
was to them a subject of great lamentation, and sorrow.

O ye Sons of men! Filij hominum usque quo gravi cord? ut quid diligi is
vanitatem and queritis mendacium. Et scitote quoniam mirificavit Dominus
Sanctum suum. Psalm. 4.3.4.
how long will ye turn my glory into shame? how long will ye love vanity, and
seek after false things? But know ye, that the Lord has extolled the beauty of
his Saints, and made it wonderful beyond the reach of humane understanding, and
the expression even of the very Angels: for all the beauty of the world
aggregated in one creature, falls infinitely short of that of my Saints in
Heaven, how ravishing then must my beauty be which is accompanied with several
other perfections, that will admit of no limits; as with infinite wisdom,
omnipotence, holiness, liberality, bounty, and all that can be imagined good,
beautyful and perfect; it is enough indeed to force even the hearts of mine
enemies to love, serve, honor, and adore me.

Thou art (I know) a great admirer of perfection; tell me then, if there were
in the world a man as wise as an Angel, would thou not be as earnest to see
him, as the Queen of Sheba was to behold Solomon; but if to this great wisdom
were added the strength of Hercules, or that of Sampson, the victories of the
Machabees, or those of the greatest Conquerours that e're appeared in this
World, the courage, the devotion, the meekness and courtesy of David, the
friendship of Jonathan, the liberality of all the Roman, and Assyrian
Potentates, and the greatest beautys that ever appeared upon Earth, certainly
thou would be totally inflamed with love for so admirable a Creature, thou
would never be weary of his company, much less of his discourse; why then
do thou not love me with all thy heart, (as thou art commanded? Diliges
Dominum Deum tuum ex toto cord tuo. Matthew. 22.37. Cupio dissolvi and esse cum
Christo. Phil. 1.23.
) why do thou not often and ardently desire with St. Paul, to be delivered
from that loathsome prison of thy body to enjoy my sight and company, who am
really adorned with all those perfections and graces in an infinite degree
above all earthly Creatures, and do confer the same upon all, and every one of
my Saints in Heaven? why do thou not despise the transitory and sordid
pleasures of the world, to seek after those of my heavenly Court, which can
beautify and embellish both thy body and Soul; and the rather because I am so
free to impart them not only to thee, but also to all those that shall be
faithful to observe my commands. For if I be so magnificent a Lord, and so
free to confer my favors in this world upon all men, without any distinction,
so that the wicked may partake of them as well as the Godly, is there any
ground then to believe, that I have not far greater blessings in store for
those alone, that are my favorites and dearest beloved? If I was so liberal as
to bestow gratis such vast treasures, (as are the manifold benefits of nature)
upon a People that I was not in the least obliged to, but on the contrary have
suffered much at their hands; Nec oculus vidit, re^ auris audivit, nec in cor
hominis ascendit quae praeparavit Deus diligentibus se 1 Cor. 2.9.
how much more am I indebted to those that have served me faithfully, and with
the loss of both their lives and fortunes. It Is impossible for thee O man! to
express the immensity of the glory which I shall confer upon my Elect in
Heaven, since that even the benefits which I have imparted to my very Enemies
here on Earth, are far beyond the reach of thy understanding; for my Apostle
says, that the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him.

If that be so (as really it is) why do thou loyter then in thy banishment,
and dote so much upon the vaniteis of the world, and earthly affairs? why art
thou so desirous to live any longer in the land of Egypt to gather straw, and
drink muddy water out of it is stinking Pits, despising the headspring of all
felicitys, and the fountain of living waters? why art thou content to beg and
gather Alms at every door, rather then live in thy heavenly Fathers house,
where all manner of solid content, and pleasure is to be found? why do thou
starve with the prodigal Son, and feed with the Swine upon Acorns, whilst thou
may fit at his table, and eat of the banquet which he has prepared for all
his beloved in glory; If thou be'st inclined to pleasure, raise up thy heart
toward my heavenly Residence, and there thou shall behold that Supreme Good
which contains within its self eminently all the pleasures and allurements of
all things that can be called good or delectable. If this created life be
pleasing to thee, how much more pleasing must that increated life be, which
gave it a beginning, and without which it cannot subsist one moment. If health
be a comfort to thee, how much more comfort can I afford thee, who am alone the
giver, the promoter, and powerful preserver thereof; If the knowledge of the
creatures be sweet and acceptable to thee, how much more sweet and acceptable
ought the knowledge of thy Creator be unto thee. Cujus pulchritudinem sol and
luna mirantur. Job 38.7. Generationem ejus quis ennarrabit. Isa. 53.8.
If all thy delight be placed in beauty, I am he whose beauty the Sun and Moon
does admire. If thou be taken with Nobility, I am the source and offspring
of all that can be called noble, for my extraction goes far beyond the Creation
of the world, and limits of time. If thou delightest in learning, here in my
heavenly School thou shall know all my mysteries, the profound sense of holy
Scriptures; thou shall know the exact number of all my Saints and Angels; thou
shall know the Secrets of my Divine providence, how many are damned, and for
what, thou shall understand the frame and making of the world, the whole
artifice of nature, the motions of the Stars and Planets, the proprieties of
Plants, Stones, Birds, and Beasts; thou shall not only know all things created,
but also many more things which I might have created; thou shall not only know
them altogether, and in the total, but clearly and distinctly without any
confusion. The knowledge of the greatest wisemen and Philosophers of the world,
even in things natural, is full of ignorance, deceit, and incertainty, because
they know not the substance of things but through the shell and bark of
accidents; whereas a poor and silly Servant kept all his life in Slavery, nay,
were he a natural in the world, yet in heaven he shall be replenished with more
learning, and knowledge (as well of natural, as of divine things) then Solomon,
then Aristotle, then all the Mathematicians, Astrologers, Astronomers,
Philosophers, Divines and Doctors that ever were, or will be to the worlds end;
for as St. Gregory says, it is not to be believed that the Saints, who behold
within themselves the light of God, are ignorant of any thing without them.

If thou be desirous of long life and health, here thou will enjoy life
everlasting without any distemper, or malady, without any danger of death, or
of any other evil, in the quiet and peaceable possession of all manner of
pleasure and comfort; for there thou shall rejoice in what is above thee, which
is my beatifical vision; in what is below thee, which is the beauty of Heaven,
and other corporal Creatures; in what is within thee, which is the
glorification of thy body; in what is without thee, which is the company of so
many blessed Angels, so many glorious Apostles, so many renowned Patriarks, so
many famous Prophets, such an invincible army of Martyrs, a most renowned
assembly of Confessors, a vast number of true and perfect religious, so many
holy Virgins, which have overcome both the pleasures of the world, and the
frailty of their own nature. Here I shall recreate and feast all thy spiritual
Senses with an unspeakable delight, for I shall be both thy gracious and
grateful object; I shall be a mirror to the sight, music to the ear,
sweetness to the taste, balsom to the smell, flowers to the touch. Here In fine,
there shall be the clear sight of Summer, the pleasantness of the Spring, the
abundance of Autumn, and the repose of winter.

But O man! Quem dicunthomines esse filium hominis. Mat. 16.14.
I long to hear what Worldlings say of me, and of my Kingdom, for I suppose
that some of them are apt to believe I am John the Baptist, others will say
perhaps that I am Elias; others that I am Jeremiah, or some one of the
Prophets. Noli me tangere. Jo. 20.17. Vos autem quem me esse dicitis Ibid. v.
15.
Some will think that it is a folly for mortals to expect admittance to my
Kingdom, because that after my Resurrection I refused the Magdalen leave to
touch me, or to lay her hand upon any part of my garment. But what do thou
say of me, and of my glorious Residence?


MAN. I Say, Tu es Christus Filius Dei vivi. Jo. 6.70. Et regni ejus non erit
finis. Luc. 1.33.
that thou art Christ Son of the living God, and that thy Kingdom will never
have an end; it is therefore I believe that Scripture calls it the land of the
living, to let us understand that this wherein we abide, deserves no better
denomination then that of the dead; Alas, we know it by our woeful experience to
be very true; for though Adam and his Descendants for a long time, lived each of
them so many Ages, yet this fatal Epitaph, mortuus est, (which he has entailed
upon all his posterity) came at last, to show that as the world is mortal, the
inhabitants thereof must be of the same nature; but as for thy Kingdom O Lord,
it is immortal and without any end; it is therefore St. Paul says, that this
corruptible body of ours shall put on incorruption, and of mortal, become
immortal. This flesh of ours which now is so burdensome, and does so depress
our mind, which is now invested with so many inconveniences, subject to so
many alterations, grieved with so many diseases, defiled with so many
corruptions, overwhelmed with such an infinite deal of miseries, and
calamities, shall in thy Kingdom O Lord, be made glorious, and advanced to the
height of perfection. It shall be endu'd with Seven gifts suitable to thy
liberality, and to the dignity of thy beloved Servants; which are Beauty,
Agility, Fortitude, Justi fulgebant sicut sol in regno Patris eorum Mat. 13.43
Penetration, Health, Pleasure, and Perpetuity. As for the first gift, which is
Beauty, thou have thy self declared that the Just shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. The second is Agility and this prerogative of the Just
is no less then the former, for by this, their flesh is freed from that
lumpish and heavy weight which kept their Spirits fettered whilst they remained
in this life, and made as light even as the Angels themselves, who pass from
one extremity of the world to the other in the twinkling of an eye; the third
gift is Supernatural Strength, which does so abound in a glorified body, that
he shall be able to move the whole globe of the Earth, at thy command, and give
us a dry passage through the main Ocean, with as much ease as thy Angel did to
the People of Israel through the red Seas, to avoid the Rage and fury of their
pursuing Enemies. The fourth is I enetration, whereby he shall be able to
penetrate any other bodies tho'never so hard, or massy, and make nothing to
pierce Walls, Doors, the Earth, and the very Firmament, though it were made of
Brass; This thy glorified body has performed after thy Resurrection, for thou
did penetrate the house where thy Disciples were, the Doors being all shut,
and at thy Ascension thou did penetrate the Heavens also. The fifth
prerogative is absolute Health free from all pains of this life, quit of all
diseases, troubles, encumbrances, and all other infirmitys incident to humane
nature, and shall be perpetually fixed in a most perfect and flourishing state
of health and felicity, in no way liable to the least alteration for ever. The
sixth is Delight and Pleasure, which shall be heaped upon a glorified body to
that degree, that all his senses shall find their peculiar and proper objects
in a far more delicious manner then ever they could expect in this world; for
his eyes shall be for ever recreated with the beatifical vision, and with the
sight of the most glorious and beautiful bodies of all the Saints. One Sun is
enough to bring a full joy over the whole continent of the Earth, as also to
depress the raging waves of the main Ocean, in its greatest fury; it revives
the mortified grain, and makes it appear with it is green blades to assure the
Labourer of it is being alive, and sets at liberty all those varieties of
flowers and simples, which the cold season of winter kept a long time in it is
prisons of Ice; what joy then shall a blessed Soul conceive when he beholds as
many Suns as there are Saints? and when he sees himself to be one of them; when
he sees his hands, his feet, and the rest of his members, to cast forth beams
clearer then even the Sun in it is full height.

His ears shall be replenished wiih the most harmonious Songs and Music of so
many Quires of Angels, of so many millions of Saints, and of so many hundred
thousands of heavenly Spirits: as St. John in many several places of his
Revelations makes mention of; O my Soul! here I would have thee stay a while,
and consider seriously what a great satisfaction this is to the blessed: If the
harp of David were so delightful to Saul, and had so great a power as to
assuage the fury of his passion, and to recall him from that melancholy fit, of
which the Devil made use to destroy his Soul. If the Lyre of Orpheus was able
to operate such great prodigies in the World; and to win the hearts not only of
men, but also of the Infernal Spirits (if we may believe Poets) who tell us
that he recovered his Wife out of their clutches with the sweetness of his
melodious instruments: If St. Francis thought himself already in Heaven hearing
an Angel play on his instrument, what pleasure, what delight will a blessed
Soul have when he hears the sweet harmony of so many thousands of Angels
together? Tradition which gives life to the best of Historys, informs us that
the singing of one little bird alone, ravished a devout Monk to that degree
that three hundred years seemed no more to him then three hours, what a
sweetness will it be to hear the melody of those Songs, which the innumerable
citizens of that heavenly Jerusalem sing in praise of thee, their eternal King!
his smell shall be recreated with the most odoriferous scent which comes from
those beautiful bodies, infinitely more sweet then all the perfumes of the
Indies. In fine, the whole glorified body shall be filled with abundance of all
kind of consolation; the Eyes, the Ears, the Nose, the Mouth, the Hands, the
Throat, the Lungs, the Heart, the Stomach, the Back, nay, the very Intrals, and
every part of the Body, Inebriabuntur ab ubertate Domus tuae, and torrente
voluptatis tuae porabis eos. Ps. 35.9.
shall be replenished with such unspeakable sweetness and pleasure; that it may
be really said, the whole man is made to drink of the River of thy divine
delights, and made drunk with the abundance of thy most glorious and plentiful
house.

The Seventh and last prerogative of a glorified body is what the Divines call.
Perpetuity, that is security of life, which agrees well with that place of
Scripture, where it is said, the Just will live for ever; and St. Paul avers,
Justi autem in perpetuum vivent. Sap 5.16. Mors illi ultra non dominabitur. To.
6.9.
that Death has no more dominion over him. And this is one of the chiefest
prerogatives and most excellent Dignities of a glorified body; for by the great
benefit of this unspeakable favor, he is freed from all care, all doubt, all
fear, all danger, all hurt, all annoyance, and all manner of accidents that may
cross him, or give any disturbance to his ever lasting peace and rest. O how
sweet will the fruit of a virtuous life be then to his palate, how pleasant
will all his mortifications and penance, all his persecutions and troubles,
all the wrongs and injuries, all the aspersions and calumnies, which were
heaped upon him by his apparent enemies, or by his counterfeit friends, and
which he willingly suffered for thy sake, how pleasant, I say, they will appear
to him, and he to them, how he will embrace them as being instrumental to his
everlasting settlement in Glory! for though they seemed bitter to him in this
life, yet in Heaven they will taste most sweet to him, and he will think himself
highly honored to have been so ill treated for Justice.

Sweet is the cool evening after the hot summers day, sweet is the fountain to
the weary Traveller, sweet is the rest and sleep to the tired Servant; but much
more sweet is it to the Saints in Heaven, to enjoy ease after their manifold
troubles, tranquillity after their afflictions and crosses, peace after their
long and tedious war; Security after all their dangers, and rest after all
their pains and travels. For then all their grievances are at an end; then
their Skirmishes, and conflicts with their Enemies are laid aside, there is no
more talk of them, they lay down their Arms for ever, and remain in peace.

The Children of Israel went forth armed toward the Land of promise, Exodus 13.
but when they had conquered it, they laid down their Arms, put off their
Armor, 3 Reg. 4.
and forgetting all fear, and the fatigues of War, every one of them under the
shadow of his own Pavilion enjoyed the sweet advantage of a delightful peace.
Now may the bodies of thy Saints, Abac. 3.
O Lord, which have been wearied with continual watching, take their rest: Now
may the watchful Prophet come down from the Sentinels place, and take his sweet
repose for ever: Now may all those brave champions that fought so courageously
against the rage, the violence, and the craft of the Infernal Serpent, lay down
their warlike weapons, and take their pleasures in as ample a manner as thy
glorious Palace can afford, without the least apprehension of any further
disturbance, or fear of any invasion from either the world, the Flesh, or the
Devil. There Is no place there for the subtle crafts of the lurking vipers, nor
for the sight of the deadly Basilisk, neither shall the hissing of the ancient
Serpent be heard there, but only the soft breathing air of the Holy Ghost. This
is the Region of peace indeed, and the only place of security, situated above
all the Elements, whereto the nauseous clouds, and stormy winds of the dark air
of the world can have no access. Gloriosa dicta sunt de te civitas Dei. Psa. 86.
O City of God what glorious things have been said of thee! and no wonder, for
besides all that is written of the Majesty of thy King, of the beauty and
splendor of thy Inhabitants, of the peace and union of their hearts, of their
unspeakable joy and comfort; the very description which is given of thee, is
able to invite any one to be of the number of thy citizens; for thy gates are
wrought with Saphirs and Emeralds, thy walls are built with precious Stones,
thy Streets are paved with white and polished marble; thy houses are likewise
adorned with precious Stones, all lined through with Saphirs, and covered above
with massy gold. The light that shines in thee proceeds neither of Lamps, nor
of the Moon, nor yet of the refulgent Stars, no, it is the light which issued
from Light, that gives luster to thee; Psa. 103.
It Is thou, O Lord, that fills her with light, for in the midst of her thou
keep thy continual residence, and all the Saints do there reign with thee,
Psa. 20.
adorned with light, which is their sumptuous apparel, and bear Crowns of
transparent gems and precious stones upon their heads. O blessed Kingdom, says
St. Austin, where thou art always present, O Lord! who art the hope of all
Saints, and the Diadem of their everlasting glory, replenishing them with joy
on every side, so that in thy Realm, O Lord, there is infinite joy without
Sadness; health without sorrow, life without labor; light without darkness;
felicity without vexation; all goodness without evil. There Youth flourishes,
and never grows old, Life knows no end, beauty never fades, love never cools,
health never diminishes, joy never ceases. There sorrow is never felt;
complaint is never heard, matter of grief is never seen, nor ill success is
never feared, because they enjoy thee, O Lord, whose glorious presence confers
all these and many more blessings upon them. O my Soul what a main happiness
will it be to see that holy Lamb! th^^ sweet Jesus, thy gracious Redeemer
invested with superexcellent Majesty Seated in his Chair of State. If the three
Eastern Kings undertook a long journey to Bethlehem, and were so much overjoyed
when they found him, though lying in a manger; how great must their joy be now to
see him triumphing in his glory! If St. John the Baptist did leap with joy at
his approaching toward him in his Mothers womb, what an ocean of joy will now
or'ewhelm his heart, when he sees him face to face in his royal and eternal
Kingdom? O says the same Saint! to be admitted into thy presence O Lord, and to
receive the beams of glory from the splendor of thy Majesty, surpasses all
other joy and felicity that the Saints possess in Heaven, and were I to suffer
torments every day, yea, and the very pains of Hell for a time, thereby to gain
thy vision in Heaven, and to be united in glory to the number of thy Saints; it
were nothing to the greatness and excellency of the reward, but alas! how far
am I from the feelings of this most learned and holy man.

I am like a Child that longs and cries for an apple, but will not take the
pains to come for it, or like a Ship that is bound for a certain harbor, and
steers the quite contrary way, or like a Cat that loves fish, but will not wet
her paw to fetch it out of the water: I love ^^ee O Lord! but will not surmount
the least difficulty to purchase thy glory; I aim, and my desire is to land in
the safe harbor of Heaven, but I run a quite contrary course; Tu^es miser and
miserabilis, and pauper and caecus, and nudus Apoc. 3.17. Non coronabitur nisi
qui legittime certaverit. 2 Timothy 2.5. Nonne haec opportuit Christum pari and
ita intrare in gloriam suam. Lu. 24.26.
I love a virtuous and godly life, but will not make use of the means which
thou have prescribed to attain it. I am created to trade in this world for the
advantage of my Soul, and to bring my vessel laden with good works to the Land
of Promise. But alas! this forty, nay, fifty years, I have bufi'd my self even
about trifles, and now I find I am no better than that Bishop thou did so
severely reprehend in the revelations, for I may be very well called miser,
miserable, poor, blind and naked as well as he was; so that I have great reason
to fear thou will remove my candlestick out of its place, and turn me off with
a nescio vos, unless I speedily resolve upon a better course of life, and fight
more manlike for a Crown in Heaven, which I shall never obtain otherwise then
by traceing the same paths which thou wentst into thy glory.


SAVIOVR. THe only way to be happy for ever, is to lead a virtuous life without
any intermission, not in parts, or with intervals; for this is losing of
ground. Thou art to press on, and persevere; for if thou do discontinue thy
course, when will thou come to pronounce these words? I am a Conqueror: not a
Conqueror of barbarous Enemies, and Salvage Nations; but of my own predominant
and unruly passions, of my vicious and evil inclinations; of my Avarice,
Ambition, and Lusts which have subjected even the greatest of Conquerours. Who
was a greater then Alexander, that extended his Empire from Thracia, to the
utmost bounds of the Earth? but yet he burnt Persepolis at the request of a
Prostitute, to gratify his Lust. It Is true he overcame Darius, and slew many
thousands of the Persians; yet he has murdered Calisthenes: and that single
blot has tarnish'd all the glory of his great and numerous victories. All the
wishes of mortals, and all the benefits which they can either give or receive,
are very little available to a happy life. Those things which the common People
gape after are transitory and vain; whereas happiness is permanent; nor is it
to be estimated by number, measure, or parts: for it is full, and perfect; this
is Seneca the moral Philosophers discourse; which should make thee, O Christian
man! blush to set so slender an estimate upon my glory, and upon the
everlasting happiness which I promise unto thee, if thou will resolve to lead a
virtuous and godly life, and depress thy passions with the dint of
mortification and Penance; but thou do not answer my expectation, and yet
would fain be admitted into my glory at a cheaper rate then I had it my self.

This Pagan Philosopher shall rise in Judgment against thee; and his following
expressions will certainly condemn the little care thou have of thy Salvation.
I do not, says he, speak as if my self were arrived at that blessed state of
repose: but yet it is something to be on the mending hand. It is with me, as
with a man that is creeping out of a disease; he feels yet some grudgings of it,
he is every foot examining his pulse; and suspects every touch of heat to be a
relick of his fevour: Just at that rate, am I jealous of my self. The best
remedy that I know in this case, is to go on with confidence, and not to be
misled by the errors of other People. It is with our manners, as with our
healths; it is a degree of virtue, the abating of vice, as it is a degree of
health, the abating of a fit.

Could a Christian speak better; or more to the purpose? could he take a more
assured way to prevent the increase of vice, then what he prescribes? Hear him
once more speak; some says he, will place their happiness in wealth; some in
the liberty of the body; and others in the pleasure of the sense, and Palate.
But what are metals, Tastes, Sounds, or colors, to the mind of a reasonable
creature? he that sets his heart upon the riches of this world the very fear of
poverty will be grievous to him. He that is ambitious, shall be galled with envy
at a man that is preferred before him: For in that case, he that is not first, is
last. I do not, says he, speak against Riches: for if they hurt a man it is his
own folly: they may be indeed the cause of mischief; as they are a temptation
to those that do it. Instead of courage they may inspire a man with arrogance;
and instead of magnanimity, with insolence; which is in truth but the
counterfiet of heroic minds, and where is the happiness of Luxury; when a man
divides his life betwixt the Kitchen, and the stews; betwixt an anxious
conscience, and a naufeous Stomach? Caliguia, was born to show the world what
mischief might be done by a concurrence of great wickedness, and a great
fortune: he spent near 10000 l. Sterling upon a Supper. The works and
inventions of Luxury are indeed prodigious, not only in the counterfieting of
nature, but even in surpassing it. The Romans had their brooks even in their
very parlours, and found their dinners under their Tables. The Mullet was
reckoned stale unless it died in the hand of the Guiest, And they had their
glasses to put them into, that they might the better observe all the changes,
and motions of them in the last Agony betwixt life and Death. So that they fed
their eyes, before their bodies. These people would not have given themselves
half this trouble with a dying friend; nay, they would leave a Father or a
Brother at his last hour, to entertain themselves with the barbarous spectacle
of an expiring Fish.

O man! thou art a Christian, and one that pretends to the height of
perfection, which is to follow me, and ground thy life as well upon my
councels, as upon my examples; thou have in thy Baptism made a solemn oath to
have an everlasting abhorrence of the world, the flesh and the Devil, thou have
renounced them for ever; thou have declared thy self an Enemy to all sorts of
vice, yet thou art more a slave to them then ever the Romans were to their
bellies, so that I verily believe, had this Pagan Philosopher been now alive,
and seen the liberty that Christians take to run headlong into disorders, and
debauchery, he would conclude their Religion to be far worse then that of the
Romans, which was no other then to indulge their bodies in all that might be
pleasing to their Palate. Let him yet speak more of his mind to the Romans,
and thou shall find that what enormities he lays to their charge, is now adays
the common practice of Christians. That says he, which enhances the esteem of
every thing, is the price of it: In so much, that water it self, which ought to
be gratuitous, is exposed to sale, in their Conservatories of Ice, and Snow.
Nay, we are troubled that we cannot buy breath, light, and that we have the Air
it self gratis. And if our conditions be evil, our trouble is, that nature has
left something to us in common: But Luxury contrives ways to set a price upon
the most necessary and communicable benefits in nature: even those benefits,
which are free to Birds, and Beasts, as well as to men; and serve indifferently
for the use of the most Sluggish Creatures.

But how chances it, that fountain water is not cool enough to serve us, unless
it be bound up in Ice? So long as the Stomach is moderatly satisfied, Nature
discharges her functions without trouble: but when the blood comes to be
inflamed with excess of wine, or the Stomach overcharged with meat, simple
water is not cool enough to Allay it is heat; then we are forced to make use of
remedies, which remedies themselves are vices. And this is the product of
heaping Suppers upon Dinners, and Dinners upon Suppers without intermission.

The natural thirst, (be it never so vehement, and not derived from libidinous
actions) is easily quenched with a draught of water, though it be of the River it
will suffice; but, when the palate is grown squeemish, we taste nothing; and
that which we take for thirst, is only the rage of a Fevour, or some other
distemper acquired by disorder: Even the very Women are in some measure guilty
of this extravagance, for though they have not altered their natures, they have
changed the course of their lives; and by taking the liberties of men, they
partake as well of their diseases, as of their wickedness. They sit up late,
drink as much, nay, in their very Appetites they are as masculine too; in a
word, they have lost the modesty, and other advantages of their Sex, by their
vices.

O man! are not these the abominations and Crimes now in vogue, in that corrupt
and licentious Age thou liv'st in? What this good moral Philosoper blames in
the Romans, is it not the common practice of Christians now a days, nay, they
are guilty of far greater crimes; for they do not only pamper their Lusts, but
provoke them; as if they were to learn the very art of voluptuousness. And
wherein is their corrupt nature depressed all this while? for I see nothing
denied to their craving Appetites, no violence used to their sensuality, no
bounds set to their womanish desires. They give all the best entertainment they
can to their bodies, and take no care at all of their Souls. It is with them as
with an innocent that a certain Nobleman had in his Family; She became blind
on a Sudden, and no body could persuade her she was blind; she could not endure
the house (she said) it was so dark, and was still calling to go abroad. That
which the people laughed at in her, is found to be true in the greatest part of
mankind: They are Covetous, Luxurious, Ambitious, and what not? but the world
shall never bring them to acknowledge it. Nay, they are the worst of the two;
for that blind fool called for a guide, and they wander about without any, and
which is worse, they will have none, It Is a hard matter to cure those that will
not believe they are sick. This is thy case O man! thou have been told often of
thy desperate condition; and how thy Soul is in danger to be lost for ever;
unless that thou do comply with my instructions, and break off that sinful
yoke of Satan, that brings thee by one evil to make way for another. Thou were
told that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and that to become an
Inhabitant thereof, thou must of necessity struggle with thy Passions, and
overcome them too, which is to destroy a numerous company of Monsters, and the
most glorious action that can be undertaken. Horatius Cocles opposed his single
body to a whole Army, till the Bridge was cut down behind him, and then leaped
into the River, with his Sword in his hand, and came off safe to his own party;
this was a generous act indeed; but it is a more noble exploit to subdue thy
corrupt nature, thou do signalize thy self, when thou art become thine own
Master, and triumphs over thy passions, which have vanquished the greatest
Conquerors of the world; when thou shall stand like another Hercules and beat
down those inbred monsters of thy old man, with as much courage, as he did
subdue the Hidra's, and Minotaures, then thou will arrive at the highest piteh
of felicity. Be not surpised that I call thy Passions Monsters of nature, for
they are not only monstrous in themselves, but they make the mind that is
harrass'd with them very deformed and most miserable to boot; for they leave no
place either for Council or friendship, honesty or good manners; no place
either for the exercise of reason, or for the Offices of life. If I were to
describe the Passion of anger, which is the common distemper of all mankind, I
would draw a Tiger bathed in blood, sharp set, and ready to take a leap at his
prey, or dress it up as the Poets represent their furys, with whips, Snakes,
and flames: It should be sour, livid, full of Scars, and wallowing in gore,
raging up and down, destroying, grinning, bellowing, and pursuing; sick of all
other things, and most of all of it self. It turns beauty into deformity, and
the calmest councels into fierceness; It disorders the very garments of those
that are slaves to it, and fills their minds with horror: How abominable must
it be in the Soul then, when it appears so hideous even through the bones, the
skin, and so many impediments. Is he not a monster of a man that has lost the
government of himself; and is tossed hither and thither by his Raging fury, as
by a tempest? He is the executioner of his own revenge, both with his heart and
hand; and the murderer of his nearest friends. The smallest matter will blow
him up to that degree that he is altogether insociable, and inaccessible; He
does all things by violence as well upon himself, as others. It may be then
very well called the master of all Passions, being it is the most hard to be
surmounted. Yet Heathens without the assistance of my grace, or knowledge of my
glory, have wholly subdued this predominate Passion, encouraged thereunto only
by a popular applause, and to get the esteem of being perfect Philosophers.
Plato was about to strike his Servant, and while his hand was in the Air, he
checked himself, but still held it in that menacing posture; being taken notice
of, and asked what he meant: I am now, says he, punishing of an angry man.
Another time his Servant having committed a great fault; pray says he to his
friend, do you beat that fellow, for I am angry; for he did not think it fit
that a Servant should be in his power; that is not his own master.

Socrates when he was angry, would take himself in it, and speak low, in
opposition to the motions of his displeasure. O man! thou art promised a crown
of glory in Heaven if thou will subdue thy passions on Earth; Thou art assured
to sit at my Table, and to enjoy my presence for ever, so be, that thou do
subdue thy evil inclinations, and keep them always in subjection, yet these
powerful motives are not sufficient to Stir up thy drooping courage to so
glorious an action, and so much to thine own advantage; whereas these Heathens
have got the better of them all, only for to be applauded by the people, and to
obtain the credit of being perfect Philosophers; I tell thee for a certain
truth that they shall rise in Judgment with this generation of cow-hearted
Christians, Mat. 12.41, 42.
and shall condemn them, because they have subdued their Passions and evil
inclinations only upon the bare account of vanity, which they will not perform
though they be promised the reward of an Eternal weight of Glory. The Queen of
the South shall also rise in Judgment against them, and shall condemn them; for
she came from the uttermost parts of the Earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon,
whereas they will not make the least progress in virtue to pleasure me, who am
the Fountain of wisdom, and who went so many steps to find out their strayed
Souls, when they were in danger to be lost for ever.

The Histories are full of perilous and desperate enterprises, and all for
temporal rewards. In the beginning of the civil wars which the Senate of Rome
carried on against Cajus and Fulvius Gracchuus, the Consul Opimus by public
Edict promised, that whosoever should bring him the head of Cajus Gracchus,
should receive for reward it is weight in gold. Setimuleyus undertakes the work,
and cuts of the head of Gracchus with the manifest danger of his own life, and
fills the hollow places thereof with melted lead to have the more weight of
Gold. But my promises far exceed this, being I give for less labor, and for a
trouble as light as a feather, an eternal weight of glory, nay, for a draught
of water; for that which is but vile, and lasts but for a moment: I give that
which is of inestimable price, and is to continue for all Eternity. With that
which is no more worth then a Straw, thou may purchase my glory, for all the
felicities, all the riches, and Earthly delights are no more then a Straw
compared to it. Certainly thou would look upon him to be a mere fool, that
would not give a chip for an hundred weight of Gold; This is thy great folly O
man! thou will not go through the least of difficultys, nor give a small share
of thy worldly Substance to the poor and distressed for the purchase of Heaven.

Cyrus to encourage his Soldiers in his war against the Medes made them a
Sumptuous Banquet, with a promise to give them Gold and Silver in abundance, if
they had subdued that effeminate Nation; if this motive was sufficient to make
a barbarous People prefer a doubtful reward before a certain and hazardous
labor; why should not a certain reward and infinitely greater then the labor
provoke thee, and all mankind to the conquest of Heaven? Compare the banquet
which I am to to exhibit to all my beloved in Heaven, unto that which Cyrus
gave unto his whole Army, the pleasures of my Kingdom with the troubles, and
displeasures of this life, the joys above with the sorrows below, the riches
and treasures of Paradise, with the little labor and pains which thou do
take in my Service, and for which thou art promised eternal glory as a reward,
thou shall find as much difference as there is betwixt a dead body full of
worms, stench, and corruption, and a glorious body, exceeding the Sun in
brightness, the Heavens in beauty, and in sweetness the most odoriferous and
purest Roses, or Lillies. Its therefore my Apostle says, that all which men can
suffer in this life, is no way worthy of the glory which is entailed upon my
Elect. No, the Stupendous mortifications and pennances of St. Simon Stylites,
the Austeritys of St. Romualdus, the poverty and nakedness of St. Francis, the
manifold torments and tortures of all the martyrs, are no more in comparison of
my glory then is the taking up of a Straw for the gaining of an Earthly Empire.

David declares that the first man that should encouuter the Jebuseans, as
being the most daring and warlike of all his enemies, should be made General,
Joab hears of it, and exposed his life to obtain that honor at the price of
his blood. Saul offers his Daughter in marriage to him that should overcome the
Giant Goliath; David embraces the motion, and slights all danger to purchase so
great a reward. Seneca wondered at what Soldiers did, and suffered for so short
and transitory Kingdoms as are those of the world, and that not for themselves
neither, but for another, much more might he wonder that the sufferings and
labors of this life by which Christians are to gain the Kingdom of Heaven, not
for strangers, but for themselves, should seem so great and so grievous unto
them, as they make appear by their unwillingness to undergo the least trouble
for so great a purchase. But I must attribute their failings herein to their
little estimate of so precious a Jewel; Proposito sibi gaudio sustinuit crucem.
Heb. 12. Matthew. 13 Philip. 3.
for had they known the value of it as well as others have done, they would bid
for it, as they did; or at least they would not pass by so carelessly a thing
which they sought after so carefully. Saint Paul says of me, that laying the
joys of Heaven before my eyes, I sustained the Cross; this should be to all
Christians a main argument of my great estimate of the matter, seeing I would
buy it at so dear a rate, and invite all men to go and sell all they have to
purchase this treasure. St. Paul is much of my opinion, for he esteems all the
World as dung to the purchase of this precious gem; and imparted the same
feeling to his worthy Disciple, and glorious martyr St. Ignatius. Hear what he
is willing to give for the purchase thereof: Fire, Gallows, Beasts, breaking of
my bones, quartering of my members, crushing of my body, all the torments of
the Devil together let them come upon me, so I may enjoy this inestimable
treasure. St. Chryso. Tom. 5. Hom. 19.
Vincent Martyr was nothing inferior to him either in love, courage, greatness
of mind, and fervor of spirit, hear how daring he speaks to Dacianus the
President, and see with what joy, and Patience he suffers his torments. The
Tyrant orders him to be hoist up high upon a Rack, and after a jeering way
asked him where he was, to which he answered with a smiling countenance; I am
aloft, and thence do despise thee, who art insolent and puffed up with the
power thou have upon Earth; Being after menaced with more torments far
exceeding the cruelty of the former, he said, me thinks Dacianus, thou do not
threaten, but court me with what I desire with all the powers and faculties of
my Soul. And when they tore his flesh with hooks and pinchers, and burnt him
with firebrands, and flaming torches, he cried out with joy, in vain thou
weariest rhy self Dacianus, thou can not imagine torments so horrid which I
could not suffer. Know then O man! that Prisons, Pinchers, burning plates of
Iron, and death it self are unto good Christians recreations, rather then
torments, and if thou be of the number of them, thou will be likewise of the
same opinion.


MAN. I am as much perplexed, O Lord! at thy discourse as was the man of the
Gospel to hear his Master accuse him of injustice, and threaten to turn him out
of his Stewardship; what shall I do, Fodere non valeo and mendicare erubesco.
Luc. 16.3.
says he, I am ashamed to beg, and I am not able to labor. This is my case; I
am ashamed to see my self so remiss in my duty to thee, so unwilling to undergo
the least trouble to purchase thy glory, and so heedless of my own salvation,
when I see Heathens perform such great and heroic exploits even for the bare
applause of the world, and for the blind approbation of their fantastical
Sect. I am ashamed to see my self so remote from virtue, so cold in devotion,
so prone to vice, so inconstant in my good resolutions, so averss'd to
afflictions and crosses, when I hear a Pagan-Philosopher that knows nothing of
thy glory, nothing of the everlasting happiness of thy Kingdom, nothing of the
unspeakable reward of thy Blessed, and nothing of the eternal punishments which
thou have decreed for the wicked, tell me that there is not in the scale of
nature a more inseparable connection of cause and effect, then in the case of
happiness and virtue: nor any thing that more naturally produces the one, or
more necessarily presupposes the other. For, what is it to be happy, but for a
man to content himself with his lot, in a cheerful and quiet resignation to the
appointments of God? All the actions of our lives ought to be governed with a
respect to good, and evil: and it is only Reason that distinguishes: by which
reason we are in such manner influenced as if a Ray of the Divinity were dipped
in a mortal body; and that is the perfection of mankind. It Is true, we have not
the eyes of Eagles nor the Sagacity of hounds, nor if we had, could we pretend
to esteem our selves for any thing which we have in common with Brutes. What
are we the better for that which is foreign to us, and may be given, and taken
away? As the Beams of the Sun irradiate the Earth, and yet remain where they
were, so is it in some proportion with a holy mind, that illustrates all our
actions, and yet adheres to it is Original. Why do we not as well commend a
Horse for his glorious Trapings, as a man for his pompous additions? how much a
braver Creature is a Lion (which by nature ought to be fierce, and terrible)
how much braver (I say) he is in his natural horror, then in his chains? So
that every thing in its pure nature pleases us best. It is not Health,
Nobility, Riches, that can justify a wicked man; nor is it the want of all
these can discredit a good one. That Is the Sovereign Blessing, which makes the
Professor of it valuable without any thing else, and him that wants it
contemptible, though he had all the world besides. It Is not the painting,
gilding, or carving that makes a good Ship; but if she be a nimble Sailer,
tight, and strong, to endure the Seas, that is her excellency. It Is the Edge and
temper of the blade that makes a good Sword; not the richness of the Scabbard:
It Is even the same with man, it is not money, or vast possessions, or eminent
places, or great dignitys that makes him considerable, but his virtue alone.

I am a Christian, Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22.
and by my profession am bound to be serviceable to all people as far as my
ability can extend, and their necessity requires it; it is therefore St. Paul
says, though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self Servant unto all,
that I might gain the more. Unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain
them that are without law. To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the
weak; In fine, I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means save
some. This is my incumbent duty, but alas! I am far short of it, and this
brings a bl^s^ on my face; when I see a Pagan-Philosopher preach and practice
the same. It Is every man's duty, says Seneca, to make himself profitable to
mankind, if he can, to many; if not, to fewer; if not so neither, to his
neighbors, but however to himself.

There are two Republics, a great one, which is humane nature; and a less,
which is the place where we are born: some serve both at a time; some only the
greater; and some again only the less: The greater may be served in privacy,
Solitude, contemplation, and perchance that way better then any other: But it
was the intent of nature however, that we should serve both. A good man may
serve the Public, his friend, and himself too, in any Station: If he be not
for the Sword, let him take the Gown; if the Bar does not agree with him, let
him try the Pulpit; If he be silenced abroad, let him give Counsel at home; and
discharge the part of a faithful friend, and a Temperate companion. When he is
no longer a Citizen, he is yet a man; the whole world is his Country, and
humane nature never wants matter to work upon: But, if nothing will serve a man
in the civil Government, unless he be prime Minister; or in the Field, but to
command in Chief, it is his own fault. The common Soldier, where he cannot use
his hands, fights with his very looks; his example, his encouragement, his
voice: and stands his ground even when he has lost his hands: and does service
too with his very clamor; so that in any condition whatsoever, he still
discharges the duty of a good Patriot. Nay, he that spends his time well, even
in a retirement, gives a great example: we may enlarge indeed, or contract,
according to the circumstances of time, place, or abilitys; but above all
things, we must be sure to keep our selves in action; for he that is sloathful
is dead even while he lives. All this is most consonant to St. Paul's doctrine,
and to the feelings of all good Christians, but alas! it is quite contrary to
what I practice (to my shame be it spoken) and I much fear it will appear in
judgment against me in that dreadful day of thy just indignation and wrath.

O Lord! thou have made me a watchman unto the house of Israel, and have laid
a strict obligation on me to depress vice, and hinder the growth thereof,
within the precincts, of my Jurisdiction, as well by word, as by good examples;
but alas! unfaithful, and cow-hearted wretch as I am, for fear of loosing a
Benefice, or incurring the displeasure of great Persons, of whom I depend for a
livelihood, I silence their faults, and wink at their debaucheries, which
certainly will redound to my grand confusion, and the rather, because that
Pagans have acted otherwise. Was there ever so desperate a state, as that of
Athens under the thirty Tyrants; where it was capital to be honest; and the
Senate House turned into a College of Hangmen; never was government so
wretched, and so hopeless; and yet Socrates at the same time preached
Temperance to the Tyrants, and courage to the rest: and afterward died an
eminent example of manliness and resolution, and a Sacrifice for the common
good.

It Is not the part of a wiseman, says another pagan, to stand shifting, and
fencing with fortune, but to oppose her barefaced; for he is sufficiently
convinced, that she can do him no hurt: she may take away his Servants,
Possessions, Dignities, etc. She may assault his body, put out his eyes, cut
off his hands, and strip him of all external comforts of life. But what does
all this amount to, more then the recalling of a Trust, which he has received,
with condition to deliver it up again upon demand? He looks upon himself as
precarious, and only lent to himself, and yet he does not value himself ever
the less, because he is not his own; but takes such care as an honest man
should do of a thing that is committed to him in Trust. Whenever He that lent
me my self, and what I have, shall call for all back again, it is not a loss,
but a restitution; and I must willingly deliver up what most undeservedly was
bestowed upon me; and it will become me to return my mind better then I
received it. O my Soul! would thou not take this discourse to be the products
of a patient Job on his dunghill, in his mournful Addresses to God; or the
expressions of some eminent and illuminate Saint in the desert, rather then the
words of an heathen Philosopher; but what if thou see this supereminent
doctrine practiced by another of the same Sect? will it not confound thy
insatiate desire of Earthly riches, thy great neglect of thy own Salvation, and
the little value thou putst upon Heaven, and it is everlasting pleasures?

Demetrius upon the taking of Megara, asked Stilpo the Philosopher what he had
lost: nothing says he, for I had all that I could call my own about me. And yet
the enemy had then made himself the master of his Patrimony, his Children, and
his Country: But these he looked upon only as adventitious goods, and under the
command of Fortune: Now he that neither lost any thing, nor feared any thing in
a public ruin, but was safe, and at peace, in the middle of the flames, and
in the heat of a military intemperance and fury; what violence, or provocation
imaginable, can put such a man as this out of the possession of himself? Walls,
and Castles may be min'd and battered; but there is no art, or Engine, that can
subvert a steady mind: I have made my way (says Stilpo) through fire, and
blood; what is become of my Wife and Children, I know not; but they are
transitory blessings and Servants likewise that are accustomed to change their
masters; what was my own before, is my own still; some have lost their Estates;
others their dear bought Mistresses; their Commissions and Offices; the Usurers
have lost their Bonds and securities; but, Demetrius, for my part, I have saved
all: and do not imagine after all this, either that Demetrius is a conqueror,
or that Stilpo is overcome. It Is only thy fortune has been too hard for mine.
Alexander took Babylon; Scipio took Carthage; the Capitol was burnt: but
there is no fire or violence that can discompose a generous mind: Some perhaps
will take this Character for a Chimera; but they are grossly mistaken, for all
ages afford some, tho not so many instances of this elevated virtue. A good man
will do his duty let it be never so painful, so hazardous, or never so great a
loss to him; and it is not all the money, the power; and the pleasure in the
world; no not any force, or necessity, that can make him wicked; Hear what the
noble and daring Mathathias says in the open Streets of Maden, 1 Match. 2.
though all should act contrary to the law of their Ancestors to obey the King
Antiochus, and comply with his commands, yet I, with my Children, and Brothers,
will continue faithful and obedient to our Forefathers Law, even to the loss
of our Estates, and Lives; he considered what he was to do, not what he was to
suffer, and kept on his course, though there should be nothing but Gibbits, and
Torments in the way.

The Philosopher I but now spoke of, is another instance of it; I mean Stilpo,
who, when he had lost his Country, his Wife, his Children, the Town on fire
above his head, himself scaping very hardly, and naked out of the flames, I
have saved my Goods says he, which are, my Justice, my Courage, my Temperance,
my Prudence; showing by this how much easier it was to overcome a Nation, then
one Wise man. It is a certain mark of a brave mind (says another Pagan
Philosopher) not to be moved by any Accidents, and brings this President to
make good his argument: The upper Region of the Air admits neither clouds, nor
Tempest,; the Thunder, Storms, and Meteors, are framed below; and this is the
difference betwixt a mean, and an exalted mind: The former is rude, and
tumultuary; the latter is modest, venerable, composed, and always quiet in his
station. In a word, it is the conscience that pronounces upon the man whether
he be happy or miserable. Sacrilege and Adultery are generally condemned, yet
how many are there still that do not so much as blush at the one; and in truth,
that take a glory in the other? There is nothing more common, then for great
Thieves to ride in triumph, when the little ones are punished. But let
wickedness escape as it may at the Bar, it never fails of doing Justice upon it
self; for every guilty person is his own hangman.

O most gracious Savior! the Godly feelings, and the heroic exploits of these
Heathen Philosophers have already so confounded me that I have not a word to
say in my own defense, and do very much apprehend that my confusion will be far
greater in the day of thy wrath, when they shall all appear as evidences
against me, and Judge me worthy to be their footstool in Hell for an Eternity,
and to be trampled on, Ponet illum inconculcationem quasi lutum plarearum. Isa.
10.6. Castigo Corpus meum and in servitutem redigo: ne forte cum aliis
predicaverim, ipse reprobus efficiam. 1 Cor. 9.27.
like the mire of the streets, because they did better things ass;isted only by
the feeble light of nature, then I have performed having the powerful
assistance of thy Grace. St. Paul offers me the same means that himself took to
prevent so horrid a confusion, I keep my body under, and bring it to
subjection: lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self
should be a castaway; but alas! this remedy is in a manner as hard to me as
the disease, for certainly it would shorten my days to be always in prayer,
still weeping, constantly watching, lying perpetually upon the ground, wearing
of haircloth night und day: And besides St. Augustine tells me, Aug. Hom. ult.
ex 50.5.
it is not enough to do all this, to change my life, and to desist hankering
after vice, but I must of necessity make atonement to God for my past Sins by
the constant and daily practice of sorrowful Penance, humble sighs, contrition
of heart, and of giving Alms. St. Cypr. l. de lap. and l. 5. Epist. ad Cornel.
And the reason St. Cyprian gives for it, is, that a prevalent and tedious
medicine must be applied to a desperate and deep sore, and that the Penance
must be of as long continuance as was the fault. St. Hierom is much of the fame
opinion, for he will have our long and sinful pastime to be expiated with as
long lamentations and sorrow, Epist. 7. ad Eustoch.
he will have our soft linen, and silk apparel, to be changed into a sharp
hair-cloth, And St. Ambrose says positively that as a great malady requires a
long course of Physic, Ambr. ad Virg. lapsum 8.
so great offenses must of necessity be cleans'd with a long continn'd
Penance, and often reiterated acts of Contrition.

What shall I do in this case, Quid faciam fodere non valeo, mendicare
erubesco. Luc. 16.3.
my dear Savior! I know the remedies, which thy Holy Doctors prescribe, are
most wholesome for my Soul, but I am not able to swallow such bitter Pills; and
on the other side I am in a strange confusion, to see my felf outdone by
Pagans even in the most essential parts of Christianity; for they have more
love for virtue, and a far greater abhorrence of Sin then I have. Aristotle
declares, it were better to die, Aristot. 3. Eth.
then do any thing against the good of virtue.

Seneca, and Peregrinus are more resolute in the matter; Though I were certain,
says the former, that men should never know it, and that God would pardon me:
yet I would not offend him for the filthiness of sin; no, says the latter; for
there is nothing can happen unto man more horrible, and more destructive of his
fame and fortune then to commit a Sin. Nay even those Philosophers, Plato in
Demetrio.
who denied the immortality of the Soul, and the Providence of God, were of
opinion that nothing, no not even the loss of his life should oblige a man to
commit it. And there have been some, who have suffered great extremitys to
decline a vicious act: Democles was one of them, for he choos'd, to be boiled
in scalding water rather then give his consent to Sin. Verterius conceived so
great a horror against uncleanness, that he suffered Prison, whips and other
most rigorous torments rather then he would sin against chastity. O my Soul! if
the manifold and rare examples of Heathens, the Masculine courage, and great
exploits of Pagans, the powerful and zealous exhortations of Saints be not able
to move thee to a speedy resolution of amendment, to labor hardly for an
eternal weight of glory, whilst thou have time, Descendant in Infernum
viventes. Ps. 54.16.
and to secure thy self from falling into the everlasting and insufferable
torments of Hell by making a plentiful provision of good works in the days of
thy life; let the Holy Ghost at least persuade thee to undertake so good and so
beneficial a work, he exhorts thee to learn of the Emmet how to provide in the
heat of Summer against the cold of Winter: Pro. 20.
Run about, says he, make have, stir up thy self, give no sleep unto thy eyes,
let not thy eyelids slumber; Skip out as a Do from the hands of him that
holds her; and as a Bird out of the hand of the Fouler: Go unto the Emmet (thou
sloathful man) and consider her doings, and learn to be wise; she having no
guide, no teacher, or Captain, provides meat for her self in the Summer; and
heaps together in the Harvest, that which may serve her to feed upon in the
winter.

The sloathful man, says he again, will not sow in the winter; for that is
cold, and therefore shall beg in the Summer, and no man shall take pity of him.
O my Soul! this is the very misfortune that came upon the rich Glutton, he
forgot to provide for his Soul in this world, he fed himself with all the
varieties that Gold and Silver could purchase, and had no compassion of the
poor: but now he starves in Hell with hunger, and dies with thirst and none has
compassion of him. O my Savior! give us I beseech thee a full discourse upon
this Subject, for that or nothing will do the work with me.


SAVIOVR. O Man! Me non timebitis, and a facie mea non dolebitis, qui posui
arenam terminum mari praeceptum sempiternum quod non praeteribit? and
intumescent fluctus ejus, and non transibunt illud. Jer. 5.22.
thou must know that I am great and wonderful in all my works, great in the
creation of man, great in submitting all creatures to his disposition and
power, to be used by him at will, great in bringing out of nothing what wonders
of nature thou see daily before thy eyes, great in suppressing the raging
waves of the Seas, and setting bounds to that tumultuary and aspiring Element,
which these so many thousand years have withstood its frequent and furious
attacks, I am great and wonderful also in ordering a Hell and an Eternity of
torments for all those that dye in my displeasure. I am an Omnipotent God in
all my actions, omnipotent in my wrath, omnipotent in my Justice, and
omnipotent likewise in the punishment which I do inflict upon the wicked. It Is
therefore the Prophet says, O man! fear ye not the Lord, and will thou not
tremble in his presence who has placed the land for the bound of the Sea, by a
perpetual decree that it cannot pass it; and though the waves thereof toss
themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass
over it: as if he had said, have thou not a great deal of reason to dread the
Arm of so powerful a God, whose omnipotency is sufficiently discovered by this
prodigious work. And if he be so great in all his works, thou must likewise
acknowledge him to be great in the chastisement of Sinners. The same Prophet
was Innocent and free from the least spot of Sin, being Sanctified in his
Mothers womb, yet he trembles at the very noise of my Severity to Sinners, and
says, there is none like unto thee, O Lord, thou art great, and thy name is
great in might; Who would not fear thee O King of Nations, for to thee does it
appertain: For as much as among all the wisemen of the Nations, and in all
their Kingdoms, there is none like unto thee. My heart is replenished with the
fear of thy wrath, and therefore have sequestered my felf from the converse of
all men, into a remote wilderness to prevent thy fury, and appease thy Anger
with sorrow, with Sighs, and with a continual flood of tears. Respicit Terram,
and facit eam tremere, tangit montes, and fumigant. Psa. 105. Stellae and
Columnae Coeli pavent, and contremiscuntad nutum ejus Job. 26.11 Ideo sn uno
die venient plagaeejus, mors and luctus, and fames, and igne comburetur, quia
fortis est Dominus Deus qui Jndicabit illam Ap. c. 18.8.
Though this holy man was certain that my Indignation and wrath was not against
him, yet seeing it so great, and ready to fall with all its weight upon the
criminal and guilty heads of Sinners, he had no less then cause to tremble,
being that even my looks put the Earth in a quaking fit, and make the Mountains
groan, nay, they make the Stars, and even the Pillars of Heaven to tremble;
they are astonished at my reproof; and why not, being that the Angels, and
Archangels, the Cherubins and Seraphins, the Principalities and Powers of
Heaven, are all Struck into an amazement at the very aspect of my most dreadful
Majesty and angry countenance; not that they fear to be deprived of their
glory, but because the greatness of my indignation is such, that they cannot but
be astonished at the very sight of me. By this thou may Judge, in what a
deplorable condition the Damned will be, for these are the unhappy wretches
which are to feel the weight of my wrath; all their plagues shall come upon
them in one day, everlasting death, mourning and famine, shall be their
inheritance for ever; they shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is the
Lord God who judges them.

My Apostle had a sufficient trial of my Strength when I forced him out of the
way of iniquity, Horrendum est incidere in manus Dei viventis. Heb. 10.31.
and of a Persecutor of Christians, made him the Defender, and powerful
promoter of Christianity; therefore, he says it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God, not into the hands of men, for they are not so
powerful, but criminals may fly from their violence, and decline from their
anger, moreover they have not the authority to cast a Soul into the Dungeon of
Hell; It Is therefore I had warned my Disciples not to fear them which kill the
Body, Mat. 10.28
and are not able to kill the Soul, but rather to fear him which is able to
destroy both Soul and body in Hell; And these are the hands which my Apostle
calls dreadful; they are them also that the wise man speaks of, where he says,
unless ye do penance, and give that slender atonement of tears, and of a
hearty grief to God for your sins, ye shall undoubtedly fall into the hands of
the Lord, and not into the hands of men. By what is already said, thou may
easily conclude, that as I am omnipotent, and great in my power, in my Majesty,
and in all my works, I am the same in my wrath, in my Justice, and in the
punishment which I have decreed for the Damned.

If thou will examine Scripture thou shall find there such dreadful effects of
my Justice upon the wicked, even in this life, which is the only season for
mercy, that thou shall be forced to confess that the pains of Hell must be as
intolerable as they are unspeakable, and that it were better for the damned
they had never been born, then to endure them for an Eternity without any hopes
of redemption, or of the least abatement. What a terrible punishment was that
of Dathan, and Abiram, and of all their Accomplices, in the sight of that
numerous People of Israel, at the request of my Servant Moises, to vindicate
his innocence, and punish the wrong which was intended to him by those Peoples
rising in Rebellion against him, I commanded the Earth to open its bowels and
to swallow them alive, together with all their Earthly substance down into the
bottomless pit of Hell, which was no sooner commanded, then put in execution.
The punishment of Sodom and Gomorah, (if well considered) is able to terify the
stoutest Bully that ever appeared on the Stage of this world, to mollify his
obdurate heart, and force from his mouth (Lord what will thou have me do) They
were so much addicted to that brutish pleasure, Domine quid me vis facere. Act.
9.6.
and sordid Sin of the flesh, that they must attempt even upon my very Angels,
and strive to make them the subject of their Lust; this was a general
corruption, and therefore required a general chastisement, their Sins cried for
vengeance, Genesis 19.24.
and though I was solicited by my Servant Abraham to spare their lives for the
sake of ten Just men, (knowing there was none but Lot) who was already secured,
and under the safeguard of my Angels; I poured down wildfire, and brimstone
upon them, and cast them headlong into Hellfire, there to increase the fatal
number of the damned, and to become partakers of their torments, as they had
been of their crimes on Earth. Did thou ever hear such terrible menaces as
are set down in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17. etc.
and which were exactly put in execution against the transgressors of my Law.
Hear how the Prophet speaks to them in my behalf? Cursed shall thou be in the
City, and Cursed shall thou be in the field. Cursed shall thou be when thou
come in, and enrfed shall thou be when thou go out. The Lord shall send
upon thee cursing, vexation and rebuke, in all that thou set'st thine hand unto
for to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly, because of
the wickedness of thy doings, whereby thou have for saken me. The Lord shall
smite thee with a Consumption, and with a Fever, and with an inflammation, and
with an extreme burning, and with the sword, and with blasting, and they shall
pursue thee until thou perish. Thy Carcass shall be meat unto all Fowls of the
Air, and unto the Beasts of the Earth, and no man shall fray them away. The
Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the Emerods, and with
the Scab, and with the Itch, whereof thou shall not be healed. The Lord shall
smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart. Thou shall
grope at noonday, as the blind grope in darkness, and thou shall not prosper
in thy ways: and thou shall be oppressed, and spoiled evermore, and no man
shall save thee. Thou shall serve thine Enemies, which the Lord shall send
against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all
things: and he shall put a yoke of Iron about thy neck, until he have destroyed
thee. The Lord shall bring a Nation against thee from far, from the end of the
Earth, as swift as the Eagle flys, and shall besiege thee in all thy gates,
until thy high and fenc'd-walls come down, wherein thou trustest; and thou
shall eat the fruit of thy own body, the flesh of thy Sons, and of thy
Daughters (which the Lord thy God has given thee) in the Siege, and in the
straitness wherewith thine Enemies shall distress thee: so that the man that is
tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his Brother;
and toward the Wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his Children
which he shall leave: so that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of
his Children whom he shall eat: because he has nothing left him in the Siege,
and in the straitness wherewith thine Enemies shall distress thee in all thy
gates. The tender and delicate Woman among you, which would not adventure to
set the Sole of her foot upon the ground, for delicateness and tenderness, her
eye shall be evil toward the Husband of her bosom, and toward her Son, and
toward her Daughter, and toward her young one that comes out from between
her feet, and toward her Children which she shall bear: for she shall eat them
for want of all things secretly in the Siege, and straitness wherewith thine
enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.

Certainly these are most horrible and dreadful punishments, yet they, and many
more such like chastisements, which I have heaped upon the wicked; even in this
life, for their Sins, are no more then a very imperfect shadow, and figure of
what the damned do suffer in Hell, for there my Justice shall act to its full
extent, and rigor against those that made nothing of my mercy in this life. If
the shadow be so dreadful, what will the reality be? If now my Justice, having
a mixture of mercy with it, and if the Chalice of my wrath tempered with the
water of my Grace, seems notwithstanding, so intolerable bitter, what will it
be when it shall come violently those unfortunate Souls without any mixture at
all of my mercy? Esa. 27.
When I shall Judge in measure, against measure, as the Prophet says, Jer. 25.
when I shall exercise Judgment in weight, in Justice, and measure, Apoc. 20.
and 22.
when I shall pay them home according to their particular works, and according
to the inventions of their depraved and rebellious hearts; Psalm. 27. and 61.
when I shall command the Infernal Spirits to chastise all, and each of them
according to their demerits? Apoc. 18.
when I shall give them this charge of Babylon, now thrown down into the Lake:
Look how much she has glorified her self, and how long she has lived in
delights, so much torments and afflictions give her, and continue her the same
entertainment for ever, without affording her the least comfort, or respit of
ease.

The Holy Fathers, and Doctors of my Church, grounded upon my word, believe a
variety of torments in Hell for the Damned, according to the variety of the
Sins, which they had committed in their Life; for the Adulterer shall have one
kind of torment, the Murderer another, the Thief another; the Drunkard
another, the Liar another; and the rest accordingly. The Proud shall be trodden
under the feet of Devils, and box'd by every one that meets him, with a Sirrah
to boot, thou have damned thy Soul for a point of Honor. And thou Lady of
pleasure, for a Paint and a wash for thy face and hands forfooth, to make them
look white, plump, and smooth to the view of thy Gallants, have made thy Soul
as black as even our master Devil. O what a killing reproach will this be! The
Glutton shall have for his morning and evening drink, Ps. 148.8.
fire, hail, snow, froft, the spirit of Tempest, seasoned with the unsufferable
Stench of so many Millions of damned rotten roasted Carcases; St. Bonaventure
will tell thee, that if one only body of the damned were brought into the
world, and laid in any part or corner thereof, it were sufficient to infect the
whole Earth. Thou may Judge by this what a dreadful potion the Glutton is to
have in Hell; the Drunkard also shall have a full share of the same Cup. The
delicious mouth shall be filled up with Gall, and the delicate body feared with
hot-burning Irons. O man! take notice how well the Doctrine of my Church agrees
with the Dictates of the Holy Ghost, for speaking of the wicked, he says, the
bread in his belly shall be turned into the Gall of Serpents: Job. 20.
He shall be constrained to vomit out again the Riches which he had devoured:
God shall pull them forth of his belly: He shall be constrained to suck the
galls of Cockatrices, and the tongues of Adders shall slay him: He shall bear
the smart of all that ever he has done: and yet shall he not be consumed, but
shall suffer according to the multitude of all his devices. These words show
plainly that wicked men shall suffer particular torments for their particular
crimes, as Gluttony, Extortion, Oppression, etc. And that these torments shall
be far beyond the expression of any mortal tongue; what shall I say of the
continuance, and length thereof, which is another circumstance no less terrible
then the former, for their torments shall be of the same extent with Eternity,
which has no end, and withal there shall be no possibility of any jot of help,
ease, intermission, relaxation, respiration, or comfort; And this is signified
by my words so often repeated. Ligatis manibus and pedibus projicite eum in
tenebras exteriores. Matthew. 12.
The Damned shall be cast into Hell, bound hand and foot: that is without all
ability of resistance or struggling against their torments. The dreadful
shutting up of the gate, which I foretold in a doleful manner, and with a
heavy heart, is a sufficient evidence of it: Clausa est Januae; The gate is
shut up, and made fast for ever: that is to say, in Hell, the gate of all
mercy, Matthew. 25.
of all pardon, of all ease, of all intermission, of all comfort, is shut up
for ever; There is none to be expected from Heaven, none from Earth, none from
the Creator; and none from all the Creatures, no, were they thy dearest
friends, and nearest relations, there is no consolation to be hoped for, but
extreme desolation for all Eternity. Luc. 16.
Thou have a lively expression hereof in that dreadful Parable of the rich
Glutton in Hell; see to what an extreme necessity he was driven, to desire
after so pitiful a manner that Lazarus might dip the top only of his finger in
water to cool his tongue therewith, in the midst of that scorching fire wherein
he was tormented, and yet this small favor, this slender request would not be
granted to him. O ye rich of the world, that make your Gods your treasures,
consider seriously the severity of my Justice; Read rationem villicationis
tuae. Luc. 16.2.
what a strict account you are to give me of all your expenses, how and after
what manner you have spent the least sarthing: consider also what torments you
shall suffer in Hell, if you have employed your wealth, as this unfortunate
glutton had done, to pamper up your bodies, without any regard to your Souls.
And let this consideration move you to the perfect amendment of your lives, now
while you do live, and the gate of my mercy is open to you: This is the only
time wherein you may avoid all those everlasting misfortunes; now is the only
season to prevent my indignation and wrath; if you be wise, you will not delay
a matter of such great importance, for you do not know what will become of you
to morrow, no, nor what you may be an hour hence: Noli te obdurate corda vestra
etc. Psalm. 94.8.
Do not harden your hearts, as the people of Israel did in the provocation, and
as in the day of temptation in the wilderness, Jest I swear in my wrath that
you shall not enter into my rest. If Pharaoh had resolved an amendment while
Moises was with him, how fortunate a Creature had he been? If the rich Glutton
had taken the time while Lazarus lay at his door, how blessed a man had he made
himself? He was foretold his misery (as you are now) by Moises and other
Prophets according to my directions; but he would not take notice of their
words, he gave no ear to their exhortations; but soon after he fell into such
detestation of his own folly, that he would needs have Lazarus sent from
Abraham's bosom unto his Brethren in the world, to warn them of his error, and
evil consequences thereof. But Abraham answered, it was to no purpose; in as
much as they would give no credit to Lazarus, but rather stone him to death for
disgracing their honored deceased Brother by revealing his torments. The
wicked men now alive would do no less to any that should tell them of their
Parents and Friends being tormented in Hell for such offenses as themselves are
guilty of. What could I do more to save their Souls, then to send them
Preachers and Teachers to give them necessary instructions to work their
Salvation. They were often told that leading the life they do, they cannot avoid
the misfortune of this unhappy wretch; they know, or ought to know that many
before them have been damned for less matters, They cannot choose but know,
that they must shortly die, and receive themselves, as they received living as
they did, or rather worse. They are often told that the pains prepared for the
wicked are intolerable and eternal too. They do acknowledge them to be most
unfortunate, that for any pleasure, or interest of this world have run the
hazard of their own Salvation, and have made themselves the worthy objects of
my everlasting indignation; and yet they continue their wicked course of life,
An divitias bonitatis ejus and longanimi atem contemnis ignorans quoniam
benignitas Dei ad paenitentiam te adducit? secundum autem duritiam tuam and
impaenitens cor tuum thesanrirasti iram in die irae and revalationis justi
Judicy Dei, qui reddet unicuique secundum opera ejus Romans 2.4, 5, 6.
despising the riches of my goodness and forbearance, and long suffering, not
knowing that my goodness leads them to repentance; but after their hardened and
impenitent hearts, they treasure up unto themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, and revelation of my righteous Judgment, who will render to them
according to their deeds.

Tell me O man! who ever would be so earnest to heap up a treasure, as not to
let one day pass without adding something to it, and that for the space of
fifty or threescore years, sure he would then at the opening of his trunks,
find a vast treasure; this is thy case, O unfortunate wretch! do thou not
know that there is not a day, or an hour that passes wherein thou do not
increase the treasure of my wrath, which is reserved for thy destruction; and
which is augmented by every Sin thou do commit; every lascivious look thou
give, every unclean thought, every impure desire, thy hatred, thy revenge,
thy great oaths, thy perjurys, thy blasphemys, with the rest of thy wicked
doings, which are enough to fill up a vast volume, and going on thus for the
space of so many years; how immense must be the treasure of my wrath against
thee, if thou die impenitent? Thou must know that I am thy God, and thy Judge
too, consequently that my duty is to take care that the punishment be equal to
the offense, Hebr. 10.29. Rursum crucifi gentes sibimet ipsis filium Dei, and
ostentui habentes Hebr. 6.6. Memorare novissima tua, and in aeternum non
peccabis. Eccl. 7.40.
and satisfactory to the person offended; Thou have trodden me under foot, and
have counted the blood of the covenant wherewith thou were sanctified, an
unholy thing, and have done despite unto the spirit of my grace; nay, thou have
often crucified me to thy self, and put me to an open shame, wherefore as I am
infinite in all my Attributes, and in all respects, thy pains must be likewise
infinite in all manner of rigor.

O man! thou have given me hitherto a reasonable account of matters belonging
to thy Salvation, and as this point is one of the chiefest conducing to it, and
besides is a main obstacle to the increase of vice, I do not doubt but thou art
sufficiently instructed herein: let me therefore hear from thee what the holy
Fathers, and Doctors of my Church say of the Damned, and of the rigor of
their punishments.


MAN. Infandum, Jehova, Jubes renovare dolores
Inferni, and poenas, quas detestabile Regnum
Ditis habet; quarum pars magna est faetor and ignis.
Add quod aeterno privantur lumine Solis
Cunctipotentis; ibi torquentur corpora miris
Nocte diuque modis. Nulli patet exitus ex hoc
Ignivomente Lacn. Densa in caligine pressi
Damnati stabunt, manibus pedibusque ligatis.
Discite Mortales! facilis descensus Avcrni;
Sed revocare gradum, superumque evadere ad orbem,
Hoc opus, hic labor est; Solis quos Christus amavit
Arbiter, aut ardens evexit ad Athera virtus,
Tantus erit concessus honor; Jesuque potiri
Perpetuo Aspectu; Sanctis simul annumerari,
Angelicisque choris, sine fine dicentibus hymnum,
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus omni-
Potens qui est; and qui erat, and qui venturus est.
MOst Gracious Savior, in order to comply with thy command, I must premit
these two considerations; First, that there is nothing happens to mortals in
this life, or in the other, but by thy permission. Secondly, that the Devil,
who is the mortal Enemy of all mankind, is to be the Executioner of thy Justice
in Hell, and sometimes on Earth; as appears by what St. John says in his
Revelations. I saw, says he, Apoc. 9.
a Star fall from heaven unto the Earth: And to him was given the key of the
bottomless pit. And he opened the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out
of the pit, as the smoke of a great Furnace; and the Sun and the Air were
darkened, by reason of the smoke of the pit. And there came out of the smoke
Locusts upon the Earth; and unto them was given power, Adescription of the
power of hell.
as the Scorpions of the Earth have power. And it was commanded them, that they
should not hurt the grass of the Earth, neither any green thing, neither any
Tree; but only those men which have not the Seal of God in their for-heads. And
to them was given that they should not kill them, but that they should be
tormented five Months; and their torment was as the torment of a Scorpion, when
he strikes a Man. And in those days shall a man seek Death, and shall not find
it; and shall desire to dye, and Death shall fly from them. And the shapes of
the Locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battle; and on their heads were
as it were Crowns like gold, and their faces were as the faces of men; And they
had hair as the hair of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of Lions: And
they had breast-plates, as it were breast-plates of Iron, and the sound of
their wings was as the sound of Chariots of many horses running to battle, and
they had tails like unto Scorpions, and there were Stings in their tails: St.
Augustine says, that the meaning of the holy Ghost, who is the undoubted Author
of this Scripture, was to represent unto us under so formidable and dreadful a
figure the severity of thy Justice, and the greatness of thy chastisements,
thereby to frighten the wicked, and debar them from ever offending so powerful,
and so dreadful a Judge. He understands by that Star which fell from Heaven
unto the Earth, and to whom the key of that bottomless pit was given, Exodus 8.
Lucifer, a most beautiful and resplendent Angel indeed, who for his Pride was
cast down from Heaven to assume the fatal Government of that Region of
everlasting darkness; and by those Locusts like unto horses armed and ready for
a battle, the infernal Spirits, which were the associates of his rebellon in
Heaven, and now are become his Ministers, and the tyranical executioners of his
inbred rage and malice against men; by that grass, and green plants which they
are prohibited to hurt, he understands the Just, whose Souls being moistened
with the waters of thy divine grace, do sprout out the green leaves, the
flourishing branches, and the most odoriferous fruit of life everlasting. But
what are those that have not the Seal of God in their foreheads, which is the
glorious character, and distinctive mark of thy faithful Servants, O Lord!
what, but the wicked, it is then against them only that this great Army of
Devils are to fight, these are the People which they are to torment according
to their demerits, and the Services which they had exhibited unto them in their
life, even as the People of Egypt were punished by the very flies, and frogs,
which they had adored as their Gods a little before. What a horror will it be
to them, to behold in that most obscure and nasty dungeon of Hell so many
thousands of hideous and ill shaped Monsters? what a fearful thing will it be
to stand in full view of that hungry Dragon, bursting with rage, and fury
against those unfortunate Slaves, of that Behemoth, that Job speaks of, who
eats grass as an Ox, Job. 40.
who has his strength in his loins, and his force in the navel of his belly,
who moves his tail like a Cedar; who devours the mountains, and drinks up the
rivers, who makes nothing to draw Jordan into his mouth and eyes. This dreadful
Monster is to execute thy Sentence, O Lord, against the damned, what favor,
what mercy can they expect at his hands, being he deals so cruelly even with
those who are not his slaves, but are only delivered to his power in order to
exercise their patience. Behold how cruelly he treats that Innocent and
harmless Job, after he had consumed by fire all his sheep, and his Servants,
after he had taken away all his Cows, his Camels and Asses, and slain their
keepers, after he had beat down his houses and Smothered all his Children under
their ruins, he covered his body from head to foot with so loathsome an Ulcer,
that he was an eyesore to his whole family, and cast out upon a dunghill where
he lay without any comfort, relief, or assistance from any friend or relation;
so that he was forced himself to scrape off the worms and corruption that came
from his wounds with a pot-sheard. His poor body was so far consumed, and left
so lean, that only so much flesh remained about his lips, as might enable him
to speak and make answer: The night which brings some refreshment and ease to
the afflictions of others, augmented his misery, and increased his pains with
most dreadful apparitions; his Wife which should be a great comfort to him in
his deplorable state and condition, was one of his greatest plagues, for she
did both rail, and vilify him to that degree, as to tell him to his face that
she could not endure the noisomeness of his putrifi'd body, and bid him to
curse God, and dye, like a rotten dog as he was. His friends were no less cruel
to him upon the same account, for in seven days they did not speak a word to
condole his misfortune. O most gracious Savior! if thou have permitted that
cruel and devouring Dragon to handle so roughly the simple, pious, obedient,
pure, and Saint-like Job, only to exercise his patience, and convince the Devil
that thou had a faithful Servant upon Earth; what a large commission, and
full liberty will thou give him to torment in Hell, Adulterers, Murderers,
Highway robbers, Usurers, Drunkards, Cheats, Knights of the Post, Lascivious
companions, cruel Parents, Disloyal and stif-necked Children, and all other
wicked livers? If Job was brought to so great a distress by the sole touch of
thy hands, (as the Scripture terms it) attributing to thee what the Devil did,
as we commonly attribute to the Judge what torments are executed by the
hangman: What will it be when thou shall discharge thy whole wrath upon the
damned? Jere. 1.11.
when thou shall employ that pot of boiling fire, and that Iron rod of Jeremy
to Scald their bodies therein, and whip them after by as many hands as there are
Devils in Hell; Pro. 19.
when thou shall crush them with those smiting hammers which thou have prepared
for the bodies of fools? So Scripture calls the damned, and so they are indeed,
because they neglected to purchase thy glory at so cheap a rate as thou did
offer it, for an Act of Contrition, for a visit to the Prisoners, for an Alms
to the poor, for clothing the naked, nay, they might have had it even for a cup
of water given for thy sake, and in thy name; are they not mere fools then, to
have slieghted so great an advantage, and to have plunged themselves headlong
in those everlasting torments for a momentary pleasure. Esan having understood
that his Brother Jacob had obtained his Fathers Benediction, whilst he was
taking his pleasure in the Fields, Irrugiit clamore magno. Genesis 27.34. Nos in
sensati vitam illorum aestimabamus insaniam etc. Ecce quomodo computati sunt
inter filios Dei, and inter sanctos sors illorum est. Sapient. 5.4.
and hunting after his prey; roared like a Lion, and made such great
lamentation that he consumed himself to nothing, with excess of resentment and
Horror; by this we may easily conclude what great consternation the damned
will be in when they shall see themselves deprived for ever of thy benediction,
O Lord, and that they lost it by their own neglect, and for hunting so much
after the vain pleasures, and trifles of this World. O how they shall cry out,
and roar, not for a day, or a month, or a year, but for an Eternity, which will
never have an end. When a man possessed with the opinion of proper merit, aims
earnestly at some eminent and vacant Dignity, and at length sees himself
neglected, and put off with shame, his Indignation and grief swells him up
above measure; It is the same with those damned Wretches, or rather worse, for
they shall be far more afflicted by the very Consideration of those unspeakable
goods, and Eternal Felicities which they see themselves have lost, and those to
enjoy them, whom they reputed to be fools and madmen, and far inferior to
them in wit, in learning, and merit; It Is therefore St. Augustine says, that
their memory shall be one of their greatest tormentors, for it will represent
unto them all they have done good or bad in their lives; and both will equally
perplex them: The good because they have lost their reward, and the bad,
because they have deserved their punishment. It will likewise set before their
eyes the delights and pleasures which they had enjoyed in this life, and for
which they fell into that unspeakable misery; These Considerations shall be to
them, says St. Bernard, a sharp Sword that shall pierce their hearts through,
and make them burst with grief when they shall compare the shortness of their
past pleasures with the Eternity of their present torments. What Mathematician
(though never so learned) can perfectly confer the few, short, and evil days of
this life, with the eternal years, and Ages of the other; alas! the former is
no more then a fleeting shadow to the latter; what groans, what sighs then
will they belch out, when they see that those delights, and pleasures have
continued but an instant, and that the pains they suffer for them shall be for
Eternity; when they shall remember how easily they might have purchased Heaven,
and avoided the grand misfortune and anguishes of the damned. Then they will
say with an heavy heart, what favorable occasions and leisure had we to pray
to God for a happy end of our lives, but alas, it was the least of our
thoughts, we have spent that precious time in play and vanitys, but now we pay
dear for it; how often have we been courted to fast for our sins, and to
appease thereby the just indignation of God against us, but we have made
nothing of such good advices, being so earnest to satisfy our greedy appetites.
We had a competent Fortune and money to spare, but never had the least thought
to share thereof with the poor; and to redeem our Sins by giving them alms; no,
we accounted our means as our Gods, and judged them better employed, to spend
them in Debauchery. We often refused to pardon our Enemies, but thought it a
great piece of Gallantry to be revenged of them in a Duel. We often forbore
frequenting the Sacraments, lest we should be obliged to forsake the occasion
of sin; We never wanted the means and convenience of serving God, but we never
made use of either, and therefore we now justly pay for all our omissions and
commissions. Nunquid non dixi vobis, nolite peccare in puerum: and non audistis
me, ensanguis ejus exquiritur. Genesis 42.22
We were often told that by Sinning we trampled under foot the blood of Jesus,
our Redeemer; our Brother, Blood and Flesh by his Incarnation, nevertheless we
never gave over our sins, and therefore now the same blood cries for vengeance
against us, and has sent us here into everlasting banishment.

The greatest affliction that can come upon a man in this world is that of
exile. Ovid (though he thought himself fully resigned to Providence) yet when he
was banished into Pontus, his grief was so great, that he could not forbear
lamenting his misfortune, nor desist sighing after his native Country. Cicero
was so overjoyed when he was recalled from his Exile, that he gladly tript
these words of admiration, O what beauty is this of Italy! what civility of
People! what rich Fields! what Plentiful Vines and crops of Corn! what decency
of the City! what humanity of the Citizens! what Dignity of the Commonwealth!
Terra miseriae and tenebrarum, ubi nullus ordo sed sempiternus horror
inhabitat. Job. 10.


How great then must be the affliction of the damned, being they are banished
into the bottomless pit of Hell, which is called by Job a Land of misery and
darkness, where the shadow of Death and no order, but everlasting horror
inhabits.


SAVIOVR. O Man thou speak extraordinary well of the excessive calamities
which the damned do suffer in Hell! and thy words are sufficient to move the
most obdurate hearts, to embrace the most severe and rigid austerities that
ever was practiced by men in this world; for whoever considers seriously the
Eternity of those torments which the wicked do suffer in Hell, will never
murmr at the pains of this short life let them be never so bitter. There is
no State or Condition upon Earth, how necessitous, how poor, how miserable
soever, which the damned would not most willingly endure, nay, they would think
themselves most happy were they permitted so favorable an Exchange. This very
Consideration wrought so much upon several of my Saints, that there was no
course of life so austere but they would undergo. My beloved Disciple, after he
had discoursed of the smoke, which ascended from the torments of the damned,
world without end, Hic patientia sanctorum est, qui custodiunt mandata Dei.
Apoc. 14.12.
and how they had no rest, night or day, immediately adds, here is the patience
of the Saints, meaning, that seeing all the troubles of this life were only
temporal, and the torments of the other eternal, nothing that they endured
seemed too much for them.

See what a penitent posture Manasses had put himself in after his conversion,
behold how he groans under the burden of his Sins, and how he laments his
iniquities with such a sorrow, that he acknowledged himself unworthy even to
lift up his eyes toward Heaven; so great, he confessed were his offenses, that
he was rather deserving of Hell, then any favor at my hands; hear his words,
and thou shall believe them to be the products of a truly penitent Soul? It Is
true says he, O Lord! I have infinitely offended thee, and my Sins are more in
number then the Sand of the Sea; I am unworthy to lift up my eyes toward
Heaven to demand thy mercy. I have Sinned, O my God, I have Sinned: I
acknowledge all the evil I have done, pardon, O Lord pardon, I beg of thee, and
earnestly beseech thee, do not destroy me with my iniquities; do not reserve me
to the utmost rigor of the Justice, do not condemn me for ever unto the fire
of Hell: Remember that thou art my God; the God of Penitents; and thy immense
bounty will best appear in me, whilst it makes thee to save a miserable Sinner
unworthy of thy Grace, and gives me occasion to praise thee eternally for thy
infinite goodness. Behold how the Israelites in their Babilonical Captivity
after the taking of Jerusalem, covered with hair-cloth all their heads and
bodies, laid over with ashes, prostrate on the ground, cry out to me from the
bottom of their hearts, we have Sinned against thee O Lord, in not obeying thy
word. To thee O Lord, belongs Justice and uprightness, but to us nothing but
shame and confusion, which our iniquities have deserved: We have Sinned, we
have done evil, we have dealt unjustly, O Lord our God, in all thy
commandments. Turn from us thy anger; hear O Lord, our prayers, and our
petitions; open thy eyes and consider that the dead praise thee not, but the
Soul which is sensible and afflicted with the greatness of the evils done, and
performs due penance for them. Psalm. 6.
How full of inward grief and trouble was David for the Sins he had committed.
O Lord! says he, rebuke me not in thine anger, chastise me not in thy hot
displeasure: Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me for my
bones are vexed: But thou O Lord, how long? Return O Lord, deliver my Soul:
Save me for thy mercies sake. For in Death there is no remembrance of thee: In
the grave who shall give thee thanks? I am weary with my groaning, all the
night make I my bed to swim: I water my Couch with my tears, mine eyes are
consumed with grief. Psalm. 51.
Have mercy upon me O Lord, according to thy loving kindness, according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Wash me thoroughly
from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin, for I acknowledge my
transgressions; and my Sin is ever before me. Against thee only have I Sinned,
and done this evil in thy sight, wherefore contemn not the Sacrifice which I
offer unto thee of an afflicted mind, and of an humble and contrite heart.
Behold O man! what these great Saints have done to make mean atonement for
their Sins, and to avoid the everlasting torments of Hell! See how they
labored to mortify their Passions, to depress their evil affections, and to
destroy all their sinister inclinations proceeding from the infection of their
sensual concupiscences; they knew this to be the only means to weaken the
forces of their enemies, and that nothing was more effectual to dismount their
batteries against them then to chastise their bodies, and keep them in
subjection by a long and earnest practice of corporal afflictions; In Jejunijs
multis, in multis vigilijs, in fame, siti, frigore, and nuditate etc. 2 Co^
11.27.
this is the powerful remedy that all my Saints made use of, and even my
Apostles came to Heaven by the same means, for they spent their whole lives in
much fasting, much watching, hunger, thirst, cold and nakedness.

My beloved Apostle and Brother St. James, though he was a man of extraordinary
great Sanctity, and was therefore Sir-nam'd the Just, yet besides other
austerities of apparel, diet, and all other mortifications, his exercise of
praying on his bare knees was so continual, that the skin of them was as hard
as the brawn of a Camels knee.

Philo the learned Jew and famous Philosopher, giving an account of the first
Christians in Alexandria under St. Mark the Evangelist, sent thither from Rome
by St. Peter to give a beginning to that Church; which he performed, says he,
with such exemplary Piety, Sanctity of life, Simplicity, abstinence, and
mortification, that he, and his followers moved their Adversaries to extreme
admiration: But to what did all this rigor tend, or what might be the end of
all these extraordinary mortifications practiced so exactly, and for so many
Ages, as well, by Monks, Anachorites, and Hermits, as by the Founders of Holy
Orders, and by their Disciples to this very present Age; and will continue
(with my assistance) to the worlds end? St. St. Aug. L. 1. Confess. 5.
Augustine will tell thee in these few words, the prime motive thereof, Moriar,
ne moriar, that is to say, I will die, to the end that I may not die for ever, I
will mortify my body in this Life, lest I should be of the unhappy number of
the damned for ever.

St. Hierom is much upon the same point, for being in the Desert of Syria, he
was set upon by the Devil who plagued him (as he did St. Paul) with suggestions
of the Flesh; but what weapons did he make use of to obtain the victory over so
dangerous an enemy? the fear of God, and of the fire of Hell, was an Armor of
proof to him against all the temptations and snares of so powerful an
adversary. Hear the relation he makes himself of his several conflicts, and
brave defense. How often says he, being in the Wilderness was I burnt up and
scorched with the extreme heat of the Sun? and how often likewise was I tempted
with the Roman delights? though I was so far distant from those objects, and so
low brought that I was but skin and bone. I sat alone with a heavy heart, in
sorrow and bitterness. The whole compound of my body was at this time so
deform, and ugly with the continual wearing of my Sackcloth, and my skin so
black, that any man might take me for a perfect Ethiopian. I wept daily, and
passed my time continually in groaning, and when at length sleep came upon me
against my will, I lay down, and began a laboring my bare bones that scarce
hung together, sometimes against the ground, and sometimes with as great a
Stone as I was able to manage well with my hand. Of my meat and drink I will
say nothing, for in this place we Monks, use only cold water even in our
greatest infirmitys, and think it a great delicacy to taste of any thing that
savours of the fire. But what was all this mortification of S. Jerome for? It
was says he, for fear of Hell, that I brought my self to this extremity, and
retired my self to this Wilderness, where I have for companions only Scorpions
and wild Beasts; It was to avoid Sin that I wore out my body with continual
fasting, that I cried unto thee, O Lord, whole days and nights together; that I
never ceased to beat and knock my breast; that I persever'd in prayer for so
many years in that forlorn and savage Desert; and this I thought my self
obliged to do for to avoid the scorching flames of Hell, remembering what
council thou give me, and all mortals, Pro Justitia agonizare pro anima tua
and usque ad mortem cetta pro Justitia. Eccl. 4.33.
to fight valiantly for our Souls, and strive unto Death for the maintaining of
Justice.

O man consider seriously how remiss and careless thou, and the rest of mortals
are in the practice of this heavenly Doctrine; what do you do, or what pains do
you take to secure your Souls from Hell? what care do you take to depress your
passions and evil inclinations? what resistance do you make to Sin? which of
you all takes that great care to fly from the occasion of evil? there is none
now adays that mortifies his flesh, but will rather cherish and pamper it to
wickedness; there is none found that takes the pains to repress his unruly
appetites, that withstands his sensual suggestions; nay, the whole World run
after their own concupiscences; they presently yield themselves slaves to every
temptation that comes upon them, to every assault that the Enemy makes; they
devour every hook that the Devil lays to entrap them, and swallow down every
poisoned bait that he casts for their destruction. Prove. 7.6, 7, 8.
Behold how perfectly the careless and sensual man is described by the Holy
Ghost in the Proverbs; At the window of my house, says he, I looked through my
casement, and beheld among the simple ones a young man void of understanding,
walking in the dark night, he met with a Woman dressed like a Harlot, prepared
to deceive Souls, She invited him with many alluring speeches to go with her
home to her house, and immediately he followed her, as an Ox led unto the
Slaughter, and as a wanton skipping Lamb that is carried to the Shambles; like
a Bird that makes have to the Snare, so follows he, not knowing (silly sot)
that he is drawn to fetters, and that the danger of his Soul depends thereon,
until his heart be stricken through, etc. This description the Holy Ghost
makes, to set out the deplorable state of dissolute and foolish Christians, who
take no care to resist temptations, but follow every suggestion of the Devil,
until at last he brings them into his Slaughterhouse, and there ties them up
fast in the bands and chains of their own wickedness, banished from Heaven for
an Eternity. Now O man! I leave thee to give them a description of the
calamities, and anguishes which they are to meet with in this their unfortunate
and woeful Exile.


MAN. MOst merciful Redeemer, that it is an unfortunate Place replenished with
miseries, none can doubt, because thou O God have said it. And it is in the
opinion of the chiefest of thy Prophets, a Land of Sulpher, and burning pitch,
a Land of Pestilence and corruption: a Land of uncleanness and misery; and no
wonder it should be called so, being the Angelical Doctor St. Thomas avers,
that all the most nasty dross and dregs, as well of the Earth, as of the other
elements shall be cast down into Hell, for the greater punishment of the
Damned, and the reason he gives for it, is, that as every Creature does
contribute to the joy of the Blessed, so every creature likewise shall add unto
the torments of the damned; and as they have separated themselves by sin from
thee, who art One, and placed their happiness only in the Creatures, they shall
also receive their punishment from the Creatures in this common shore, and
Laystal of all the Elements; O what a dreadful Dungeon! what a lamentable place
of Banishment will this be to those Damned Wretches! What I have to say of
Cicero's joyful admiration, is, If men be thus transported with the difference
betwixt some Countries and others, betwixt the humors of some Men, and those of
others, what difference shall the damned Souls find betwixt Heaven and Hell,
betwixt the joy of the one, and the torments of the other, and betwixt the
conversation of Angels, and that of the Devils? What grief will it be to them
to behold themselves everlastingly banished from Heaven, deprived of thy
vision, ejected from the company of Angels, from the society of Saints, and out
of that happy Land of the living, where all is in peace, quietness, Charity,
Joy; where all shines, all pleases, and all parts resound with Alleluia's. I am
now to consider with what cruelty the Devil treats those wretches in that woeful
land of their Banishment; but before I enter upon this matter, it will not be
amiss to entertain you with the cruelty of Mortals one to another, by which we
may easily conclude how outragiously cruel the Devil will be to all men, that
shall be so unhappy as to fall into his Clutches, for he is their professed
Enemy even from their Creation.

It would be more then sufficient matter for a larger Volume then this, to
treat of the miserable consequences, and sanguinary effects of men's Rage and
malice one to the other; from hence proceed slaughters, poisons, Wars,
Desolation, rasing, and burning of Cities; unpeopling of Nations, turning of
populous Countries into Deserts; public Massacres, Regicids, Kings abdicated,
Princes led in Triumph; some murdered in their bed-chambers; others Stabbed in
the Senate, or cut off in the security of their spectacles, and pleasures. Some
were that took their passion for a Princely quality; as Darius, who in his
expedition against the Scythians, being desired by a Nobleman, that had three
Sons, that he would vouchsafe to accept of two of them into his Service, and
leave the third at home for a comfort to his Father. I will do more for you
then that, says Darius, for you shall have them all three again: So he ordered
them to be slain before his face and left him their bodies. Xerxes dealt not
much better with Pythius, who had five Sons and desired only one of them for
himself. Xerxes bad him to take his choice, and he claimed the Eldest, whom he
immediately commanded to be cut in halves; and one half of the body to be laid
on each side of the way where his Army was to pass, that they might march
betwixt them: undoubtedly a most inauspicious Sacrifice, for He came to the end
that he deserved, and lived to see that prodigious Power Scattered, and broken,
and instead of Military and victorious Troops, to be compassed with dead
Carcases.

But these you will say, were only barbarous Princes, that knew neither civility,
nor letters: And these Savage crueltys will be imputed perchance to their
rudeness of manners, and want of Discipline. But what if Alexander the great,
that was trained up under the institution even of the Prince of Philosophers,
should be guilty of an action altogether as barbarous? did he not kill Clytus
his Favorite and School-fellow with his own hand, under his own Roof, and over
the freedom of a Cup of Wine? And what was his Crime? He was loath to degenerate
from a Macedonian liberty into a Persian-Slavery, that is to say, He could not
flatter. Lysimacus, another of his friends he exposed to a Lion, and glad would
he have been to have had nails and teeth to have devoured him himself. It would
have too much derogated he thought, from the dignity of his wrath, to have
appointed a man for the execution of his friend. And this very Lysimacus after
he had escaped this danger; was never the more merciful, when he came to reign
himself; for he cut off the ears and nose of his friend. Telesphorus, and when
he had so disfigured him, that he had no longer the face of a man, he threw him
into a Dungeon, and there kept him to be showed for a Monster, and as a strange
sight. The place was so low, that he was fain to creep upon all four, and his
sides were galled too with the straitness of it. In this misery he lay half
famished in his own filth: so odious, so terrible, and so loathsome a
spectacle, that the horror of his condition had even extinguished all pity for
him. Nothing was ever so unlike a man, as the poor wretch that suffered this,
saving the cruel Tryant that acted it. But what is all this to the cruelty and
Tyranny which the Devil shall exercise upon the Souls and Bodies of his
infernal Caitiss. August. l. 1. de civit. c. 10.
St. Augustine says, that he will fasten them to malign Spirits which shall be
all inflamed with fire; that he shall manicle and bolt them with other fiery
bodies, so that they shall not be able to remove from one place to another; that
they shall have perpetually before their eyes such terrible, and hideous shapes
proportionable to their offenses, as shall be able to frighten them out of
their lives. The holy Scripture says, that the damned shall be so straightened and
crowded together in that infernal Dungeon that they may be very well compared
to grapes in the wine press, which do press one another until they burst; That
their Souls shall swim in the middle of a most dreadful Lake of fire like
fishes in the Sea, V. Less. de perfect. Divin. l. 13 c. 30.
and that this fire shall enter into their very substance even as the water
comes into the mouth, nose, and ears of a drowned body.

Telesphorus was cast into a deep Dungeon without cloths, exposed to the
inclemency of the cold and moisture of the place where he could not see the
light of Heaven, or have any thing to feed upon, but once in four and twenty
hours a little piece of hard barley bread, and a little water to drink, where he
was to continue all his life without speaking, or seeing any body, and no other
beel to sleep upon but the cold, noisome, and nasty ground, up to his navel in
his own dung; O what a misery this was! certainly one weeks lodging there,
would appear longer then a hundred years elsewhere. Yet if we compare this with
that banishment and prison of Hell, we shall find the misery of this man to be
a main happiness in regard of that which the damned suffer in their dark and
dreadful habitation: In his troubles he met with none so hard-hearted as to
Scoff and jest at his misfortunes, none to torment and whip him, but in Hell
they shall find both; for the Devils shall never cease to deride, whip, and
torment them most cruelly. There he had no horrid sights, no fearful noises of
howlings, groanings, and lamentations; but in Hell the eyes and ears of the
damned shall never be free from all those distasters. There he had no flames of
fire to scorch him, but in Hell they shall burn even into the very bowels.
There he might move and turn from one side to the other; But in Hell they are
not permitted to stir out of the place, nor change their posture to give
themselves the least ease. There he might breath now and then some little fresh
Air; but in hell they shall suck in nothing but flames, stink and Sulpher.
There he might have some hopes of release after the Tyrant's death, but in Hell
they have no expectation of jail-delivery, no hope of being ever redeemed.
There the least piece of hard bread would seem to him every day a fine Regale,
but in Hell for an Eternity they shall not behold a crumb of bread, nor a drop
of water, but shall eternally rage with a doglike hunger, and a burning thirst.
This is the grand calamity of that Land of darkness: barren of all things, but
of the brambles and thorns of grief and torments.

Caesar would commonly, for exercise and pleasure, put Senators, and Roman
Knights to the torture: and whip several of them like slaves, or put them to
death with the most accurate torments, merely for the satisfaction of his
cruelty. That Caesar who wished the People of Rome had all but one neck, that
he might cut it off at one blow. Cruelty was the employment, the Study, and the
Joy of his life. He would not so much as give the expiring leave to groan, but
caused their mouths to be stopped with spunges, or for want of them with rags of
their own cloths, that they might not breath out so much as their last Agonies
at liberty; nay, he was so impatient of delay, that he would frequently rise
from Supper to have men killed by torchlight; as if his life and death had
depended upon their dispatch before the next morning. To say nothing how many
Fathers were put to death by him in the same night with their Sons (which was a
kind of mercy, in the preventing of their mourning.) And was not Sylla's
cruelty prodigious too, which was only stopped for want of Enemies? He caused
seven thousand Citizens of Rome to be slaughtered at once; and some of the
Senators being startled at their cries that were heard in the Senat-house: let
us mind our business, says Sylla, this is nothing but a few Mutineers that I
have ordered to be sent out of the way. A glorious Spectacle! says Hannibal,
when he saw the Trenches flowing with humane blood; and if the rivers had run
blood too, would have liked it so much the better.

O most gracious Savior! how could thou suffer such monsters of nature to
live upon Earth, or how came it that the ground did not swallow them into it is
bowels? But alas! why should I admire such cruelty among men, being they were
set on by the Devil, who has been always a most cruel Tyrant to Mankind, but
especially when they are delivered over into his power: We are amazed to hear
of such unhumame and barbarous actions; we are astonished to think of that
hellish invention of Phalaris, to roste men alive in his brazen Bull; But alas!
all these torments, and bloody slaughters are mere toys in respect of what is
exercised in Hell; for the torments there are so great that they cannot be
expressed, and no wonder; being that the only pain of fire comprizes as many
torments as the body of man has Limbs, Joints, Sinews, Arteries, etc. and
especially being caused by so penetrating a fire; in respect of which our
temporal fire (though it were made of all the combustible matter in the world) is
no more then a painted fire: And in those flames of Hell the Souls of the
damned must burn not for an hour, nor a year, De cadaveribus eorum ascendet
faetor, Isa. 34.3. Famem patientur ut canes Psa. 5.7, 8.
nor an Age, but for an Eternity, and have the Pestilential vapors of so many
damned bodies, perpetually at their noses: and all that time suffer hunger as
dogs, which is one of the greatest torments in Hell.

Quintillian says, that Famine is the most pressing of all necessities, and the
most dreadful of all evils; that Plagues and Wars are felicities compared with
this affliction, If then a famine of so many months, or of a shorter time; as
that which the Inhabitants of Jerusalem suffered, when they were brought to
that distress as to eat their Children, be the greatest of temporal evils, what
must we believe of the famine which the damned shall suffer in Hell for an
Eternity? O Epicures, and ye that make your Gods of your bellys! give ear unto
what the Son of God foretells of you, you shall find it in St. Luke. Woe says
he, unto you who make it your work to pamper your bodies, and fill your paunches
with the most delicious viands and wine that can be purchased for Silver or
Gold, for the day shall come that you shall be hunger-starved, and with a
hunger that shall continue for an Eternity. A Temporal hunger may bring men to
such extremitys as to eat Dogs, Cats, Rats, Mice, Snakes, Toads, Leather and
Dung; nay it has already brought several Countries, and whole Cities to that
calamity, and forced Mothers to devour their own Children; and men to eat the
flesh of their own arms, as it happened to Zeno the Emperor. If hunger be so
great a chastisement in this life; how will it afflict the damned in the other,
where they shall tear one another to pieces, not for a year, or an Age, Apoc.
18.
but for an Eternity? Consider my Soul, how the Devil measures his torments to
the damned by their offenses, and how God commands him as the Executioner of
his Justice in-Hell, to make them suffer their pains proportionable to the
pleasures they took in this life, this puts me in mind of a very Remarkable
passage of a Nobleman, who took all his pleasure in Tilting and running at the
Ring, this was his constant exercise which he preferred even before the practice
of devotion, and piety, so that he was a perfect Worldling without any care of
his Soul, or the least apprehension of Hell, and in this neglect of his
Salvation he died; his Lady being otherways inclined, and very much addicted to
contemplation, always earnestly imploring of God the favor to let her
understand, the State and condition her Husband was in, which was at last
granted, and he was represented unto her in the same shape as she had seen him
alive, but not attended by the same company, for he was now encompassed with a
multitude of Devils: the chief commander of them in her hearing, gave orders,
they should fit their new Guest with a pair of fiery shoes, whose flames might
reach his very head, then he commanded they should put him on a red-hot coat of
Male made full of sharp Spikes, Camtip. l. 2.9.2. Joan. major. v. Inf. Exemp.
6. Werm. Mon. Carthu. in fasci. morum.
which might pierce his body in all parts, and to accouter him like a complete
Champion, he commanded a helmet to be put on him with a pointed nail that might
pierce his head, and be clench'd below his feet, and after this a Target was
Put about his neck of so great a weight that it might crush all the bones in
his body. All this being punctually, and speedily performed, the Prince of
darkness made a speech to his Officers, to let them know that this worthy
Person, after he had entertained himself in Tilting, and the like achievements
of valor, and gallantry, was accustomed to refresh his weari'd limbs with
sweet Baths, and then to retire to some soft bed, where he usually sported with
other dalliances of sensuality; wherefore let him now have somewhat of those
refreshments, which our Palace does afford to welcome so deserving a Person who
has been in his life so faithful to serve us, and so obedient to our
Suggestions; whereupon they presently hurled him into a fire which was prepared
for him: then forsooth, to ease him, they placed with him in a bed warmed red
hot a Toad of a huge size with most dreadful eyes, which clipped the noble
Spark very closely, kissing and embracing him in so rufual a manner that he
roared out like a furious Lion: and brought him even to the pangs of death.
Another man she saw seated in a chair of fire, and certain women thrusting into
his mouth burning torches, and drawing them out at other parts of his body;
these Women she was told were his accomplices, and the instruments of his Sins.

But what are all these torments to the eternal loss of the fruition and sight
of thee, my Savior! wherein our Divines do place the everlasting beatitude and
Supreme felicity of mankind in the next life; St Thom. part 1.7. 1 art. 4 and
7.12. art. 1. and 7.6. art 3. etc.
for the Angellical Doctor says, the sight of God, or to see God in his own
nature or Essence, is the whole substance of our everlasting happiness in the
life to come; what a deplorable loss then will it be to the damned to be
deprived of this unspeakable comfort for an Eternity, it is so deplorable that
Scripture does place it in the first rank of all other losses, damages,
torments, and miseries that can befall a damned Soul; let the wicked man be
taken away, Tollatur Impius ne videat gloriam Dei. Esai. 16.
to the end he may not see the glory of God says the Prophet. From this loss
proceeds that great and general torment so often repeated in Scripture by the
name of the worm of Conscience, so called, because as a worm lies eating and
gnawing the wood wherein she abides, so shall the remorse of their Consciences
ly within the damned, griping and tormenting them for ever; it shall be to them
a remembrancer to put them in mind of the means and causes of their
everlasting damnation, which will make them to fret and rage, and admire their
own folly to have hanker'd so much after the vanities of the World, and
neglected the grand work of their Salvation. Hear how they exclaim in Hell;
what has our Pride, Sap. 5.
or what has the glory of our Riches profited us? they are all now vanished
like a shadow: We have wearied our selves in the way of iniquity and
perdition, and the way of our Lord we have not known. This shall be their
everlasting ditty, thus shall their tormented Conscience rave in Hell.

O most gracious Savior! when I see (to my great sorrow) in this sad Age we
live in, poor Mortals so far blinded with their worldly interest, so deeply
engaged in the mire of iniquity, so much taken with their sinful recreations
and pastimes, so deaf to thy Inspirations and callings, so avers'd to the
practice of piety and devotion, such great enemies to mortification and
penance; I despair in a manner, of their Salvation, and the rather that these
so powerful motives cannot prevail with them, or make them desist lusting after
those poisonous baits which the Devll presents unto them daily, and at every
moment; and which they with as much ease swallow, as he takes pleasure to
destroy their Souls. Their common discourse is, it is time enough to think of
Penance, when we come to old Age, for then we shall be fit for no other thing.
O most Sacred Savior! thou say thou will not the death of a Sinner,
wherefore be pleased to let them know the danger of delaying their conversion,
and of deferring their repentance until their latter days.


SAVIOVR. THere is a kind of People in the World, Romans 16. Tit. 1.
says my Apostle, that do exteriourly and by words confess God, and profess
themselves to be as good Christians as the rest, yet interiourly, and by the
products of their doble and dissembling hearts, they don't believe there is a
God, at least with those Attributes, that are as essential to him, as his
divine Nature, and which I call infinite knowledge, Providence, Care, and
disposition of humane affairs, Justice, Judgment, Punishment and the like;
These, they do not indeed believe, because their life and actions are quite
contrary to a well-grounded belief; Scripture avers it with a woe unto the
dissolute and careless in heart, who do not believe God. Vae dissolutis cord
qui non credunt Deo. Eccl. 2. Deuteronomy. 22.
These are the men whom I do hate, and detest with all my heart, because they
plow with an Ox and an Ass together, because they sow their ground with mingled
Seed, and their Apparel is made of flax and wool together. These are them I
spoke of in the Revelations, Apoc. 3.
I would thou were either cold or hot: but for that thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold nor hot, therefore will I begin to vomit thee out of my mouth.
These are they who can accord all Religions together, and take up all
Controversys, by only saying, that either they are differences of small
importance, or else that they are out of their Province, and belong only to
learned men to dispute of, but not unto them; moreover they are of opinion that
both parts do err in somewhat, or may be agreed, and go both to Heaven. These
are the men who can apply themselves to any company, to any time, to any
Government, to any Princes pleasure, to any Religion, but will not admit of any
discourse of Devotion in their presence, only they will have men eat, drink and
be merry with them; tell news of the Court and affairs abroad, Sing, Dance,
Laugh, and play at Cards, and dice; and so they spend their lives in their
Sinful recreations without any thoughts of God, without any care of Salvation,
without any apprehension of Death, depending only upon a good Peccavi, in their
extremity, and when God shall Summon them to another World; but alas! they
shall find themselves sadly mistaken, Vae Impio in malum Esai. 3. Ipsi
videntes sic admirati sunt, conturbati sunt, commoti sunt: tremor apprehendet
eos. Psalm. 47.6.
for I shall turn them off with a woe to the wicked, and then shall set before
their eyes all their abominations, and crimes; their Usury, their Drunkenness,
their whoredom, their treacheries, their false Oaths, their Extortions, and
Oppressions of the poor, their blasphemies, and the rest of their wicked
actions, shall come in a crowd to confound their Souls; their Gold and Silver;
their Estates, and Fortunes which they had so unjustly acquired, their
pleasures and treasures now the only object of their adoration, shall then
become the fatal Subject of their confusion, and my Justice shall take delight
to batter, and break their understanding, Conteret Dominus scelestos simul and
Peccatores Esa. 1.28.
and memory with the full knowledge of all their Sins, and how often they had
slieghted my Inspirations, my Callings, my amorous invitations, and other
innumerable effects of my mercy.

O silly Souls! says St. Paul, be not deceived, be not so far overseen as to
lead a licentious life, in hopes to dye a good Death, Nolite orrare quae enim
seminaverit homo haec and metet. Qui seminat in carne, de carne metet
corruptionem. Gala. 6.7. Mat. 7.16.
for in that dreadful hour you shall reap no better grain then what you have
sown, if you have been such bad Husbands of your Salvation as to sow, and plant
nothing else in the Soil and ground of your Souls, but carnal works, you cannot
pretend to no better Harvest, then corruption, and everlasting Damnation. Do
Men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? even so every good Tree
brings forth good fruit, but a corrupt Tree brings forth evil fruit: A good
Tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree, bring forth good
fruit. Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into
the fire. These are my words, it is I, the Eternal verity, that speaks them,
Dicite justo quoniam been, fructum adinventionum suarum commedent. Esai. 3.10.
and therefore they cannot be contradicted, or falsify'd; let all men lay their
hands on their breasts, and examine their own life and conversation, if they
find themselves to be good Christians, upright and honest in all their ways,
it shall be well with them in the hour of their Death; for they shall eat the
fruit of their well-doings; but if they be viciously given, and found void of
all good works, they must expect no better welcome from me, then an order to
cut them all down with the Ax of Death, and to cast them headlong into
hellfire.

Thou shall find several proofs to confirm this assertion in the first Sermon
I preached immediately after I was baptized, there shall thou hear me
recommend, Matthew. 5.4
and extol the great advantages of a virtuous life, of Poverty, Meekness,
Justice, Purity, Sorrow for Sin, patience in suffering, contempt of Riches,
forgiving of injuries, Fasting, Prayer, Penance, Entering by the straight gate,
and also of perfection, Holiness, Integrity of life and conversation, and of
the exact fulfilling of every particular of my Heavenly Fathers Laws, and
Commandments. There thou shall hear me say, I came not to the World to break
the Law, but to fulfill the same; and whosoever shall offer to break the least
of them, and bring others either by his ill example, or by his erroneous
doctrine to do the like, should have no place in the Kingdom of Heaven. There
thou may hear me say to all Christians, except their Justice did exceed that
of the Scribes and Pharisees, (which was altogether in words, and outward
appearance) they could not be saved. That they might not serve two Masters in
this life, but either must forsake God, or abandon Mammon. That they should
decline from false Prophets that usually come in sheep's clothing, but are no
better then ravenous Wolves in their hearts; and that all men should seek to
enter by the straight gate; but the conclusion of my long Sermon is, that the
only sign and token of a good Tree, is the good fruit which it bears, and
without this fruit, let the Tree be never so fair or pleasant to the eye, yet
it is to be cut down and burnt; that it is not every one that shall cry Lord,
Lord, at the last day, shall be saved, or enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but
only such as did execute really, and in Deeds, the Will and commandments of my
Father in this life. Where is there any encouragement here for the wicked to
delay their conversion, or to put it off till the hour of death, in hopes of a
good Peccavi? I see none, for they are all most pressing motives to force them
rather out of their iniquity into a virtuous and godly life. To be the better
convinced of this undeniable truth, thou must know that life is a time, and
season of sowing, and planting the seed of virtue, and the bitter roots of
mortifications and penance; and that Death is Harvest time to reap the main
profit of that happy Seed, and the wonderful sweetness of those bitter roots;
It Is therefore my Prophet (speaking of the manifold tribulations and anguishes
of the Just, Euntes Ibant and flebant mittentes semina sua, venientes autem
venient cum exultatione portantes manipulos suos. Ps. 126.6. Tromsijt mesus,
finita est aestas, and nos salvati non sumus Jer. 8.20. Non potest male mori
qui been vixit and vix been moritur qui male vixit. Aug. Venite been dicti
Patris mei posside te paratum vobis regnum a constitutione mundi. Matthew. 25.34.
) says, they were going on weeping, and sowing the precious seed of their
eternal Salvation, and that without any doubt, they shall come again rejoicing,
bringing their sheaves with them; and my Prophet Jeremy declares how the wicked
shall say in the hour of Death, and with tears in their eyes, the Harvest is
past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved. This was the lamentation of
the Jews seeing themselves oppressed under the slavish, and heavy yoke of the
Caldeans, without any hopes of being relieved; but it may be likewise taken for
the sad moan which the wicked shall make in the hour of Death, seeing
themselves void of all good works, and groaning under the heavy weight of their
evil actions: then indeed they may cry, the Summer is ended, the time of our
life is now expired, wherein we might have gathered a plentiful stock of all
virtues, and good works: but We unfortunate Souls! We have spent that precious
season in all manner of vices, and now that the Harvest is past, we must appear
naked, as we are, of all good works, replenished with evil ones, before a
dreadful Judge, to be sentenced to Eternal Death, which We have justly deserved
for abusing his mercy, by flattering our selves with a good Peccavi, at our
last farewell to the World, and to all its deceitful pleasures. The Harvest is
past, the Summer is ended, and we are not saved; What can be more terrible? How
should any Man dare delay his conversion, hearing these words, and having as
many Presidents hereof, as there have been Sinners surprised by death, even in
the heat of their wickedness. O ye Blessed Souls, says St. Augustine, who have
spent your days in the constant practice of virtue, still submissive to the
Laws of God, always obedient to his commands, thirsting after righteousness and
justice, great lovers of mortification and penance, hear what comfortable news
I bring you, and what is that? You cannot dye an ill death; no, it is
impossible, Orabat scelestus ad Dominum ad quo non erat misericordiam con
secuturus. 2 Machab. 9.13. De Centum Millibus quorum maia fuit vita, vix unus
salvabitur. Aug.
for God will assist you in that dreadful hour, and will receive your Souls, at
their departing your bodies, into the perfect enjoyment of my everlasting Glory.
Whereas the wicked, though they should make as great a show of an apparent
repentance as Antiochus did, yet will they hardly come to a better end, for of
a hundred thousand, that lead a bad life continually to the hour of death,
scarce one shall be saved, says the same St. Augustine, and his doctrine is
grounded upon my words; because I have called, and ye refused, I have stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded; and as ye have made naught of all my
Counsels, and been deaf to my reproof: I also will laugh at your Calamity, I
will mock when your fear comes: When it comes as desolation, and when your
destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when distress and anguish comes upon you,
then shall ye call upon me, but I will not answer; ye shall seek me early, but
ye shall not find me; because ye hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear
of the Lord. Prove. 1.24.
They would not accept of my Counsel: they despised all my reproofs, therefore
shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own
devices. The devout St. Bernard confirms this truth by two similitudes, whereof
the first is, that as a man could not be dead in Rome who never was in Rome, so
no man can die in God who never was in God, More bestiali incubuit terrenis,
more bestiali excedet terrenis. Tert.
no, says Tertullian, Friend, thou have led a life more like unto that of a
Beast, then of a Christian, plundg'd over head and ears like a mould in terrene
and sordid concerns: Thou have been in thy family as furious as a Lion, in thy
behavior as wild as a Boar, in thy employments as Subtle and as crafty as a
Fox, in Taverns and in Company as greedy as a Dog, in thy conversation as
silly, Formr vivendi est norma moriendi. Idem.
and as light-brain'd as a Hare; therefore since thou have constantly led the
life of a Beast, rather then that of a good Christian, thou deserve to dye
the death of a Beast. It Is a maxim received among ye, that the Copy must be
like unto the Original; what is life? It Is an Original, and what is Death? It Is
a Copy; why then such must be the Copy, as was the Original; if the Original
was a good and virtuous life, the Copy must be a penitent and Godly Death; but
if the Original was totally a Scandalous, vicious, and debauched life, by all
means the Copy must be the death of a Reprobate. Thou may be convinced
hereof even by very nature, for if thou speak aloud near any Rock, or
hollow-place, the Echo will sound distinctly every word thou have said; If I
set the same Tertullian the question, what is life; he will answer, that it is
a voice, and that death is the Echo thereof; then whatever the life
pronounces, death will repeat it; If virtue, virtue; If vice, vice; If the fear
of God, the fear of God; If the neglect of Salvation, and the contempt of Gods
Commands, certainly death will repeat the self same thing, so that it is the
greatest folly in nature to lead a wicked life, in expectation of a good
Peccavi in the hour of death, which is as seldom granted to such persons as a
Phaenix is seen in the World. There Is another maxim in great request among your
Philosophers which I do mightily approve of, by reason of it is truth, that a
part is of the same nature with the thing whereof it is a part; Pars est
ejusdem naturae cum toto cujus est pars. Arist.
If I set St. Thomas the Question, What is Life? his answer will be, that it is
a compound of young and old days, and that Death is the latter part thereof,
then it must be according to this undoubted maxim, of the same nature with the
Life; If this was good and virtuous, that must be the same; but if it was a
cursed and wicked Life, even unto the last point, Death must certainly be no
better.

The second Similitude upon which St. Quo vero casura sit arbor, ramos ejus
attend, unde major est copia Ramorum and ponderosior inde casuram non dubites.
St. Ber. Video homines tanquam arbores ambulantes. Mar. 8.24. Conteret Dominus
scelestos simul and peccatores Esai. 1.28.
Bernard grounds this truth, is certainly very remarkable; look says he, upon a
Tree when it is cut, and ready to drop down; if thou would fain know to what
side it will fall, take notice of its boughs and branches, where thou see
them thicker, and more inclined by their weight, thou may very well conclude,
it will fall to that side; What is Man? the blind man of the Gospel whom I had
cured by putting my hands upon him, looking up, said, I see Men as Trees,
walking. If thou be'st desirous to know to what side will this Tree fall, look
upon his boughs and branches, I mean his passions and inclinations, if thou
see them altogether bent to good works, and inclined to Devotion and virtue,
thou may reasonably conclude he will fall toward Heaven: but if by their
weight he is carried to evil, and debauchery, that man so blindly led by his
unruly passions, will undoubtedly fall upon the Rocks of Hell, Tert. l. de vera
and falsa paeni.
there to be crushed for an Eternity. Tertullian speaks of two sorts of Death,
ordinary, and extraordinary, ordinary death he calls that which is occasioned
by sickness, and by extraordinary he means that which comes by some sudden
mischance, or accident; but whatever death the wicked dys of, he is in a most
evident danger to miss of his long expected Peccavi; If he dies of the latter,
the case is very clear, for it is grounded upon this warantable Axim of
Philosophy, In repentinis agimus Secundum habitum; that is, in things which
happen of a sudden, men act always according to the custom which they have
acquired, let it be good or bad. Saul was a desperate, and bloody man, how
often did he attempt upon David's life? he was cruel to others, he must be the
same to himself, for after loosing the battle, and being not able to get off
from his pursuing Enemies, Sta super me, and Interfice me. 2 Reg. 1.9.
he commanded one of his Soldiers to run him through with his Lance, and to
make an end of his Life.

Who could be more proud, more sanguinary, and more ambitious of honor then
was Abimelech, for to be King of Israel, He murdered all his Brethren, which
were in number threescore and ten, whereat his Father Jerubbaal took so much
grief that he soon after died; Evagina gladium tuum, and percute me ne forte
dicatur qu^d a Faemina interfectus sim. Jud. 9.54.
what do thou think will be the end of this so cruel a Prince? will he cry
Peccavi, in the hour of his death? believe me 'twill be far from his thoughts.
He went to besiege the strong City of Thebes, and after he had taken it, he
beset the Tower, where most part of the Citizens were retired for security; but
he boldly went to set fire to the gate thereof, and a Woman taking notice of
him, cast a piece of millstone upon his head, and brake his Skull, whereupon he
called hastily unto the young Man his Armor-bearer, and said unto him, draw
thy sword and slay me, that men say not of me, a Woman slew him: and his young
Man thrust him through with his weapon, and he died.

Julian the Apostate acted much like him, for he aimed at an Empire, and to
come to it, he thought it the best way, to feign himself a friend to the
Christians, so that he appeared to them most zealous for Christianity, and
pretended to further the increase thereof were he in the power of doing it,
which made the Christians to use all means to promote him to the Empire, but no
sooner was he invested with that imperial dignity, than he began to discover
what he was to them in his heart, for none was ever so great an enemy to my
name, or showed so great an abhorrence of Christians, then he did; so great was
his animosity to both, that he murdered very many thousands of them, and
destroyed all their Alters and Churches which were erected and dedicated to my
worship and Service; will this most wicked and disssembling Prince cry Peccavi
in the hour of his death? no, he will continue his impiety to his last breath,
which will be the perfect Echo of his most ambitious and abominable life, for
receiving a mortal wound in the siege of a Town in the Kingdom of Persia, he
took a handful of his blood, and flung it up, as it were into my face, with
this horrid expression, vicisti Nazarene, vicisti, O Nazarean? Cum men's
inclinata fugrit ad aliquid non se jam haber aequali^er ad utrum que
oppositorum, sed ad illud ad quod magis. inclinatur fertur, nisi per rationis
discussionem ab eo quadam solicitudine abducatur. St. Tho.
thou have indeed overcome me at last; after this, he commanded his Gentlemen
to put his Corpse into a Coffin of lead, and cast it into the Sea, that his
subjects finding not his body on Earth might believe it was carried by the
hands of Angels into Heaven, and seated there amongst the Gods. Thou see by
these presidents what a foolish mistake the wicked ly under; when they put off
their conversion to the very last hour of their life, in hopes to have then a
hearty Peccavi, which may be to me a sufficient Atonement for all their
offenses, and breaches of both my Laws and commandments.

The Angelical Doctor St. Thomas seems to be much astonished at their folly
herein, for says he, when men are viciously inclined, and taken with a surprise
in their evil habits, it is out of their jurisdiction to conceive an abhorrence
against them, and have a love and esteem for a virtuous life, unless they make
use of their reason to find out the manifold advantages of the one, and the
several evil consequences of the other; but how can a wicked man, that is
seized on by Death as he walks in the streets by a tile falling from the top of
a house, or some other such like unexpected accident, make use of his reason in
that ample manner; it is impossible, and consequently, Hac animadversione
percutitur percator ut moriens obliviscatur sui, qui dum viveret oblitus est
Dei. St. Amb. Arist.
whoever neglects his Salvation so far as to put it to such perilous events,
deserves no mercy at my hands. But set the case that an old habitual Sinner
should dye of a long and languishing sickness, it is very probable, he will
never think of me in his latter hour; nor have the least feeling of a Peccavi,
being he forgot to call to me for mercy in his healthful days, and this indeed
is the usual punishment which I do inflict upon such persons. Moreover it is
grounded upon this other Maxim of Philosophy altogether as undeniaable as the
former, Ab assuetis non fit passio, That is to say, things which men have daily
before their eyes, make no impression upon their hearts; the Sun which is the
most resplendent, and the most glorious Creature that ever was wrought by my
hands for the use of men, is daily seen without the least admiration, whereas
if a Comet appears, they are all eyes to behold it; A Surgeon will handle
and dress the nastiest wound that ever man had, without the least grudge, or
loathing, because he is accustomed to it. A new raised Soldier will tremble at
the noise of a bullet, whereas an old, and well-train'd Soldier will never
shrink, or give ground, though even Cannons were roaring about him, and their
bullets flying on every side of him, because he is acquainted with such warlike
entertainment. It Is even so with a wicked liver in the hour of his death, though
his Ghostly Father, his Wife, his Children, and all his friends were round his
bed, breaking their hearts, and bursting their lungs, calling and crying unto
him to produce one act of Contrition, one sorrowful Peccavi, one, have mercy on
me O Lord, he will take no notice of what they say, all their exhortations to
him intended to bring him to dye a good death, will be to no effect, he had
often heard the like, or rather more pressing motives from Teachers and
Preachers in their Pulpits, yet his heart was Steel-proof to all their fiery
words, they could never make him think on his Salvation, and therefore it is but
in vain to expect he will be sollicitous for it now, when the Devil has him
fast fettered, when his heart is over-clouded with the darkness of his manifold
and grievous Sins, when his understanding is blinded, his will altogether
corrupted, his senses decayed, and the whole commonwealth of his Body and Soul
clear out of order, by reason of their approaching and dismal separation: Thou
have a very remarkable president of this in the old Testament; there thou may
read, what wonders I had done in order to mollify the heart of Pharaoh, Exodus
9.10
and bring him to a right understanding of his obedience, and duty to me, who
am the powerful and mighty Jehovah, who depress at will, and make subject the
greatest Potentates of the whole World. How I had slain his firstborn for
refusing to let go the People of Israel out of his Land; how I made all the
Rivers, Streams, Fountains, and Springs within his Dominions run with blood for
the same reason; how I covered all his Realm with darkness and Frogs, which
were so numerous that they came in Swarms upon his Table, and even into his
Bed; how I sent a grievous Swarm of Flies into his house, and into all the
houses of Egypt; how I had plagued all the Inhabitants of the Land, as also
their Cattle, which pestiferous Ulcers and Boils, of which they all died, how I
had rained down such a stupendous shour of Hail upon them, as was never seen
before or since in the world; how I had spread over the whole Land of Egypt
Locusts, that devoured and destroyed all that the hail had left; yet all these
prodigies could not mollify the obdurate and rebellious heart of Pharaoh, till
at last my Justice took him to task, and drowned both him and his whole Army in
the Red-Seas, which was a passage they were to go through, to take up their
quarters in the unquenchable fire of Hell, where they shall repent for an
Eternity, but to no advantage for their Souls.

If this discourse so well grounded upon Scripture, Fathers, and Reason, Hos.
13.9.
as also upon so many presidents out of Holy Writ, will not prevail with
Sinners, not to delay their conversion, or put it off to their crasy years, I
have only this to say, Perditio tua ex te Israel; let their eternal ruin, and
the fatal loss of their Souls lie at their own doors. However, to let them know
how much I thirst after their Salvation, I will have thee to convince them of
their extreme folly, to serve so faithfully such bad Masters, as the World and
the Devil; who for every pleasure they allow them, give them a thousand mortal
Stings, even in this life, besides the unspeakable misery which they shall make
them suffer in the other; on the contrary my pleasures are solid, permanent,
and bring excessive comfort to the consciences of those that receive them; so
that, as the Propher says, Psa. 84.10
one day spent in my service, brings more advantage to their Souls, then a
thousand years employed in that of the world, and it were-better be a
doorkeeper in my house, then to dwell in the Tents of wickedness. Let them
know likewise, the tenderness of my affection for them, and how earnestly I
court them to serve me, and not to take example by the prodigal Child, who had
spent all his substance idly, and was forced at last to feed with the swine,
and was very glad too to be admitted into their company: When in reallity he
might sit at my Table, and feed with my Saints and Angels in Heaven, if he had
served me with as much care and diligence as he did the World.


MAN. NO man can be grateful to thee O Lord! without contemning those things
that put the common People out of their wits. We must go into banishment they
cry, we must lay down our lives; hate the World, and all its allurements;
beggar, and expose our selves to reproaches; nay it is often seen, that
gratitude suffers the punishment due to Malefactors; and that Ingratitude
receives the rewards of fidelity. As thy benefits are many, and great, so are
the hazards of gratitude, which is the case, more or less, of all other
virtues; and it were hard, if this, above all the rest, should be both painful
and fruitless: So that though we may go currently on with it in smooth way, we
must yet prepare, and resolve (if need be) to force through all to it, even if
the way were covered with thorns, and Serpents; and, fall back, fall edge, we
must be grateful still. Grateful for thy sake, O Lord, and grateful likewise
for our own peculiar Interest, for it preserves thy favors, and gains us a new
addition of greater.

When I speak in the praise of gratitude, I plead the cause both of God and
man, for, without it, we can neither be Sociable, nor religious. There Is a
strange delight in the very purpose, and contemplation of it, as well as in the
action; when I can say to my self, I love my Benefactor; what is there in this
world that I would not do to oblige and serve him? Where I have not the means
of a requital, the very meditation of it is sufficient. A man is never the less
an Artist, for not having his tools about him; or a musician, because he wants
his Fiddle: nor is he the less brave, because his hands are bound; or the worse
Pilot, for being upon dry ground. If I have only a will to be grateful, and the
heart to persever, I am so, and that is all thou requirest O Lord! Let me be
upon the wheel; or under the hand of the Executioner; let me be burnt limb by
limb, and my whole body dropping in the flames, a good Conscience supports me
in all extremes: nay, it is comfortable even in death it self: for when we come
to approach that point, what care do we take to summon, and call to mind all
our Benefactors, and the good offices they have done us, that we may leave the
world fairly, and set our minds in order, this is the bare duty of good nature,
and what common civility requires of us, how much greater then must our care be
to remember all the graces, and favors which We have received at thy hands O
Lord, and to be grateful to thee accordingly; or if we cannot return thee thanks
equal to the benefits which thou were pleased to confer upon us, let us at
least be grateful to thee so far, as not to serve another Master, for whom thou
have an abhorrence, as being quite contrary to thy divine Maxims.

I have already produced sufficient motives, and reasons to breed in our hearts
a contempt of the World, so odious to God, and so destructive of our own
Salvation; I have endeavored as much as I could, to wean our affections from
it, and from all it is pelf, as well for being in themselves vile, transitory,
mutable, inconsiderable, and dangerous; as for the frequent Instructions we
have had from thee, O Lord! to hate, despise, and consider them as the mortal
Enemies of our Salvation. I will now add this one reason, that though the World
and all its pleasures and treasures were real indeed, and of that great
estimate (as we make them) yet we should not love them, because that thy love O
God, should replenish our hearts to that degree, as to leave no place for any
terrene or carnal affection.

It was thy command, O Lord! to the People of Israel that they should love thee
with all their heart, with all their Soul, and with all their powers, though they
were not so much obliged to thee, as we are, having received more favors and
graces at thy hands then ever they did; and having also more knowledge of thy
goodness then they could ever attain to; how then can we in gratitude admit of
any other love? How can we cast our eyes, or set our hearts upon the creature,
when, (had each of us a million of hearts) we should in justice consecrate 'em
all unto thee? There Is not a motive for which thou art amiable but deserves a
thousand wills, a thousand loves, a thousand lives, all what we are, and all
what we have, or can prtend to in this World; But if we look upon all the
titles and motives of love which I have already spoke of, and for which we are
indespensably obliged to love thee, how can we in good Conscience, love any
thing besides thee? If we consider seriously the multitude of thy benefits, and
the products of thy infinite love, and goodness to us, we shall be obliged to
confess that, had we as many hearts as there are grains of Sand upon the
Seashore, or Atoms in the air, all would not be capable to contain that great
love which we owe unto thee; how then can I divide this one heart, which I have
from thee, amongst so many Creatures? and yet this is a plague that follows all
mankind, it is an evil that runs in the blood of all mortals, it is the highest
of Ingratitude, which is the common distemper of this corrupt Age we live in;
for some are ungrateful to their Country, and their Country no less ungrateful
to others; so that the complaint of Ingratitude reaches all Men: Does not the
Son wish for the death of his Father? the Husband for that of his Wife? etc.
But who can expect to find gratitude in an age of so many gaping, and craving
Appetites, where all People take, and none give? In an Age of license to all
sorts of vanity, and wickedness; as Lust, Gluttony, Avarice, Envy, Ambition,
Sloth, Insolence, Levity, Contumacy, Fear, Rashness, private Discords, and
public Evils, extravagant and groundless wishes, vain Confidence, sickly
affections, shameless Impiety, Rapine authorized, and the violation of all
things Sacred, and profane Obligations are pursued with Sword and Poison:
Benefits are turned into Crimes; and that blood most seditiously spilt, for
which every honest man should expose his own. Those that should be the
preservers of their Country, are the destroyers of it; and it is matter of
dignity to trample upon the Government; the Sword gives the Law, and
Mercenaries take up arms against their Masters. Among these turbulent, and
unruly motions, what hope is there of finding honesty, or good Faith, which is
the life of all virtues? there is not a more lively Image of humane life, then
that of a conquered City: There is neither Mercy, Modesty, nor Religion; and if
we forget our lives, we may well forget the obligations we have to thee and all
thy benefits too.

But let us consider seriously the multitude and greatness of thy divine
blessings, and deal with thee even as one man does with another. The wise man
says, that gifts break Rocks, Victoriam and honorem acquirit qui dat munera;
animam autem aufert accipientium. Prove. 22.9.
and shall not thy divine benefits move a heart of flesh? and if they can steal
the hearts of the receivers (according to Solomon) how come we not to be robbed
of our Souls by thee O Lord! For thou do not only give us thy gifts, but also
do bestow thy self upon us as a most precious treasure. If we consider the
benefits which we have received from thee in our Creation, they are as many as
we have members of our bodies, and faculties of our Souls; If those of our
Conservation, they are equal in number to the distinct natures in Heaven and on
Earth. The Elements, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and the whole World were
created for our preservation, for without them we could not subsist; If we look
upon the benefits of our Redemption, We shall be easily convinced, that they
are as many as there are evils in Hell, from which we are happily delivered by
thy Passion, and total effusion of thy most precious blood. Those of our
Justification are no less in number then are the Sacraments, which thou have
instituted to increase our Merits, and work the Sanctification of our Souls;
then the Graces and Inspirations which thou do shower down into our hearts,
and the divine Examples which thou have left us, Nonne haec opportuit Christum
pati and ita intrare in gloriam suam. Luc. 24.26.
and which should invite us all to tread with a masculine courage in the same
paths which brought thee O Lord, into thine own glory. All these with thousands
of other benefits and obligations which we have received from thee, and by thy
Creatures, cry out unto us to love thee with all our heart, with all our Soul,
with all our Powers, and to trample under our feet this false World, with all
it is vanitys, trifles, and transitory pleasures. But alas! We make nothing of
all thy benefits, We give no ear to all their cries, but rather, will love the
World and taste of its pleasures in as ample a measure as our fortunes will
afford us, wherein we seem to be worse then even the very Heathens; for
Aristides, though he was reputed to be one of the greatest Men of Athens, yet he
was so avers'd to the Pomp and toys of the World, and so affected to poverty,
that he always wore a course broken garment, suffered Hunger, Cold, and Thirst,
not for any want of means, or friends to relieve him, but merely for his own
fancy; Zeno was nothing concerned when news was brought to him, that he had
lost all what he had in the World; When An xagoras received the like news, he
said no more then, if my Goods had not perished, I had been undone. Crates
flung his whole substance into the Sea, with this expression, It is better I
drown you, then you me. Diogenes bid adieu to all he had in the World, and took
nothing with him but a wooden dish, and seeing by chance one drink out of the
hollow of his hand, broke that also. And shall we refuse to do in obedience to
thy Commands, O Lord, and for the purchase of an eternal weight of glory, what
they freely, and gladly performed to pleasure their own fancies, and gain the
repute of being Philosophers? O madness! O ingratitude never to be paralel'd!
Quid retribuam Domino pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi. Ps. 115.12.
Though We are thine by so many just titles, and thou have given thy self, and
all what thou have unto us, yet we never think of what We ought to do for thee,
nor how We shall express our thankfulness for such and so great benefits. This
was the greatest care that David took, and the sole subject of his most serious
consideration, what shall I return unto the Lord for all the favors which he
has confirmed upon me? But O blessed King and Prophet give me leave to ask thee
what are those favors? It Is true he has raised thee from the Station of a
Shepherd to the dignity of a King, He has enabled thee to encounter a Giant,
and to get the better of him too, He has often protected thee against the evil
Spirit of Saul, and has preserved thy life from all the wicked and treacherous
attempts he made to destroy thee; these are great obligations indeed, and
deserve thy grateful return; but are nothing to the benefits which we have
received at his hands; his love for us was so great that he suffered death to
bring us to life everlasting; and left unto us for food to our Souls, his most
precious body and blood; certainly these obligations are unspeakable, and
deserve at least that small atonement of returning back unto him our Souls,
hearts, and bodies; for as we had them from him, it is our weighty obligation to
let him have them again entirely, and free from any love-to the World, or
affection to the Creatures; so that We are to account our selves now and
evermore, as only his, and not our own; consequently, We are not to debase our
love by placing it upon any worldly object, but to settle it wholly upon him
alone.

And really if we consider seriously the infinite love which thou have for us,
O Lord, We shall find that we have no love left to bestow either upon the
World, or any terrene object, no, nor upon our selves; for We must know that
love consists in action, and the more it acts or suffers, the greater is the
perfection thereof; how great then must thy love be O Lord, being thou have
wrought such Stupendous works for our Salvation, and still do continue to
work the like for our preservation; the Sun, the Moon, Omnia subjecisti sub
pedibus ejus, over and boves universns insuper and peccora Campi; Volucres
Coeli and Pisces maris. Psa. 8.8.
and the Stars have their being from thee O Lord, upon our account, it was
merely for our sake thou have created them. It was for our love thou have
brought out of nothing what wonders of nature we see daily before our eyes;
that so great, and so beautiful a diversity of odoriferous flowers, of sweet
herbs, of delicate fruit, of fine Trees, and all other varieties which the
Earth produces; It was by thy orders, and for our entertainment and comfort: Do
we not see how the Corn grows for to feed us, how the wool increases for our
clothing, and all Beasts are left to our disposing? thou have also ordered the
very Rocks to open their bosoms and refresh us with their Springs; and not only
the Earth supplys us with all it is productions; but also all other Elements are
so many storehouses to supply our wants, the Sea, the Rivers and Brooks have
orders from thee to supply us with fish, the Air with fowl, and the fire with
heat. Nay, the very Angels have their understanding from thee with that
obligation to preserve and protect us from all disasters both at home and
abroad. Angelis suis mandavit de te ut custodiant te in omnibus vijs tuis. Psa.
90.13.
If patience be a trial of love, where shall we find so great an example of
that heavenly virtue, as thou have shown to the World in thy most bloody
passion and cruel death for us poor, miserable, and wretched Sinners, and also
in thy most gracious for bearance with us, as often as we transgress thy Laws,
and rebel against thy self. If a King, after his Vassals had a thousand times
attempted to murder him, should not only pardon them, but also continue still
to heap his favors and treasures upon them, Rursum crucifigertes Christum in
Cordibus vestris. Heb. 6: 6.
certainly We would conclude that his love for them was excessive great, what
ought We then to say of thy love, O Lord, who suffer us incessantly to
crucify thee, our Creator, our Redeemer, and glorious King, yet thou art still
silent, and the excess of thy love sets a stop to the current of thy Justice. O
Lord says the Prophet royal, what is man that thou art mindeful of him: but I
may add, Lord, Quid est homo quod memor es ejus. Ps. 8.5
what is man that the Holy Trinity must have so great a love for him? The
Eternal Father delivers up into the hands of his mortal enemies his only and
dearly beloved Son to suffer the most bitter death of the Cross for our
Redemption. The Son leaves unto us his Real Body and Blood under the species of
Bread and Wine to comfort, and strengthen our Souls against all the temptations
and snares of the Devil; and the Father and the Son together send us the Holy
Ghost, by whose grace We are made partakers of thy divine nature: Divinae
narurae consortes efficimur. 2 Pet. 1.4.
can there be imagined a more intense, more real, or more tender love then
this? If the right payment of love, must be love, and that in an equal measure
too, how shall we be able to requite thy love; it is altogether out of our
power, unless thou will be pleased to accept of our offer to have no more love
but for thee, no will but thine, and to requite thy great love with an ardent
love hereafter for all good works, and a virtuous life; for thou art not
content we should only love thee with our tongues, no, thou do reprehend
those, who cry unto thee, Lord, Lord, and do not what thou command: We must
therefore love thee in all fincerity, we must suffer for thee, and make thee
partake of all what we have that is good, or may be pleasing unto thee, We must
love thee truly, who so much loved us; we must resolve to trample the world
under our feet, and also (if occasion be) to lose honor, wealth, and
pleasures, rather then decline from thy love; but that we may the better
perform our resolution, let us know from thee, O Lord what the World is; and
how dangerous it is to bestow our affections upon it.


SAVIOVR. O Man! thou must never repute him happy that depends upon the World
for his happiness; for nothing can be more preposterous then to place the good
of a reasonable Creature in unreasonable things, and yet as it is a common
mistake to account those necessary that are superfluous, so it is altogether as
common with men to depend upon the World for the felicity of life, which arises
only from virtue. There is no trusting to its smiles, no more then there is to
a calm at Sea, which will swell and rage in a moment, so that the Ships are
swallowed up at night, in the very place where they sported themselves in the
morning. The world has the same power over Princes, that it has over Empires;
over Nations, that it has over Cities; and the same power over Cities, that it
has over private men. Where Is that Estate that may not be followed upon the
heel with Famine, and Beggary? That Dignity, which the next moment may not be
laid in the dust? that Kingdom that is secure from desolation and ruin.

The burning of Lions may serve as a President to show that nothing can be
safe, or stable in this World, it may likewise teach men to stand upon their
guard, and arm themselves against all surprises. The terror of it must needs be
great, for the calamity is almost without example. If it had been fired by an
Enemy, the flame would have left some farther mischief to be done by the
Soldiers; but to be wholly consumed, was a prodigious accident! and perhaps an
Earthquake so pernicious as that, was never heard of: so many rarities to be
destroyed in one night; and in a profound peace to suffer an outrage beyond the
extremity of war, who would believe it? but twelve hours betwixt of fair a City
and none at all: It was laid in ashes in less time then it would require to
tell the story. That the Inhabitants should stand unshaken in such a calamity
is hardly to be expected; and their wonder could not but be equal to their
grief. This dismal accident should teach all men to provide against the
possibilities, that fall within the Power of so cruel an Enemy, as is the
World; for this Tyrant having all external things under his dominion will
sometimes smile at poor Silly Mortals, and invite them to taste of his
pleasures, and another while, he will turn them off with a frown, and destroy
them with mischiefs whereof they are to seek for the Author. No time, place, or
condition is excepted from his Tyranny; he makes their very pleasures painful
to them, and makes War upon them in the depth of Peace; he turns the means of
their Security into an occasion of fear: he turns a Friend into an Enemy, and
makes a mortal Foe of a deer Companion: his Slaves shall be sure to suffer the
effects of War without any Adversary; and rather then fail, even their felicity
shall be the fatal cause of their utter destruction.

Lest they should either forget, or neglect his power; every day produces
something extraordinary. He persecutes the most temperate with sickness; the
strongest constitution with the Ptisick; he brings the Innocent to punishment,
and the most retired he assaults with tumults. Those Glorys which have grown up
with many Ages, with infinite labor, and expense, and under the favor of many
Auspicious providence, one day scatters, and brings to nothing. He that
pronounced a day, nay an hour sufficient for the destruction of the greatest
Empire, might have fallen to a moment. It were some comfort yet to the frailty
of mankind, and of humane affairs, if things might but decay as slowly as they
rise, but they grow by degrees, and they fall to ruin in an Instant. There is
no true felicity to be expected from the World in either private or public
affairs. Men, Nations, and Citys have all their fates, and periods: Their very
entertainments are not without terror, and their calamity rises where they
least expected it. Those Kingdoms which stood the shock both of Foreign Wars,
and Civil, come to destruction without the sight of an Enemy. A man may be safe
to day, and happy in the love of his Country, but to morrow he may be in
trouble, and cast either into Prison, or Banishment: To day, in pleasure,
peace, health; to morrow broken upon the wheel; led in Triumph one day, and the
next in the Agony of a mortal Sickness. What the World gives this day, he may
take the next; and he that trusts to his favors, shall either find himself
deceived or if he be not, he will at least be troubled because he has but
fallible means to depend upon. He throws his gifts among his slaves, and they
(silly Souls) sweat and scuffle for them; never considering how few are the
better for that which was expected by all. Some are transported with what they
get; others tormented for what they miss, and many times there is a Leg or an
Arm broken, or a man killed in a contest for a thing of no more value then a
counter. He gives them Honors, Riches, and Favors, only to take them away
again; either by violence, or treachery, so that they frequently return to the
damage of the receivers. He throws out baits for them, and sets traps, as they
do for Birds and Beasts; his bountys are snares, and Limetwigs to them; They
(poor Souls) think they have taken a great prize, but they are themselves
taken. If what Riches, Pleasures, or Dignitys the World gives had any thing in
them that were substantial, they would some time or other fill, and quiet the
receivers; but they serve only to provoke their Appetite, without any thing to
allay it, unless Pomp, and ostentation. In fine, this I conclude upon; that the
Empire of the World is but imaginary, and that whosoever serves it, makes
himself a voluntary slave; the best, and safest course that men can take to
exempt themselves from the tyranny and slavery thereof, is to be neither
dejected with his injurys, nor dazzled with his flattery, and favors. When Zeno
was told that all his substance was drowned; why then, says he, the World has a
mind to make me a Philosopher. It Is a great matter for a man to advance his
mind above his threats, or flatteries; for he that has once gotten the better
of him, is safo for ever; and to come to this point, all mortals should follow
the dictates of the Wise, for the things that are always contemned by them, are
really despicable, and vain in themselves.

Solomon was absolutely the wisest Prince that ever appeared upon the Stage of
this World, and the most experienced in the Peace, 2 Parab.
Prosperity, Riches and Glory thereof. All the Potentates and crowned Heads of
the Earth thought themselves happy for ever, had they but the Honor to behold
his Face, to hear him speak, and be eyewitnesses of his wisdom and renowned
felicity. The Riches, the Pleasures, and treasures of all other Princes, (were
they all collected in a heap) would be nothing to his: for he had yearly Six
hundred Sixty Six Talents of Gold, beside what Tribute he had pai'd unto him
anually by the Kings of Arabia, and other Princes: As for Silver, it was as
plentiful with him, 3 Reg. 4.
as Stones are with the Mountaineers: his Plate and Jewels were without
number: His Throne was supported with several figures of Lions, and other
Beasts, all made of massive gold. His Apparel and Armor were as precious, as
they were numerous; he had all the Kings, from the Philistines River unto Egypt
at his beck to serve him when ever he had occasion to command them. He had
forty thousand Saddle-horses in his Stables, 3 Reg. 11.
and twelve thousand Chariots, and threescore thousand horses with double their
number of furniture to use upon occasion. He had two hundred Spears all of
Gold, each valued at six hundred Crowns in gold, and three hundred bucklers
guilt each with three hundred crowns of gold. He had every day spent in his
house one thousand nine hundred thirty and seven Quarters of Meal and Flower;
thirty Oxen with an hundred Wethers, besides all sorts of Foul and Venison to a
vast quantity, He had seven hundred Wives that were his Queens, and three
hundred Concubines besides: yet after all this Earthly Wealth, Pleasures,
Treasures, and even what his heart could desire, this was his feeling of them,
vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas: Eccles. 1.
vanity of vanities, and all is but vanity, by which S. Jerome understands the
greatness of his vanity, which was indeed above all vanities that may be
devised. And Solomon himself confirms it by several Examples, In c. 1. Ecc.
Ibid.
and by his own experiment too: I have, says he, been King in Jerulalem, and
determined by my wisdom to seek out the nature of all things, and have seen,
that all under the Sun, are mere vanitys and affliction of Spirit. I said in my
heart, Cap. 21.
I will go and abound in all delights, and in every pleasure that can be had,
or thought of; and I saw that this was also vanity. Ibid.
I took great works in hand, made great Palaces, Sumptuous Houses, costly
Stables, Strong Towers, Pleasant Ramparts, vast Vineyards, delicate Gardens full
of fine Flours and all sorts of herbs that can be named, great Orchards planted
with all kind of Trees: I made my Fishponds to water my Trees: I had a great
train of Servants Men and Women, and a numerous Family, great herds of Cattle
far beyond all that ever my Predecessors were masters of in Jerusalem. I
brought into my own Treasury the Gold and Silver, the Riches and Jewels of all
my neighboring Kings and Princes. I had a vast number of Musicians and
Singers, both of Men and Women, wherein the Children of men do place their
chiefest delight. I had a great many artificial curious and costly Cups to
drink Wine; In fine whatever things my Eyes and Heart could fancy, it was out
of hand provided for them, I did never restrain them from taking their
pleafures: But when I came to reflect seriously with my self upon all my
actions, and works wherein I had taken so much labor and toil both in mind
and body; I made this conclusion and firmly believe that all was vanity, and
affliction of mind. Job was likewise a most wise and holy man, Job 1.2, 3, 4.
etc.
he was perfect and upright in all his ways, He was a man that feared God, and
eschew'd all evil, there were born unto him seven Sons and three Daughters whom
he had educated in the fear and love of God. His substance was seven thousand
sheep, three hundred Camels, five hundred yoke of Oxen, five hundred she-Asses,
a vast treasure of Gold and Silver, abundance of Plate, and Household Stuff, a
numeroms Family; In fine, he was the richest and most powerful of all the Men
of the East, yet in a moment he was made the poorest, and the most afflicted of
all mankind. He was reduced to that extremity, that his dearest Friends would
not abide the sight of him; thus was he cast out of doors, and forced to lie
upon a dunghill; where he makes this sad complaint, which is enough to breed in
the hearts of all mankind a continual abhorrence of the World, and all its
allurements. How long, says he, to his false and dissembling Friends, will ye
vex my Soul, and break me in pieces with words? These ten times have ye
reproached me: You are not ashamed that you make your selves strange to me. And
be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remains with my self. If indeed ye
will magnify your selves against me, and plead against me my reproach: Know now
that God has permitted the World, and the Devil to overthrow me, and compass me
with their nets. Behold I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard; I cry out
aloud, but there is no Judgment. They have fenced up my way that I cannot pass,
and have set darkness in my paths. They have stripped me of all my substance
wherein I glori'd, and have taken the Crown from my head; They have also
destroyed me on every side, and have put my Brethren far from me, and made my
acquaintance even estranged from me; so that my Relations have failed me, and
my familiar Friends have forgotten me. They that dwell in my house Ridicule me,
and my maids count me for a Stranger, I am an Alien in their sight. I called my
Servant, and he gave me no answer; I entreated him with as much humility as
possible, and he rebuked me. My Breath is loathsome to my Wife, and though I
entreated her for the Childrens sake begotten of my body, yet she would not
come near me. Nay, even young Children despise me; I arose and they spoke
against me. All my inward Friends abhorred me; and they whom I loved, are
turned against me. O man! can there be a greater motive to hate and abhor the
World, to despise it is pleasures, to make nothing of it is allurements, and
never to confide, or place any trust in it is false and dissembling friendship,
then to see how Tyger-like, they all combine together to work the utter
destruction of this poor, innocent, and harmless Prince who was seen one day to
be the most opulent, the most famous, and the most respected of all Men, of his
Age, and on the fame day to be made a poor, loathsome, crasy and despicable
creature, cast out of doors, and laid upon a dunghill all full of Ulcers from
head to foot, abandoned by his Wife, by all his Friends, by his Servants, and
even by those friends who made up their fortunes under him, and for whom he had
as great a kindness, as a Father could have for his Children.

But alas! to see Friends and Favorites so much estranged, and so ungrateful
to their chief Benefactours is no novelty, it is of as ancient a date as is, in
a manner, the Creation of the World; was not Cain so ungrateful and treacherous
to his Brother Abel, as to invite him into the Fields under the notion of
kindness, but really, and with an absolute design to murder him, as it fell
out, for being jealous of his prosperity, and of his being more in my favor
then himself, he made an end of his life in that very place, where Abel thought
to meet with his pleasure, And was not this same Cain murdered by his own
Grandchild Lamech, Septuplum ultio dabitur de Cain, de Lamech, vero septuagies
septies. Gen 4, 24. Per quae quis peccat per haec and punietur. St. Amb.
Maledictus Chanaan servus servorum erit fratribus suis. Genesis 9.25.
to let all people know that such treacherous proceedings will have their due
punishment at last, and that they shall be chastis'd in the same manner as they
have offended me. If the ingratitude of Brothers and Friends be so displeasing
to me as to deserve my indignation and wrath in so high a measure, what severe
punishment must Children expect that are ungrateful, and cruel to their
Parents. Read in the book of Genesis what afflictions were heaped upon Cham for
being so ungrateful to Noah the Just, who was his Father; and the Savior of
all mankind too, After the Deluge was over; he planted a Vineyard, and he
drank of the Wine to that Excess that he lay uncovered within his Tent, and
when this Cham his younger Son beheld his nakedness, he laughed, and ridiculed
the good old Man; who no sooner was a wake (and discerning what Cham had done)
but was extremely moved, and in the bitterness of his heart, he gave him his
malediction, which fell soon after upon him, and continued successively to his
whole generation.

Absolon came to be so great a Monster to his Father; that he rebelled against
him, brought the greatest part of the Nation into his faction, and marched
toward him with a resolution to deprive him both of his Life and Scepter; what
a deplorable condition was the Father brought to, when he saw his own dearly
beloved Son, and all his subjects in arms against him: Himself left alone with
a few Friends that stood by him, banished from his Palace, reviled by his
Subjects, called a thousand Rogues, Stones flung at his head. Shall this
affliction from a Son to so good a Father, Tulit Joab tres lanceas in manu sna,
and infixit eas in cord Absalom. 2 Reg. 18.14. Three lances for the three
times he disturbed the Nation
remain without punishment? no, Absolon's heart shall be pierced through with
as many lances as he created disturbances in the Kingdom, and sorrow to his
Father; and this punishment shall be performed by the dearest of all his
friends, which of necessity must be an extreme addition to his great
misfortune. Augustus was a most gracious Prince when he had the power in his
own hand; and so careful of the welfare of his Subjects, that they had, no
less, then reason, to think themselves most happy under his Government, for he
kept them in peace with all the World, so that they could trade both far and
near without any fear of being molested, or their Ships in danger of being
taken by any Enemy, in their voyages abroad, or coming home; he gave them as
much of their Liberty as they could reasonably expect, and as much freedom, and
Privilege as their hearts could desire, but they (ungrateful Wretches) kicked
at all his kindeness, and resolved inhumanely to rebel against him; and who
must be the chief head of their Faction, but Cinna, a man so much indebted to
Augustus for his manifold favors conferred upon him, and above all other
kindnesses, for giving him his life, which he had before forfeited upon such
another wicked action: The design was laid, and ordered that Cinna with two
more of his Confederates should invite Augustus into his Chariot, and when he
was therein, to deliver him unto his mortal Enemies, or murder him in the very
place, If he had made any resistance: but another circumstance which does
aggravate his ingratitude to the highest pitch, is, that when he had one hand
extended to subscribe unto this horrid Plot against his life, he had another
ready to receive more of his favors, for at the same time Augustus made him a
Consul, which was an honor (as he confessed himself) he durst not so much as
desire. What shall I say of the monstrous ingratitude of Brutus against so good
a friend, and Father too, as Julius Caesar was to him, for he was not only
content to heap honors and dignities upon him, but did adopt him for his own
Son, and Heir apparent to all his worldly wealth, this so extraordinary a
kindness should move the heart even of the greatest of Tyrants to lay down his
life in defense of so good a friend, yet it was not able to mollify the stony
heart of Brutus, for he was the very first that approached him with his naked
dagger to give him his mortal wound in the very Senate House. These and several
other such miscariages tarnish'd the Luster of their glorious actions, and
forced me to remove their Empire into another Nation, which is already come to
be as treacherous and ungrateful, in a manner to me as the Romans have been one
to another: for I see they have combined with my Enemies to afflict and oppress
my Members upon Earth, and lessen the beauty and immunity of my
Church-militant: These are crimes far exceeding the falsehood, and treachery of
the Romans, because they were Heathens, without any knowledge of my infinite
Attributes, of my Supreme Majesty, of my omnipotent power, and also were
deprived of the light of grace, which are the eminent favors I have imparted
to them; but I see they turn them all to the wrong use; which certainly will
rise in Judgment against them in the dreadful day of my visitation. But alas!
Interest is the only friendship of the World; and where it is not to be had,
there is no favor, no, nor common civility to be shown. O Ungrateful World! Woe
is he that will settle his affections upon thee after all these convincing
Presidents of thy most horrid baseness. Now, Man! let me hear thee discourse of
its falsehood, and vanities: and give me an account of what my Doctors and able
Divines say of it.


MAN. O Most Gracious Savior! thou have thoroughly convinced me of the falsehood
and vanitys of the World, and have said as much of its transitory pleasures as
is able to breed in the hearts of all men an everlasting abhorrence of them,
but because thou desire to hear what the Doctors, and the able Divines of
thy Church speak of 'em, I will begin to relate thy beloved Disciples opinion
of them; he tells me in the first place, 1 Joan. 2.10, 11. etc
that whosoever hates his Brother is in Darkness, and walks in darkness, and
knows not whether he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes; and this
I think is sufficient to restrain the malice, hatred, and mortal animosities,
which Christians have one against another: In the second place, he earnestly
entreats us all not to love the World, neither the things that are in great
esteem with the World, and the reason he gives for it, is, that if any love the
world, or its allurements, the love of thy Celestial Father is not in his
heart; for all that is in the World, is the Lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, with their attendants, and several branches, which
thy Father hates mortally, and therefore if We pretend to be of the happy
number of his Children, We must be of his mind; and declare by our actions the
mortal hatred we bear them; and especially because the World passes away, and
the lust thereof; but he that does thy will, (which is the same with that of
thy Father) abides for ever.

To begin with the lust of the flesh, I must speak of the pleasures of the
Palate, which is one of the most dangerous branches thereof; for it deals with
us like the Egiptian Thieves, that Strangle those they embrace. I must confess
that I am amazed to hear of the Luxury of Nomentanus and Apicius, that
entertained their very Souls in the Kitchen; they had the choicest music for
their ears, the most diverting spectacles for their eyes; the choicest variety
of meats, and drinks for their Palates, and what was all that but a merry
madness? It Is true they had their delights but not without heavy and anxious
thoughts, even in their very enjoyments; besides that, they are followed with
repentance, and their very frolieks are little more then the laughter of so
many people out of their Wits. Their felicities are full of disquiet, and
neither sincere, nor well grounded; but they have need of one pleasure to
support another. and of new prayers to forgive the errors of their former.
Their life must needs be wretched, that get with great pains, what they keep
with greater. One diversion overtakes another: hope excites hope: Ambition
begets ambition; so that they only change the matter of their miseries, without
feeling any end of them, and shall never be without prosperous, or unhappy
causes of disquiet. What if a body might have all the pleasures in the world
for the asking? who would so much unman himself, as by accepting of them, to
desert his Soul, and become a perpetual Slave to his Senses? Those false and
miserable Palates that Judge of meats by the price and difficulty, not by the
healthfulness, and taste, they vomit, that they may eat, and they eat that they
may fetch it up again. They cross the Seas for rarities, and when they have
swallowed them, they will not so much as give them leave to digest.

But what was the end of that Apicius? of that corrupter of youth, and plague
of the Age he lived in? after he had spent a prodigious fortune upon his belly,
he poisoned himself for fear of starving, when he had 250000. Crowns in his
Coffers; which may serve to show us, that it is the mind, and not the Sum
that makes any man rich. But why do I call that poison, which was the
wholsomest draught of his life? his daily gluttony was poison rather, both to
himself and others. His ostentation of it was intolerable; and so was the
infinite pains he took to mislead others by his example, who went fast enough
of themselves without driving.

It is indeed a horrid shame for a reasonable man to place his felicity in
those entertainments, and appetites that are stronger in Brutes. Do not Beasts
eat with a far better stomach? have they not more satisfaction in their Lusts?
and they have not only a quicker relish of their pleasures, but they enjoy them
without either scandal or remorse. If sensuality were happiness, Beasts were
happier then Men; but humane felicity is lodged in the Soul, not in the Flesh.
They that deliver themselves up to Luxury, are still either tormented with too
little, or glutted with too much; and equally miserable, by being either
deserted, or overwhelmed: They are like men in a dangerous Sea; one while cast
dry upon a Rock, and another while swallowed up in a whirl-pool; and all this
from the mistake of not distinguishing good from evil. The Huntsman that with
much labor, and hazard takes a wild beast, runs as great a risque afterward
in the keeping of him; for many times he tears out the throat of his Master;
and it is the same thing with inordinate pleasures; the more in number, and the
greater they are, the more general and absolute a Slave is the Servant of them.
Let Mortals say what they will of him, and let the common People pronounce him
as happy as they please, he pays his liberty for his delights, and sells
himself for what he buys. But who must be the Purchaser? Who? but the Devil
that plays the Host in this world, Amos 1. Tob. 2.
and will serve them at an inch with what delights or pleasures they desire,
but will be sure to write up all in his black book, and take an exact account
thereof at the day of their death, then he will not fail to bring in the whole
reckoning, and charge them with all; their mirth shall be then changed into
mourning and lamentation, and if they be not able to make atonement, and
discharge their accounts, they shall hear, to their eternal sorrow, this thy
dreadful Sentence, Quantum in deliciis fuit, tantum date illi tormentum. Apoc.
18.
look how much they have taken of their delights, so much torment do you lay
upon them.

A wise and discreet Traveller, when he comes into an Inn, though his Host should
set before him most rare and delicate meats, to banquet at his pleasure; yet he
will forbear, and restrain his appetite merely in consideration of the price,
and of the journey he has to go; and takes nothing but so much as he knows well
how to discharge the next morning at his departure; on the contrary a fool will
lay hands on every delicate bit that is presented to his sight, he will act the
Prince for a night or two: but next day when it comes to be discharged, he is
sorry for what he had done, and would wish he had lived only upon bread and
water, rather then be put to that vexation and disgrace too, as to part with
all his money for his belly. The custom of thy Church O Lord, is to fast the eve
of every great feast, and then to recreate their Spirits the next day, which is
the Festival it self. This represents very well the abstinent life of thy good
Servants in this World, for which they deserve to be nobly treated, and made
much of in the World to come: but the custom of this World is quite opposite,
for they will eat and drink merrily, let the Host bring in what reckoning he
will; but when payment is demanded, and that they cannot get off without the Sum
laid in his hand, Risus dolor miscebitur, and extrema gaudii luctus occupat.
Pro. 14
O then all their mirth is forgot, and as much ashamed they are at their
laughing and ranting, as is a dog when his tail is cut off. This is the
character that Holy Scripture gives of the pleasures of the World; laughter
shall be mingled with sorrow, Melius est ire ad domum luctus, quam ad domum
convivii. Ecc. 7 Ubi tristitia ibi cor sapientis and ubi gaudium ibi cor
stultorum. Pr. 28 Beatus homo qui semper est panidus. Ibid.
and mourning shall come at the latter end of mirth. It is for this very reason
that the Wise holds it better to go to the house of sorrow, then to the house
of feasting: and the cause why, is, that where sadness appears, there the heart
of the wise man is lodged: but where mirth is, there is the heart of fools; and
for conclusion, he gives me this wholesome document, happy is the man that is
always fearful, which is the same thing that the Holy Ghost recommends to every
man; to walk carefully and upright with God, thinking upon his commandments,
how we keep and observe them; how we resist temptations, how we mortify our
flesh, how we bestow our time, talents, and riches which he was pleased to lend
us; how we labor to make up a plentiful harvest of good works for the
obtaining of Heaven, what account we could give him, if he had summoned us at
this very moment to appear before him. O that, We were so happy as to make of
these good thoughts our frequent meditation, I am certain We should have no
time to spend in the idle pleasures and pastimes of this World, but alas! our
grand misfortune is, that we never trouble our brains with 'em, we will rather
think of what our Kitchens can afford. To see what a number of Cooks, what a
variety of meats a nobleman will have, it is to be wondered that so much
provision should be made for one belly, and that so many people should be
employed to bring up the Luxury of all tastes in one dish, which is rather like
a vomit then a soup; but they have their punishment even in this World, for
from their compound dishes, arise compounded diseases, which require compound
Medicines. It Is the same thing with their mind, that it is with their Tables;
simple vices are curable by simple Councels, but a general dissolution of
manners is hardly overcome: They are overrun with a public, as well as with a
private madness. The Physicians of old understood little more then the virtue
of some herbs to stop blood, or heal a wound, and their firm and healthy bodies
needed little more, before they were corrupted with Luxury and pleasure: And
when it once came to that, their business was not to lay hunger, but to provoke
it, by a thousand inventions, and sauces. That which was aliment to a craving
Stomach, is become a burden to a full one. So that Luxury may be looked upon
as the offspring of all their diseases, as paleness in the face, trembling over
all their body, a weakness in all their joints, their bellys stretched, Multa
flagella peccatoris. Psa. 31.10.
a suffusion of choler; the torpor of the nerves; and a palpitation of the
heart, megrims, torments of the eyes, and ears, headache, Gout, Scurvy, several
kind of Feavours, and putrid Ulcers: with many other diseases, that are but
the just punishment of Luxury.

What shall I say of drunkenness, which is a voluntary madness; it emboldens
men to act all kind of mischief; it both irritates wickedness, and discovers
the same; was it not in his drunken fit that Alexander took the life of Clitus
upon the point of his Sword, though he was the dearest of his Friends, and the
chief of his Favorites? It makes them that are insolent, prouder, and those
that are cruel by nature put on the fierceness of an angered Bear; it takes
away all shame. Eece caput Holofernis, qui in contemptu superbiae suae Deum
Israel contempsit, and tibi interitum mina. batur. Judith. 13.28
He that is peevish breaks out presently into ill words, and blows too, and
values not to strike even his Wife and Children. A drunken man's tongue trips,
his head runs round, he staggers in his pace, but the next morning he will
certainly meet with those diseases which usually follow this vice. How many
public mischiefs it has done, how many warlike nations, and strong Cities,
that have stood invincible to several attaques, and Seiges, has drunkenness
overcome? how many great Armies has it defeated. Did not the drunkenness of
Holofernes bring a total destruction upon the Assyrians, and at the same time
an exceeding joy to the people of Israel, when they beheld his head cut off by
the hands of a Woman which was of a masculin courage. Yet we may see many in
the World that hold it to be a piece of gallantry to drink the company dead? a
magnificent Virtue indeed, to swallow more wine then the rest, and yet at last
to be outdone by a hogshead.

But there is yet another piece of gallantry, that is as brutish as the other,
and what is that? it is to invert the offices of day, and night: as if their
eyes were only given them to make use of in the dark: Is it day, they will cry,
O then it is time to go to bed. Is it night? why then it is time for us to rise.
They will Sup in the morning, and Dine at midnight. In fine, I must conclude
that they are the most miserable of all mortals, that deliver themselves up to
their palates, or to their Lusts: For the pleasure is short, and the end of it
is either eternal shame, or a speedy, and hearty Repentance.

What shall I say of vainglory, which is a disordinate desire to be well
thought of, to be in the esteem of the World, receive the applause, and good
word of all people, to be praised and glorified of Men; this indeed is a great
vanity, yet, it is the common distemper of all men, and creeps into the breasts,
even of the most religious among them; had I seen a man run up and down the
streets after a feather, which is tossed to and fro with the wind, certainly I
would imagine him to be either a perfect fool, or a little maddish, I can have
no better opinion of a man that is carried away with the wavering blast of
several mouths, for as this man might weary himself out before he got the thing
which he fo earnestly followed, and when he had it, it is at best but a
feather, so a vainglorious man may labor a long time, before he attain to his
aim, which is a popular applause, and when he has it, it is not worth to him a
pins head, being but the breath of a few men's mouths, that does alter upon
every light occasion, and now makes him great, now little, now good, now bad,
and at another time nothing at all.

O Lord! Matthew. 27. Joan. 8. Joan. 9. Matthew. 21. Mar. 27. Luc. 23.
thou art a sufficient Evidence to prove this truth, for thou have been tossed
to and fro in the opinion of men; some have said that thou were a Samaritan,
and had a Devil in thee; others, that thou could not be a Prophet, no, nor a
man sent from God, being thou did not keep the Sabbath Day, others, to the
contrary, alleging that if thou had not thy commission from above, thou
could not work so many and such stupendous Miracles; so that there was a
strange division among them upon the whole matter: In fine, the conclusion of
the dispute is a main argument of the Worlds vanity, for upon Palm Sunday they
received thee into Jerusalem with the Solemnity of Hosanna, casting green
branches, and even their apparel under thy feet; but on Thursday and Friday
following, they all cried out Crucify against thee, and preferred the life of
a Barrabas, of a wicked Murderer, before that of a pure, spotless, and most
innocent Lamb, who came to wash off our sinful spots with the effusion of his
most precious blood.

Understand this ye brutish among the People; Inteliigite haec insipientes in
populo and stulti aliquando sapite. Psa. 94.8.
and ye fools, when will ye be wise to consider, if they dealt thus with the
Savior of the World, who was the holiest that ever trod upon the Earth, and
wrought more miracles then all the books of the World are able to contain,
which in all reason might have purchased him a glorious Name, Fame, and Honor
among the people; why will you over-labour and toil your selves for an unsettled
blast of vainglory? Why do you cast your labors into the wind of men's
mouths? Mihi au^em pro minimo est ut a vobis Judicer, aut ab humano die. 1 Cor.
4.3.
Why do you place your Riches in the lips of wavering and unstable men, where
every Flatterer may rob you of them, have you no surer Coffer to lock them up
in? St. Paul was of another mind when he said, I esteem it little to be judged
of you, or of the day of man, And he had a deal of reason; for what cares he
that runs at the Tilt, if the ignorant People that stand by, do give Sentence
against him, so the Judges be of his side. Jesu filii David misereremei. Luc.
18.38.
Had the blind man in the road to Jericho, depended on the approbation and
liking of those that were going by, he had never received from thee O Lord, the
benefit of his sight, for they would not have him to run after thee, no, nor
cry out to thee for a cure.

If we believe St. Ambrose, he will tell us, that a vain man is no better then
a wind-mil, for he will run on, if he be praised; but if he feels not the gale
of a popular applause to blow up his Sails, he is presently daunted, and quite
out of heart; no more will the windmil grind nor make any meal, but according
as the blast shall hold favorable, and blow into its ribbs: Dan. 31.
so that I may very well compare him to the Babilonians, who with a little
sweet mufick, were made to adore any thing whatsoever. It Is therefore I believe
that Holy Scripture says, As Silver is tried in the fire by blowing it, so is a
vain man tried in the mouth of him that praises, and the similitude is very
true, for as Silver, if it be good, suffers no detriment thereby, but if it be
otherwise, it goes off like a shadow, and leaves nothing behind it but nasty
dross; It Is even so with a vain man, he is overjoyed when he is praised, but if
he hears nothing said to his commendation, he is heart-sick: How many have we
seen put beside themselves with joy of their praises, and afterward brought
down with a contrary wind of contempt, and driven even upon the very borders
of despair? how many do we see daily extolled in their Sins, and cried up in
their wickedness? how many palpable and intolerable flatteries do we hear both
used, and accepted of daily, for I see none give it a repulse, as David did,
Away says he, with this Oil and Ointment of Sinners, let it not come upon my
head. We are all created for Heaven, and why should we not rather imitate the
Citizens thereof, then those of this World that are so much enamored with it is
vanities, and so far engaged in the follys thereof. The Angels and Saints seek
for no honor to themselves, but leave all to God, and shall We poor silly
wretches desire so ardently to be glorified? for what? Psa. 9.
is it for our dignities, for our honors, for our vast Estates? These I must
confess are great matters in the fight of silly Mortals, they are Jewels of an
extraordinary price, and to purchase them, they don't scruple to lay down even
their Souls in exchange to the Devil for them; the Christians in Jewry were so
much enamored with them, Joan. 11. Toan 19.
that they would not confess thee O Lord, in public, nor make open profession
of thy Faith. This brought an everlasting remorse upon Pilate's injustice, Act.
26.
for though he knew thou were innocent, yet to keep in favor with the Jews, and
to continue his place under Caesar, he condemned thee to die the death even of
the greatest Malefactors. Agrippa and Festus were convinced of th'integrity
and truth of St. Paul's doctrine, yet these Remora's diverted them from making
profession thereof. And does not the same consideration withhold Millions of
Souls in this corrupt Age we live in from embracing the means of working their
Eternal Salvation? O! Nollite esse Pueri sensibus. 1 Cor. 14.
says St. Paul to such silly Souls, be you not Children in understanding; and
why? because it is usual with children to set a far greater value upon a
painted table, then upon a precious Jewel; what are all the honors, dignities,
and treasures of this world but painted stuff, acquired with a deal of labor,
preserved with abundance of fear and care, and lost with as much grief and
sorrow. I remember in my own days, that Monsieur Fouket, the greatest Favorite
the King of France had, was invested with the chiefest honors and dignities
that a subject could pretend to, and his heart was so swelled up with Pride,
that he choos'd for a motte, Quo non Ascendam, but I remember also that all his
ambition and glory vanished in one night, for the King being informed of his
design to make bimself absolute Master of the Isle of Rae, seized upon his
earthly substance both at home and abroad, and condemned his Person to a Prison
during his life, whereupon this Jest was made of him, and writ under his Coat
of Arms, Quo non descendam; for certainly it was a prodigious toss, to be
thrown down from the height of prosperity, to the depth of Adversity, and in
one night.

Now let us consider any state or dignity that we most affect, and reason thus,
many have already mounted up so high, but they were forced to descend again, by
the appointment either of Death or of Fortune, and which was the greater,
either the joy of getting, or the sorrow in loosing it? where are now all those
Emperors, Potentes potenter tormenta patientur. Sap. 6.7.
those Kings, those Princes, those Popes and Prelates, who rejoiced so much in
their days at their own advancement? There Is not a word of them now, they are
clear out of men's memory, and long since rotten in their graves. Now every
mecanick fellow may boldly walk over their heads, whose faces heretofore might
not be seen without a ticket for admittance into their inner chamber of
Presence, and what does their dignities avail them now, only that they are the
more taken notice of in Hell (if they be gone down so low) and the far more
tormented by the Devils.

I cannot better compare the vanity of this World, then to a man's own shadow,
which the more he runs after, Omnia arbitror ut stercora ut Christum
lucrifaciam. Phil. 3.8.
the more it flies from him, but if he flies from it, it will approach him; the
only way to catch it, is to fall down on the ground upon it. So We see that
those who gaped after honor in this World, are now so far from having any
honor exhibited to their Persons, that their very memory is clear out of date;
whereas those who have most fled from it, and have debased themselves to the
very lowest degree of mankind through an excess of humility; are now the most
honored, even by those that were their enemies in this life. St. Paul made no
more of the World and of all its honors and treasures, then of common dung,
and who is more honored now then he, even in this World? who is more
commended, and remembered in this life, then he, and all others that have
followed his examples. We may conclude by this what a main folly it is to have
so great an estimate for worldly honors, as to endanger our Souls in the vain
and foolish pursuit of them. There are several other vanitys in the World,
which do entangle the poor Children of Adam, in a thousand follys, which are so
many baits the Devil flings among them to draw their Souls into his most dark
and dreadful Dominion. Some will value themselves upon the antiquity of their
Familys, some upon their Wisdom, others upon their beauty and rich apparel,
etc. most gracious Savior thou have copiously instructed me hitherto in all
matters relating to my Salvation, as far as I have proposed, I hope thou will
be mercifully pleased to let me hear thy sentiments touching the premises, and
how dangerous it is to hanker after such toys, and amusements of Children.


SAVIOVR. O Man! If mortals could trace their descents, they should find all
Slaves to come from Princes, and all Princes from Slaves, and therefore I think
they are not their crafts-master, when they murmur against nature, and fortune,
as if 'twere their unkindeness that makes them inconsiderable in the World,
when it is only by their own weakness that they make themselves so: for it is
virtue, not pedigree that renders a man either valuable, or happy. It was never
heard that I did either reject, or choose any man for his quality,
contrariwise, to confound this vanity, when I came down from my Heavenly
Father's Palace upon Earth, to become man for the Redemption of mankind; I
called my self by the name of the Son of man, Matthew. 8.20.24.26.
and chose to be born of a poor Virgin, for, otherwise I was no Son of man;
Joan. 10.
and to debase my self the more, I went under the notion of a Shepherd, and was
called so too, 1 Reg. 9. 1 Reg. 26.
which is a name of contempt in the World. Moreover when I was to constitute
the first King in Israel, I did not seek for one of the most ancient blood, but
fixed upon Saul, who was absolutely of the most contemptable, and basest Tribe
of the Jews; and after him I selected David, who was a Shepherd too, and the
poorest of all his Brethren. Matthew. 4.
And when I came into the World as aforesaid, with a design to reform it, and
spread my Doctrine over all its Dominions, Psa. 49. Quae stulta sunt mundi
elegit Deus ut confundat sapientes, and ignobilia mundi and contemptibilia
elegit Deus and ea quae non sunt ut ea quae sunt destrucret. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
I did not pitch upon the noblest men to give them my commission, and make them
my Patentees, to bring that work to perfection; but even upon the poorest, and
simplest, and those too, that had their lively hood only by fishing, I made my
Apostles, and Princes of all the Earth, thereby to confound the foolish vanity
of this World, that makes so great and estimable, the preeminence of a little
flesh and blood in this life, where there is no merit or virtue to be found.
It Is certain the original of all mankind was the same, and, it is only a
virtuous life, and a clear conscience, that makes any man noble; for that
derives even from Heaven it self, which is so bountiful as to cast those
favors, and blessings, even upon the very Heathens, when they give their
concurrence to receive them; for Socrates was no Patrician born, no more was
Cleanthes, though he came to that dignity from that low and contemptible Station
of an under-Gardiner; neither did Plato attain to that great dignity, wherein
the World had seen him, by his birth, but by his goodness. It Is most certain
also that the beginning of the Nobility of this Age, as well as of all other
past Centurys, had nothing before it: so that of all their Ancestors, some
were splendid, others sordid, as it happened, thou may very well Judge by
David, and his Brethren, what their Fathers condition was, that could afford
his Sons no higher fortune, then to be private Sentinels in Saul's Army, and of
Saul's Father too, by his sending him with a piece of bread in his pocket to
seek, both far and near, for his strayed Asses: Look upon the Nobility of this
present Age, and read the memorials of their Extraction, thou shall find some
good, some bad, some virtuous, and some godly, some in an eminent, and others
in a very low condition; nor is it any more to their honor, the glory of their
Predecessors, then it is to their shame, the wickedness of their Posterity.
They are all composed of the same element, and therefore they should not value
themselves upon their Nobility of blood, as if they were not all of them equal,
when their primitive Progenitour is unknown, and that they can carry it no
farther, the Herald provides some Hero to supply the place of an illustrious
Original; and there is the rise of Arms, and Families. O, what a grand folly it
is to spend ones life in pursuit of a title, that serves only when he dies to
furnish out an Epitaph; yet Nobility of flesh and blood is a most precious
pearl in the eye of the World, and indeed it is to be highly esteemed, when it
is joined with virtue, and accompanied with the fear and love of God; They are
the men whom I esteem most in the World, Job 1.8.
and have so great a veneration for them, that I call them my own Servants, as
also the glory and renown of my whole Flock, as thou may see by the
commendations I gave of Job to the mortal Enemy of all mankind, when he came
to give me an account of his travels, and of his walking up and down the World;
have thou considered (said I to him) my Servant Job, that there is none like him
on Earth; he is a true Nobleman indeed, for he is a perfect and upright man,
one that fears God, and eschews evil; a man that (were he stripped of all his
means, of all his Children, of his health, and all his earthly wealth, reduced
to ly upon a dunghill) will be notwithstanding loyal, and obedient to my
commands.

Mattathias was no less a Nobleman, Machab. 2.
for though Antiochus had deprived him of all his great Estate, and issued out
his warrants to take him, and put him to death, unless he had adored his Idols,
and offered them Sacrifice; yet he made an open, and public protestation that
he, his Children, and his Brethren would never obey so wicked an order, and so
contrary to the law of his Forefathers, adding, that it was neither profitable
nor honorable to his Noble Family, to relinquish the law and righteousness of
God, to fulfill the will and command of a frail, mortal and sinful man, though
he were even a King. Eleazarus a Nobleman of great Age, Machab. 2.
but of a far greater courage and of a comely aspect, was sentenced to die
unless he had complied with the same Kings Proclamation, to eat Pork, which was
forbidden them by the law; answered, that he would rather choose a glorious
death, then an odious and sinful life: whereupon his neighbors and friends out
of a natural compassion, would fain persuade him to eat whatsoever he had a
fancy to, and that they would tell the King of his compliance with his command;
but he considering the eminent dignity of his old Age, and of his ancient
extraction, answered, no, the Lord forbid that Eleazarus now ninety years old
should dissemble, and give that great occasion of Scandal to young folks, for
though I should save my life by that sinful means, yet I cannot escape the hands
of the Almighty, either dead, or alive. By what is said, thou may conclude
that where true Nobility is, there virtue must be lodged, which is the only
ornament that can make them grateful to me, and give them a true title to a
glorious Crown in Heaven; but where this is wanting, Nobility is in it self;
and in my sight, a mere trifle, and perfect vanity; he can only brag that he is
of the same substance with the rest of mortals, and say unto rottenness, thou
art my Father, Pistredinidixi, pater meus es tu matter mea and soror mea vermi
bus. Job 6.
and unto worms you are my Mother and Sisters. He that will behold the Nobility
of his Ancestors, let him look into their graves, there he shall find the
truth of what Job speaks. True nobility was never begun otherwise then by
virtue; and therefore as it is a testimony of valor and virtue in the
Predecessors; so ought it to be a forceable inducement to the same in the
Successors. And whoever holds the rank and name thereof by descent only,
without the Substance of virtue, is altogether an Alien to his Ancestors,
being he can produce nothing of their merits, and has nothing to show for his
extraction, but an old piece of parchment, these are the men I speak of by my
Prophet; They are made abominable even as the things which they love; their
glory is from their birth, from the belly, and from their conception only, that
is to say, they brag and glory of their Ancestors, Progenitors, and Noble
birth, whereas, having no virtue answerable to their extraction, but following
their sensual appetites, and bestowing their affections upon wicked and
abominable delights, they are made in like manner abominable as well to me, as
to all honest and Godly men. And in my judgment, it is a most foolish vanity
in such persons to beg credit of dead men, that deserve none themselves; to
seek for old titles of honor from their Ancestors, they being themselves
utterly incapable of any, by reason of their base manners, and rustical
behavior.

As for the Wisdom of the world, alas! it is but mere folly with me, as thou
may conceive by what I replied to the most wise and the most learned men of
Israel, Luke 24.25 Stultissimus sum virorum and sapientia hominum non est mecum
Prove. 30.2.
who were in doubt of my Resurrection; O Fools and slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken. Solomon was absolutely the wisest man that
ever-appear'd upon Earth, yet he owns himself to be more brutish then any man,
nay he complains that he has not even the understanding of a man, Eccl. 2.12.
and I really believe him, for had he any understanding at all, he would not
act the Fool to that desperate degree of madness, as to give his Soul to the
Devil for a transitory and brutish pleasure; hear how he speaks of himself, I
was King over all Israel, in Jerusalem, and turned my self to behold Wisdom,
and errors, and folly, but what is man that he should pretend to strive with
his King, and Creator too, whose wisdom excells my folly, as far as light
excells darkness. The Worlds wisdom is laughed at by my Prophet, where he says,
surely the Princes of Zoan are all Fools, Isa. 19.11.
the counsel of the wise Councellor of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye
unto Pharaoh, I am the Son of the wise, the Son of ancient Kings? where are
they now, where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them know
what the Lord of Hosts has purposed against Egypt. The Princes of Zoan are
become Fools indeed, the Princes of Noph are deceived, they have also seduced
Egypt, even they that are the stay of the Tribes thereof.

My great Apostle, and Vessel of election gives an excellent description of the
World's folly, where he says, 1 Cor. 1.18, 19, 20.
the preaching of the Cross is to them that perish, foolishness; but unto us
which are saved, it is the power of God. For it is written, I will destroy the
Wisdom of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.
Where is the Wise? where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World?
has not God made foolish the wisdom of this World? for after that, in the
wisdom of God, the World by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews require a
sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom: But We preach Christ crucified, unto
the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, but unto them
which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ, the power and wisdom of God.
Because the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then Men; For ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. But God has
chosen the foolish things of this world, to confound the wise, and the weak
things of the world to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of
the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea and things which
are not, to bring to naught things that are; that no flesh should glory in his
presence.

If the Wisdom of the World be so great a folly with me, as St. Paul says, is
it not an intolerable vanity to delight and boast in it, so much as men do,
and to value themselves more upon it, then upon my wisdom, which was that of my
Saints. It Is a wonderful thing to see how contrary my Judgment is to that of
Man; some will thrust themselves into an Ecclesiastical State, and will conceit
themselves to be most fit to do the Service of God, because they have the
repute of Wise men in the World, but St. Non multi sapientes secundum carnem. 1
Cor. 1.
Paul will let them understand that it is not usual with me to choose many Wise
men according to the flesh; He will tell them also that it is not every worldly
wise man that makes a wise Christian; no says he, but if any man seem wise
among you, Stultus fiat ut fit sapiens. 1 Cor. 3.8.
let him become a fool to the end he may be made wise. Vain therefore, and of no
account is the wisdom of the world, unless it be subordinate, and subject to
that of God. And whosoever, (let him be never so wise in his own judgment) will
condemn those that have no esteem for the world, and are resolved to desert it,
and slight all its allurements, to serve me: his wisdom herein is a main folly,
and his prudence mere vanity, as he will himself confess one day, when he shall
come to cry with those, who were also wise in this world, Nos insensati vitam
illorum aestimabamus Insaniam, etc. Sap. 5.
but are now filly wretches in the other. We senseless and foolish worldly wise
men did esteem the life of Saints to be a perfect madness; but now our eyes are
opened to see that they were the wise men indeed, and We the only fools.

I can say no less of corporal Beauty, Prove. 31.
for it is vain, and the grace of a fair countenance is deceivable. It Is the
fatal cause of the loss, and utter destruction of many Millions of Souls; it
was the vain complacency that Lucifer took in his fading beauty, which gave him
that irrecoverable overthrow from the height of Heaven to the bottomless pit of
Hell; hear how my Prophet speaks to him; how art thou fallen from Heaven, Isa.
14.12.
O Lucifer, Sun of the morning! How art thou cast down to the ground, which
did weaken the Nations? for thou have said in thine heart, I will ascend into
Heaven, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God: I will sit also upon the
Mount of the Congregation, in the sides of the North. I will ascend above the
height of the Clouds, I will be like the most High. Yet thou shall be brought
down to Hell, to the sides of the Pit. They that see thee, shall narrowly look
upon thee, and consider thee, saying, is this the Angel of light far surpassing
that of the Stars whose beauty did exceed that of all other Angels, but alas!
it is now changed into deformity far greater then that of all the Devils in
Hell. This gave occasion of David's most humble request to me, turn away my
eyes, O Lord, that they behold not vanity. It Is a singular vanity indeed, which
is both dangerous and deceitful. O! had mortals duly considered what infinite
ruins and destructions beauty has caused in the World, Psa. 4. Psa. 118. Favus
distillans labiam erecricis, ne attendas fallaciae ejus, long fac a muliere
viam tuam and ne appropinques foribus domus ejus. Noviffima autem illius amara
sunt quasi absynthiam, and accuta quasi gladius biceps. etc. Pr. 5.3.4.8.
they would be altogether of David's mind, and fly from it as from the aspect
of a most poisonous Serpent. Was it not the beauty of the fair Helena that laid
the famous Troy in ashes, and put the pious Eneas to the strait of carrying his
old Father Anchises upon his shoulders through the flames; did not the most,
valiant Champions of their Age, Hector, and Achilles die upon the same account,
were not all the Inhabitants of that unfortunate City, Men, Women, and
Children killed, and most barbarously cut in pieces by the Grecians, to take a
full revenge for the affront which Paris had done to their King, by taking his
Queen away? I might have produced as many Presidents of this nature, as would
be sufficient to fill a larger volume then this; but, for brevities sake, I
will only lay down before thee, this single consideration; how many Souls are
daily hurried headlong to Hell for doting upon this fading and deceitful
Beauty, how many challenges, and Duels, how many Jealousies, and private
animosities, how many Strifes, and great uprores about this, and that other
beauty? and all this noise is but for a painted Snake, (so the holy Fathers
call it) which is fair without, and inwardly replenished with mortal poison;
add to this the remedy which a most learned Doctor prescribes against the
temptation of a beautiful Woman, consider says he, what foul dross lys under
that fair Skin; for when the fairest face in the world is either scratched, or
scared, it will be rather a subject of contempt then of any love. An Ague of
some four or five days will bring a great alteration upon the fairest beauty,
but half an hours absence of the Soul from the body will make the loveliest
face that ever was a most hideous and frightful sight to be looked upon;
Issabella Clara was the rarest beauty of her Age, but when she died, and was in
her coffin but two days, one of the Grandees of Spain that esteemed very much
her beauty when living, desired to have a prospect of her face, which was then
the ngliest that ever man could behold, all covered with worms, and two
ill-shap'd ones starting out of her eyes; this indeed made the good Nobleman
with no less horror, then admiration to utter these words, haec ne est illa
Issabella Clara; is this that fair Issabella, whose resplendent beauty had
ravished the hearts, and dazi'd the eyes of all her beholders, adieu then to
the World, and all its vanities; this was a Christian Resolution, and worthy to
be taken notice of by all those who bestow so much labor in procuring, or
preserving their corporal beauty, as though all their happiness consisted
therein; nay, many are detained even by that only consideration from taking a
resolution to serve me, so that this precious Jewel (as they call it) is a
great obstacle to their Salvation, as it is often the fatal Subject of many a
poor creatures eternal damnation.

But the basest of all Prostitutes are those that dedicate themselves wholly to
the extravagance of Embroiderys, rich Apparel, Paint, Genesis 3.
Wash, Patches, perfumes, Tire-women, etc. They have passed even the limits of
Nature, for if Adam had never fallen, Men, and Women should never have known
what belonged to Apparel; It is only a convenience devised to cover the shame
of nakedness, and other infirmities contracted by his dismal overthrow: They
are lashed out into superfluities, insomuch, that it is now adays only for
Beggars, and Clowns to content themselves with what is sufficient. Their Luxury
makes them Insolent, and mad, They take upon themselves like Princes and
Queens, and will fly out for every trifle, as if there were life and death in
the case. What a madness is it for a man to lay out an Estate upon a Table, or
a Cabinet, a hundred pound for a pair of pendants to his Lady, and a far
greater Sum for garments that will neither defend her body, nor her modesty; so
thin that one would make a conscience of swearing, she were not naked. This is
the common distemper of all mankind, for they take pride and glory in apparel,
which is as much, as if a Beggar should glory and take pride in his old clouts
that do cover his sores. St. Paul seems to be avers'd to this Superfluity of
apparel, for, writing to his Disciple Timothy, and setting down a Rule whereby
Christians should order their lives, Hab^^tes autem alimenta and quibus tegamur
his contenti fimus. 1 Timothy 6.8.
he says, if we have wherewithal to cover our selves, let us be content; my
very dictates and the holy maxims, with the rare examples which I have left
unto all mortals should condemn their nicety, and variety of apparel, for I was
pleased to be content with one only garment during the whole course of my
mortal life, without Shoes, Stockins, or a Hat, nor even a shirt to my back,
not for any want, (for I might have had all the most precious ornaments of the
World to adorn my body, Qui mollibus vestiuntur in domibus Regum sunt. Luc. 7
Mart. 3.11. Induebatur purpura and bysso. Luc. 16.19
with one fiat,) but it was my pleasure to appear otherwise, to condemn the
Worlds vanity. I premitted my Prophet also with a course and austere attire, to
demonstrate the abhorrence. I had against so great, and so common an abuse; and
said plainly that such as are not like my Precursor in their attire, but will
go clothed in soft and delicate apparel, are fitter to live in the Courts of
earthly Kings, then in my heavenly Palace. I said also in my description of
the rich man damned, that he was apparelled in purple and Silk; meaning thereby
that this was also a main step toward his everlasting damnation; even as to
set forth the extraordinary holiness of my Prophet Elias, I said of him, Vir
pilosus and Zona pellicea accinctus renibus. 4 Reg. 1.8.
that his reins were covered with hair cloth.

It is a thing worthy thy daily admiration to consider how far asunder I and my
Saints are from the humor and behavior of Worldlings in this very matter. I
was the very first Tailor that ever made up a garment in this World, and made
it for the most noble of all thy Ancestors in Paradise, but of what did I make
it? was it of cloth of Gold, or Silver, Genesis 3.
of cloth thirty, forty shillings the yard, was it of a most precious and
costly silk? no, it was only of beasts skins; and St. Circui erunt in meloris,
in pellibus caprinis egenter, angustiati, afflicti, quibus dignus non erat
mundus. Heb. 11.37.
Paul avers of the greatest and noblest Saints of the old Testament that they
were covered only with goats skins, and with the hair of Camels. Does not this
condemn the unspeakable vanity of mortals that are so extraordinary curious,
and rich in their apparel, and take so much pride therein that they must have
the spoil of all the Creatures upon Earth, to cover their backs, and adorn
their bodies. From one they take his wool; from another his skin, from another
his hair and fur, and from others their very excrements, as the Silk, which is
nothing else but the excrement of worms. Neither are they content with all
these robberies upon Earth; they must ransack the very Sea for Pearls to
beautify their necks, and turn up its Sands for precious Stones to adorn their
ears. They will enter into the very bowels of the Earth to find out Gold and
Silver, and having borrowed all these curiosities of other Creatures for more
vile then themselves, they are not content to enjoy them in private, but they
must show their finery abroad, and provoke people to look upon them, as if all
were of their own Stock. What an idle complacency do they take to see Diamonds
Sparkle upon their singers? and how foolishly are they conceited, to think the
luster thereof come from themselves. When Silver, Gold and Silks do glister on
their bodies, they look sumptuously, as if all that beauty came from them. When
Cats-dung does smell in their garments they would have People believe that
those sweet odours proceed from their own bodies. And thus, (says my Prophet)
they spend their lives in vanity without any serious care of their Salvation;
nay, they take such great delight in their rich Apparel, and other vanitys,
that they will bring them to Church too, that men may take the more notice of
them, and whilst they are running over a few prayers, their hearts are taken up
with their sine garments, and their eyes are glanced on all sides, as if they
were craving the applause, and admiration of the whole Assembly. I hope O man!
thou art now convinced of the truth of the premises; if thou can tell me any
more of the World's vanity, let me hear it at large, and thou shall know what
my Judgment will be concerning them.


MAN. It was a Question among the Heathen Philosophers, whether it is better
for a Man to have much, or to have enough, and the ground of their debate was,
that he who has much desires more, which shows, that he has not yet enough; but
he that has enough, is at rest; and the conclusion was, that he is the richest
man that is content with what he has; for why should a man be reputed the less
rich, for not having that, for which he shall be banished, for which his very
Wife or Son shall poison him: That which gives him security in War, and quiet
in Peace; which he possesses without danger, and disposes of without trouble,
deserves indeed the name of Riches, which alone can make a man happy in this
World: for no man can be poor, that has enough; nor rich, that covets more then
he has. Alexander, after all his Conquests, complained that he wanted more
Worlds; he desired something more, even when he had gotten all: And that which
was sufficient for humane nature, was not enough for one man.

I am very apt to believe that money never made any man Rich; for the more he
had, the more he still coveted. The richest man that ever lived is poor in my
opinion, and should be so in any reasonable man's judgment: But he that keeps
himself to the limits of nature, does neither feel Poverty, nor fear it;
whereas those which the World calls happy, their felicity is a false splendor,
that dazles the eyes of the vulgar, but our rich man is glorious, and happy
within himself. There Is no ambition in hunger, or thirst: let there be food;
and no matter for the table, the dish, and the Servants; nor with what meats
nature is satisfied. Those are the torments of Luxury, that rather stuff the
stomach, then fill it: It studys rather to cause an appetite, then to allay it.
It Is not for us to say, this is not hand some, that is common; the other offends
my eye. Nature provides for health, not delicacy. When the Trumpet sounds a
charge, the poor man knows he is not aimed at; when they cry out fire, his body
is all he has to look after; If he be to take a journey, there is no blocking up
of Streets, and thronging of passages for a parting complement: a small matter
fills his belly, and contents his mind; he lives from hand to mouth, without
carking or fearing for to morrow. He that would know the worst of Poverty, let
him but compare the looks of the rich, and the poor; and he shall find the
poor man to have the smoother brow, and to be more merry at the heart; or if
any trouble befalls him, it passes over like a Cloud, whereas the other, either
his good humor is counter fiet, or his melancholy deep, and ulcerated, and
the worse because he dares not publicly own his misfortune, but he is forced
to play the part of a happy man, even with a Cancer in his heart. His felicity
is but personated, and if he were but stripped of his ornaments, he would be
contempitble. In buying of a horse, we take off his cloths and his trappings,
and examine his shape and body, for fear of being cozened: And shall we put an
estimate upon a man for being set off by his fortune, and quality? nay, if we
see any thing of ornament about him, we are to suspect him the more for some
infirmity under it.

He that is content in Poverty, would not be so neither in Plenty; for the
fault is not in the thing, but in the mind. It Is therefore thy Apostle writing
to Timothy, says, command the Rich of this World not to be high-minded, nor
place their considence in the uncertainty of their Riches; Divitibus hujus
mundi praecipe non sublime sapere, neque sperare in incerto divitiarum.

1 Timothy 17. Non proderunt divitiae indie ultionis.

Pro. 11.4, Divitiarumjactantia quid nobis contulit. Sap. 5. Dormierunt somnum
suum and nihil in venerunt omnes viri divitiarum in manibus suis. Psa. 75.6.


and the ground of his Precept, is, that Riches, shall not profit a man in the
day of revenge, nor rescue him from the rigor of thy Justice in the day of his
death, if his sins have put him out of thy favor; this the wicked Rich
themselves confess, though too late, being already condemned to live in torments
for an Eternity; what has the bravery of our Riches availed us? nothing at all;
but have rather increased our misery, because we made thereof our Gods upon
Earth, though we were often told of their vanity, and how they could never afford
their Masters any comfort, or ease, when they were in most need of their help.
The Royal Prophet seems to commiserate their deplorable condition where he
says, Alas! the Rich men have slept out their sleep, and have found nothing in
their hands; People in their sleep will dream of Mountains of Gold and Silver,
and think themselves rich for ever, but when they awake, they find they are
altogether in as bare a condition as before; this is the case with the rich,
whilst they are in this life, they do imagine themselves Rich for ever, and
that their vast treasures will bear them up in all necessitys that shall occur;
but when they open their eyes in the hour of death, they see then that they
must depart for another World with as little provision as the poorest beggar in
nature, I cannot but smile to hear the Prophet Baruch laugh at such People;
where are they now, says he, those great Estated men, those mercenary Judges,
those deluding Lawyers, those fly Attornys, those greedy and covetous
Merchants, those insatiable Usurers that heaped up such a vast deal of gold and
silver, and that never desisted gathering together? Alas! they are rooted out
of the World, and cast down into Hell-sire; And therefore says St James, now ye
rich men weep, and wail, Jacob. 5.1, 2, 3. etc.
and howl, for your miseries that come upon you; now your riches are rotten,
and your gold and silver is rusty; and the rust thereof shall be in testimony
against you: It shall feed upon your flesh, as if it were fire; you have
hoorded up wrath to your own selves in the last day. Though he is an Apostle that
speaks, yet his words are the very dictates of the holy Ghost, whereby we may
easily conceive the dangerous consequence of worldly wealth and the main folly
of them that labor so much to procure the same, by injustice, and other
indirect means, and when they are masters of them, do not employ them to the
advantage of their Souls, but lay out all to support their grandeur, and
satisfy their Lust.

I am certain, that if an Assembly of the most able physicians of the World had
met to determine whether such or such meats were dangerous to feed upon, and
that they should all conclude they were absolute poison to the body, few, or
none at all would hazard his health to eat thereof, though otherwise in sight,
smell, and taste, they appeared sweet, and most pleasant; And shall not the
unanimous votes of all the Saints in Heaven, and of all the Catholic Doctors
on Earth, together with thy most holy and urgent admonitions, O Lord, be able
to remove the disordinate love which mortals bear to this most dangerous, and
Soul-killing vanity? Thou say by thy Prophet to all mankind, Divitiae si
affluant nolite cor apponere. Psa. 61. Qui diligit aurum non justificabitur.
Eccl. 31. Zacha. 1.
set not your hearts upon the love of Riches; and why? the wise make them this
answer, because whoever loves Gold (that is beyond the precept) shall never be
justified; and thou say thy self; that thy indignation and wrath shall fall
very heavy upon rich nations. There Is nothing so often repeated in Scripture as
a Woe to the Rich; and thou do confirm it thy self with that usual
affirmation, Amen, Amen, I say unto you, that a Rich man shall hardly enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 19.
What an extreme folly it is then to seek so much after so poisonous a bait, as
are Earthly Riches, which may perhaps afford some little comfort to their
owners in this World, but with an absolute exclusion from the everlasting
pleasures of thy kingdom, Woe be to you Rich men for that you have received
your consolation in this life, so that in the other you are not to expect any:
Sad news indeed for the Rich, and able to settle in their hearts a perpetual
abhorrence against so fatal an enemy to the Salvation of their Souls. This
expression, I fear, will not at all relish with many of our Worldlings, who
account Riches, to be their dearest, and only Friend, nay, had I said, their
God, it would not be contrary to truth, for their hearts are more enamored
with them, then they are with thee, O Lord, though thou have deposited thy sweet
life to ransom their Souls from the power of Hell, Qui volunt divites fieri,
incident in tettuionem, and in laqueum Diaboli, and defideria malta inutilia
and nociva quae mergunt homines in interitum and perdidonem. 1 Timothy 6.9.
and Death everlasting. And yet if St. Paul may be credited, they are grossly
mistaken, and wide from the mark they aim at, for where they expect their
consolation and pleasure, they meet with their eternal destruction and sorrow,
for He says, that they which will be rich do fall into temptations, and into
the Snares of Satan, as also into many unprofitable and hurtful desires, which
do drown them in the Abiss of destruction and Woe.

Their main objection to this doctrine, is, what shall become of our Wives and
Children, if we be not careful to provide a maintenance for them, that they may
live in the World with as much splendor, as the dignity of their condition
requires. But the Wife man gives them a satisfactory answer, in my mind, and a
notable check to boot, for he calls them fools, and besides, he tells them in
plain terms, that their great care, and labor which they take to provide so
amply for their Wives and Children is sinful, and therefore will create an
eternal displeasure to their poor Souls: This is confirmed by the Parable which
thou did rehearse of the Rich-man, who said, what must I do, for I have no
place vacant wherein to bestow my Fruits? and he said this will I do; Lac.
12.20.
I will demolish my Barns, and erect greater, and in them will I bestow all my
Fruits, and my Goods. And then I will say to my Soul; Soul, thou have much
wealth laid up for many years; take now thine ease, Eat, Drink and be merry.
And did not God say unto him? thou Fool, this night thy Soul, shall be required
of thee: then whose shall those things be which thou have provided? So He that
impiously, or immoderatly lays up treasure for himself, his Wife, and Family,
expecting to enjoy it many years, deserves the same title, and may as suddenly
be disappointed, because he had improved his own Stock, and robbed God, his
heavenly King of his Custom, that is, He never according to his capacity
bestowed any part of his treasure in pious works, as Gods law does require; And
indeed, if this be well considered, We shall find it an excessive folly, and
maddness too: What can it be termed else? to damn ones Soul to leave ones Wife
and Children rich in the world? This is certainly the height of madness, and a
mere delusion of the Devil; for one moment after We are dead, We shall care no
more for all our Kindred then we shall for strangers; and one penny given in
Alms while we lived for thy sake, O Lord, shall bring us more comfort at that
day, then thousands of pounds bestowed even upon our nearest Relations to make
them rich. It is of such People that the Prophet Royal speaks, Universa vanitas
omnis homo vive^s. Psalm. 39.
where he says, that all their actions are nothing but mere vanity, for what
greater vanity is there then to bequeath such vast Sums of Gold and Silver to
their own kindred, and leave in a manner nothing for the good of their immortal
Souls: Vae vobis qui trahitis iniquitatem in funiculis vanitatis. Esai. 56.
Were we to go a long journey, We would be sure to carry some provision with us
for to support our bodies, and We shall take no care for our Souls when they are
in their departing Agony, ready to begin that painful, and frightful voyage of
Eternity? Surely such men walk unprofitably; certainly they are disquieted in
vain; they heap up Riches, and know not who shall enjoy them; their life is a
gathering of all kind of vansty; vanity in ambition, vanity in Riches, vanity
in pleasures, vanity in their corporal beauty, vanity in their Apparel; vanity
in all things which they most esteem; vanity in all their life, vanity in their
death, In fine, vanity in their last Will and Testament, wherein their noblest
part the Soul has the least share. Woe be unto you, says the Prophet, Psalm. 3.
that do draw wickedness in the ropes of vanity, of promotion, of dignity, of
Nobility, etc. these are the ropes he means, and which do always drag with them
a vast crowd of iniqnity and Sin. Thou have O Lord, a mortal hatred for the
observers of superfluous vanitys, 1 Reg. 17.
and thou have utterly destroyed the whole Family and Lineage of Baasa, King of
Israel, for no other reason, but because they had provoked thee in their
vanity. Blessed then is that man who has not suffered his heart to be seduced
with the vanity and false madness of this World, Beatus vir qui non respexit in
vanitates, and insanias falsas. Psalm.
of this Vale of tears, of this deplorable banishment, of this boisterous Sea,
so full of disasters, that there is not a day, nor an hour; nor a moment of our
life but is attended with some misfortune, or another, the best Arithmetician
that ever took pen in hand cannot exactly set down, or calculate milerys that
are incident to humane nature, no tongue is able to express the manifold
infirmitys of our Bodies, the passions of our Souls, all the affronts and
injurys we receive as well from Friends, as from our Foes, all the tribulations
and crosses that are laid upon us daily both at home and abroad; This Man
commences a Lawsuit against us without either Equity, or Justice, but merely
for spite and Malice; another lys in wait for us to take away our lives; a
third man will make it his study to blast our reputation. Some are in open wars
one with the other; others, more subtle, will bear their neighbors a mortal
grudge, but will make no show of it, until they meet with a favorable occasion
to execute their malice; Da mihi in disco caput Joannis Baptistae. Matt. 14.8.
the hatred of Herodias against St. John the Baptist was not publicly known to
the world until she had persuaded her Daughter to ask no greater favor of
Herod then to give her in a dish the head of so renowned a Prophet, and of so
glorious a Martyr. Some, to be revenged of their Brothers, (if they cannot annoy
their Persons,) will not scruple to produce false witness to criminate them,
and be themselves of the number too; others will make it their whole business
to trot up and down, like so many infernal Emissaries, and publish wherever
they go, as well the private, as the public imperfections of this or that
other body, even as they do maliciously and falsely surmise; and will never
revoke what they had taxed him with, though they were even upon the borders of
Hell, ready to be cast therein both Soul and body; so great is the malice of
such desperate and unchristian Sonls. There are besides thief usual calamities,
an infinite number of others, that are nameless, because they be sudden, and
unexpected chances; one loses an eye in a Skirmish, another his arm, one gets a
fall from his horse, and breaks his neck, another in a frantic fit flings
himself out of a Window and is bruised to death; a Third man falls into a Pool,
or a River, and is drowned.

If all the Writers of this Sinful Age We live in had taken an exact account
from every particular man within the same Century, of what distasters had
happened to him in his life, they would certainly have matter enough to fill as
many volumes as they have hairs on their heads, and if all the merry passages,
and sad rencounters that every individual man had met with in his days, were
put in a balance, the latter would much overweigh the former, so he would
visibly see that for one hour of pleasure, and true content he had in his life,
he met with a hundred of misery, of tribulation, and anguishes; now if the life
of Man, which is so short, be intermixed with fuch a vast deal of sorrow, what
a small parcel thereof can pretend to any real felicity (if such a thing may be
expected in this World.)

But all those calamities I now have mentioned, are common, as well, to the
good, as to the bad, Lassati sumus in via iniquitatis and perditionis and
ambulavimus vias difficiles: viam autem domini ignoravimus. Sap. 5.
because they both sail in the same Sea, and are both likewise exposed to the
selfsame fortune; yet I can demonstrate many other miseries which are peculiar
to the wicked alone, and these are not improperly termed the Daughters of
iniquity, whose description will be much to our present purpose, because they
render the life of the wicked most abominable, and their body and mind, both
subject to a multitude of miseries. Hear, what they themselves do confess of
them: Alas! say they, we have wearied our selves in the way of iniquity and
perdition, We have walked in most difficult and sinister paths during our whole
lives, for We know nothing of the way of the Lord; by this their own discourse
we may very well conclude, that even as the Just enjoy a kind of Paradise here
upon Earth, and do expect a far more happy one in the other life; so the wicked
have in this World their Hell, to which a far more intolerable shall succeed
in the other, for evil Consciences proceed from Hell without doubt, and they
steer their course directly to the same Haven, where they shall be tormented
eternally. And their products have proportionable evils derived from several
causes, some of them are the effects of thy Justice O Lord, for thou art a most
just Judge in all thy proceedings, sometimes thou do order the sin to be
punished as soon as committed, and though thou do usually reserve the
punishment thereof to the other life, yet the wicked are very often afflicted
even in this life for the same. It Is most certain that as thou do govern the
whole World with a general providence, thou do also moderate every particular
therein with a peculiar Providence, so that, as the number of our Sins does
increase, our Punishments shall be multiplied to the same degree. This we know
by our many and fatal experiences, for what were all our disasters hitherto, as
so many Revolutions of Government, such vast alterations and changes in matters
of State and Religion, the various fortune of so many Kings, and Princes, Such
horrid disloialty in Subjects to their lawful Sovereigns, so many stupendous
and destructive Famines and Conflagrations, such inhumane and bloody Wars, so
many pestilential Distempers, such cruel Murders; so many private and public
dissentions and jars? They were certainly the just punishments of our manifold
and most grevious offenses: to make good what I say, that the punishment
immediately follows the sin, I produce what thou O Lord, said to Cain for a
confirmation, Nonne si been egeris recipies: si autem male, statim in foribus
peccatum aderit. Genesis 7. Deuteronomy. 7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted, but If thou do ill, Sin lies
at thy door; that is to say, the pain and punishment of the Sin is at hand, and
Moises in thy name says as much to the People of Israel; know then, that the
Lord thy God, he is God, the faithful God, which keeps Covenant and Mercy with
them that love him, and keep his Commandments, to a thousand Generations; and
repays them that hate him, to their face, to destroy them. He will not be slack
to him that hates him, he will repay him to his face. This word Statim, so
often repeated in Scripture, and which signifies a quick return, assures me
that besides the punishments thon have reserved for the wicked in the other
World, thou have also some in store whereby to chastise them, even in this
life, and immediately after the transgression of thy Law; So that as often as
they fall into Sin, so often they feel the heavy weight of thy just
indignation, they are tossed from one misery into another; from one tribulation
they fall into another; this day brought to the bar for their misdemeanors, to
morrow condemned to dye, and the next day shamefully put to death without
making any reflection upon what might be the fatal cause of their great
misfortune: For they do not believe the goods of nature to be thy benefits, and
consequently not deserving their thanksgiving for them, neither do they impute
their punishment to thy Wrath, nor as laid upon them by thy appointment, and
this blindness it is which prevents the amendment of their lives.

If there were no other evil in the World then the afflictions and miseries
which attend our bodies, it were not so much to be hated, neither should our
fear be so great to trade, and converse therein; but seeing our correspondence
and freedom with it, is so pernicions to our Souls also, which ought to be the
subject of our greatest care, as being the principal part of our essence, Pluet
super peccatores laqueos. Psalm. 10.6.
and a precious depositum, whereof We must give a strict account to thee, O
Lord, We are necessarily, and in all reason obliged to estrange our selves from
it, and more especially, for fear to be intangl'd in its Snares, which are so
numerous, that the Prophet says of thee, upon the wicked thon shall rain
Snares. O what an unspeakable number of snares must be in the world then, since
they are compared to the drops of Rain that fall from Heaven; and they must
fall upon Sinners too, because they, of all men, have the least care of their
hearts, of their senses, and consciences, they are the least solicitons to
avoid the occasions of Sin, and the least concerned for Spiritual Remedys, so
that being intimately acquainted with the World they cannot avoid falling into
these Snares which come like Rain upon Sinners. O Lord! thou do pour down
Snares upon Youth, Snares upon old Age, there are Snares in every state and
condition; Snares in Riches, Snares in Poverty, Snares in Honors, Snares in
opprobrys, Snares in Frindship, Snares in the Society of Men, as well as in the
company of Women, Snares in the Solitary Wilderness; Snares in Prosperity,
Snares in Adversity, Snares in all our senses; In fine, the Prophet cries out,
Snares upon all the Inhabitants of the Earth. O Lord! had thou vouchsafed to
open our eyes, as thou did those of blessed St. Anthony, Athanas. in vita St.
Antony.
We should see how the whole World is spread over with Snares, and so close,
that they touch one another; and we would also admire as he did, that any one
should escape: what wonder is it then that so many Souls should perish daily,
and that St. Bernard should fay, of ten Souls that flote upon the tempestious
Sea of this World, scarce one shall be fav'd; and who shall not hate so
dangerous a World, who should not fear to live in so dreadful a place, who will
not strive with all his might, and skill to avoid those Snares? who will dare
go barefoot among so many Serpents, and without Arms among so many Enemies;
who will believe himself secure among so many occasions of Sin, or who will be
so desperate as to cohabit with so many mortal infirmities without a Doctor, or
his prescription to preserve him from falling into one, or several of those
distempers? who will not use all his Endeavors to get out of this Egypt, out
of this land of darkness, out of this Babilonish Slavery, who will not ardently
desire to be set at liberty out of the scorching flames of this World, which do
as often provoke thee O Lord, to resolve upon our utter destruction, as the
wickedness of Sodom and Gomorha did solicit thee to so dreadful a chastisement,
as theirs was? Since that the World is so replenished with dangerous Snares,
designed to entangle our poor Souls therein, and send them Prisoners to the
dark dungeon of Hell, and withal, We meet every where with a Precipiece, the
very flames of vice have in a great measure deformed tho beauty of our Souls
already, who will then think himself safe to live any longer in a place so
thronged with mortal Enemies?

The Wise man sets us this Question, Prove. 6.
can a man take fire in his bosom, and his cloths not by burnt? or can one go
upon hot Coals, and his feet not be burnt? He that will handle Pitch, Eccle. 13.
says another cannot be free from a spot; no more can a Man that is always
conversant with the Proud be exempt from Pride; and this is the case of all us
poor Mortals, for We cannot expect to live in the World among so many Snares,
Aliquando incidam vna die in manum Sauli nonne melius est ut sugiam and salver.
1 Reg. 27.1.
and Ambushes without falling into them frequently. David was cruelly
persecuted by Saul, and often in danger of his sweet life, which made him take
a firm resolution to avoid his company, and never to come into his sight; for
says he, if I do not take this course, and secure my life by flying from the
danger; I shall certainly one time or other fall into his hands; let us make
use of the same means to secure our Souls from the World, and from all it is
false allurements; let us fly from them, or at least, (if We be so far engaged
therein that we cannot avoid it,) let us be sure to give it no place in our
hearts, which ought to be wholly consecrated to thee O Lord, who alone
deservest it entirely to thy self, without any Rival; for thou do love us
still (though We continue to be thy Enemies,) and desires only a grateful return
of love from us, that we may be made happy for ever. In our Baptism We gave
thee admittance into our hearts, with a promise to be faithful to thee
hereafter; thou art ready to take possession thereof, and to adorn it with all
thy holy Graces and favors; certainly we must be hard-hearted indeed, if we
refuse so favorable a motion from so good and so gracious a Savior. I am
consident thy endearing words, and most loving expressions will even force our
consent to so charming a request, and the rather that it is to our great
advantage, and the eternal Salvation of our Souls; Speak then O Lord, for We
shall all hear thee, and will (by the assistance of thy Grace) perform what
ever thou will command us to do.


SAVIOVR. O Man the greatness of my Paternal Providence for mankind in
general, and the excess of my love for those among them that are my faithful
Servants, should win the hearts even of the most obstinate, and most rebellious
that ever were heard of, nay, it should force them to pay me that small
tribute, I only require at their hands which is to love me with all their
hearts, and to fulfill my commands, with the most tender affection of a most
dutiful and obedient Servant. For the love I bear them, does far exceed that of
all worldly Fathers to their Children; and the care I take to provide for them
is altogether as great as my love; What Father was ever known to shed his blood
for his children, as I have done for mine; or give that attendance to his
Children, as I give to mine: I am both day and night present with them to
protect and defend them from all accidents, I stand by them in all their
tribulations to comfort them, and so temper their afflictions that their
extremity make them not despair; the Prophet Royal was sensible of the great
care I take of my Children in their afflictions; by this I know, Psalm. 40.11,
12.
says he that thou favourest me, because thou do not suffer mine Enemy to
triumph over me; thou upholdest me in my integrity, and set me in thy sight
for ever. So great is my love for my beloved Children that I never remove my
eyes from off them.

There Is no better testimony then that of a man, who knows what is said to be
true by his own experience; my Prophet can give thee a true account of my
ardent love for those that are so happy as to be of the number of my Children,
and Favorites, and therefore I would have thee to hear what he says of me, and
to fix thy self upon his undeniable deposition; behold, says he, the eyes of
the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that hope in his mercy, to
deliver their Souls from Death. The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous,
and his ears are open unto their cry. But the face of the Lord is against them
that do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the Earth. The Righteous
cry, and the Lord hears and delivers them out of all their troubles. The Lord
is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saves such as be of a
contrite Spirit. Many are th'afflictions of the Righteous, but the Lord
delivers him out of them all: Psa. 30.18. Psa. 34.15.
But evil shall slay the wicked, and they that hate the Righteous shall be
desolate. Whereas the Lord shall redeem the Souls of his own true Servants, and
Children; and none of all them that place their trust, and put their confidence
in him shall ever perish.

The greatest treasure that a Christian Man should wish to enjoy in this World
is the love and Providence of God, the more he knows them, and the surer he is
of their enjoyment, the greater should be his comfort, and confidence in the
same God. Thou must know O man! that the testimonies of Scripture relating to
the promises I give unto the Faithful of my love; Eccle. 15, 20.34, 19.
my care and protection of them are so many authentic Evidences, and
ratifications of the same, that they are no more to be questioned then is the
last Will and Testament of a dying man, which none ought to mistrust of
falsehood: Hear then, and take great notice of what the wise say of my great
love and care for Men. The eyes of the Lord are constantly fixed upon those
that fear him, there is not a step they go, nor an action they do, nor a word
they speak but he takes an account of; He is the powerful Protector of the
godly, the upholder of the virtuous, the Defender of the zealous, a comfort to
the afflicted, a refuge to the Just from the Scorching heat of Lust, and all
other vices, a Preserver from all mortal offenses, their main help in all their
adversitys, exalting their Souls, illuminating their eyes, giving them life,
health, and his everlasting blessings; O how many kinds of employments do I
take upon me for the welfare and preservation of man! Apud Dominum gressus
hominis dirigentur, and viam ejus volet, cum ceciderit non collidetur, quia
Dominus supponit manum suam. Psalm. 36.23, 24.
The Prophet Royal gives me another office, which ought mightily to encourage
all Christians to put themselves entirely under my protection, which likewise
adds very much luster to my divine love for my faithful and loving Servants.
The steps of a good man, says he, are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in
his way. Though he should fall, he shall not be utterly cast down; for the Lord
upholds him with his hand. Consider seriously this amourous expression, and see
what hurt can come to a man that falls upon so sweet, and easy, and so gracious
a cushion, as are my sacred hands? none at all; for I will preserve them so
carefully, that not even the least harm shall come upon 'em; and if any should
be so peremptory as to afflict, or wrong any that is under my protection, I
shall take it for an injury done to my self; Qui vos tangit, tangit pupillam
oculi mei. Zacha. 2.
for He that touches them, touches the apple of mine eye. Certainly this
special care I take to protect the Righteous, is a most convincing argument of
my great love for them; and the command I lay upon my Angels to keep and
preserve them in all their ways, is altogether as great a proof of my tender
kindeness, and especially, Psalm. 90.
the strict charge I give them to bear men up in their hands, lest they should
dash their feet against the Stones; O Man consider how highly the Righteous are
honored by me, in that I have appointed my Angelical Spirits to bear them up
in their Arms; What Pope, what Emperor, what Monarch in the World was ever so
well supported? Beasts or Men's shoulders at most are enough to carry them, but
my Angels from Heaven are ordered to bear my Children even in their hands,
wherever they go.

It Is usual with Elder-Brothers (if they be not of a moross nature indeed) to
carry their younger-Brothers in their arms when they are not able to go
themselves, and this kindness my Angels do faithfully perform to the just (as
being their Elder Brothers) not only in their life time, but also in their
death, as thou may read in Scripture, Luc. 16. Psalm. 33.
where Lazarus after he died, was carried by the hands of Angels into Abraham's
bosom. And my Prophet avers that they surround the Righteous in this life, lest
any hurt should befall them from any side; and I keep a vigilant eye over them
my self that no evil may annoy them; In fine they shall tread upon the Lion,
Psa. 91.13, 14, 15, 16.
and Adder: The young Lion and the Dragon shall they trample under their feet,
because they have fixed their love upon me, therefore will I deliver them: I
will set them on high, because they have known my name. They shall call upon
me, and I will answer them: I will be with them in all their troubles, I will
also deliver them, and honor them too; I will bless them with a long life, and
show them my Salvation at the hour of their death. When the King of Syria came
with a numerous Army to take my Prophet Eliseus Prisoner, his Servant felt so
great an Agony of trembling, and was so terrified at the sight of so dreadful a
power, 4 Reg. 6.17
that my Prophet prayed heartily I should open his eyes, to let him see the far
greater number of Angels which were on his side, to beat down that vast
multitude which came to annoy him; whereupon the Servant was animated, and
seemed to dare his Adversaries, or at least to make slight of them; had I
opened thine eyes likewise, and set thee the question, what do thou see in
Sunamite, that is my Church, or every Soul that lives in the state of Grace,
thou would answer; I see great Armies of Angels on every side of her; O what
a puissant Guard is this! sure there is no danger of any disaster falling upon
my faithful Servants whilst they are so extraordinary well protected? Quid
videbis in sunamite nisi choros castrorum. Cant. 7.


Solomon's Couch was environed with sixty Men of the Strongest and stoutest of
all Israel, with their drawn Swords in their hands and were all expert in
Martial discipline, each one well Armed at all points for fear of any nocturnal
incursions, Cant. 3.
or insurrections. This is only a figure, but a perfect representative of the
great care which I take to preserve, and protect the Righteous, otherwise how
could they, (being conceived in sin, and living in a frail and corrupt flesh,
prone to all evil, and among so many snares, and powerful allurements to evil)
pass over as many years without the least mortal Sin? this is the wonderful
effect and chief benefit of my Divine Providence and Protection, which is so
extraordinary great that it does not only preserve them from evil, but changes
the very evil which they had carelessly committed into a subject of greater
good, Diligentibus Deum omnia cooperantur in bonum Romans 8.28.
because that by this little stumble they got, they become more wary, more
humble and more thankful to me: who have withdrawn them from so great a danger,
and forgiven them an offense against my infinite Majesty. This was an occasion
of St. Paul's saying. Diligentibus deum omnia cooperantur in bonum Romans 8.28.
We know all things work together for good, to them that love God. If this
great favor be worthy of all Men's admiration, how much more astonishing will
it be, that I show this great Mercy not only to my beloved Servants, but also
to their Children, and to their Children's Children after them, as I do
solemnly declare in these words. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, Exodus 20.5
visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the third and fourth Generation of
them that hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and
keep my Commandments. David is a sufficient President hereof, for I did not
reject his Children for many Ages; and though their sins have often deserved my
abandoning them, yet I had patience with them for the love and esteem I bare to
David their worthy Father, and my faithful Servant.

When Abraham sent his Servant to find out a competent, Genesis 17.
and virtuous Wife for his dearly beloved Son Isaac, I had a special care to
direct him the safest and best way, and also to bring his business to a most
prosperous conclusion, and all was for the great love and kindeness I had for
his Master; Genesis 39
I would do as much to a bad Master for the sake of a good Servant, and have
already done it to Potiphar the Egiptian, for the sake of my Patriarch Joseph,
for I have multiplied all his substance as well in his house, as in the Fields,
not upon his own account, being an unbelieving Heathen, but merely for the love
I had for his chaste and godly Servant. What mercy, what care, what Providence
can be greater then this? and is he not a mad man indeed that will refuse to
serve so good, so liberal, and so bountiful a Lord as I am to all those that
serve me, and who am so careful of themselves, Capillus de capite vestro non
peribit. Luc. 21.28.
and of all that concerns them, that, I cannot suffer so much as one hair of
their head to be lost.

The effects of my Providence are so many, and so wonderful, that I am commonly
called in Scripture the Father of the Righteous, Psalm. 103.
and I likewise call them my dearly beloved Children: my Providence promoted
the Prophet royal, and was favorable to him upon all occasions, neither was he
ungrateful, or unmindeful of my benefits, for He gives me this Atonement of his
grateful acknowledgement, Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within
me, Bless his holy name. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his
benefits, Who forgives all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; who
redeems thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and
tender mercies, who satisfies thy mouth with good things: by him thy youth is
renewed like the Eagles. The Lord executes righteousness and judgment for all
that are oppressed. He made known his ways to Moises, and all his actions unto
the Children of Israel. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
prone to mercy. He will not always chide us, neither will he keep his anger for
ever; He has not dealt with us as our sins have deserved: nor has he rewarded
us according to our iniquitys. For as the Heaven is High above the Earth, so
great is his mercy toward them that fear him. As far as the East is from the
West, so far has he removed our transgressions from us, even as a Father does
pity his Children, So the Lord pittys them that fear him, for he knows our
frame, and he remembers that we are nothing but dust. Esa. 63.16.


The Prophet Esaiah, thinking the name of Father did not sufficiently express
the tenderness of my love, because it has been never yet paralel'd by any
mortal Parents, says, Lord! thou art our Father indeed, Abraham is ignorant of
us, and Israel does not acknowledge us. Thou O Lord art our Father, our
Redeemer, and thy name is from everlasting; and though they be our Father
according to the flesh, yet they don't deserve the name thereof; it is a
qualification due to thee alone, for their love for us is no more then a
shadow to that which thou have expressed to us upon all occasions, my love
rather resembles that which a good natured Mother bears to her child, and
therefore I compare my self to the most passionate of the Sex. Can a Mother
forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son of her
womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me. Esa.
49.15.
Can any Mother speak with a more tender expression of love; who will be so
blind, so stupid, and so far from good nature as not to rejoice at the very
sound of these superamourous words, which are able to revive the deadest heart
that ever was to all motions of love, or devotion? what man (though never so
great a drone) hearing me give him this extraordinary assurance of my most
ardent love, and paternal Providence, will not run with the spouse in the
Canticles after the sweet scent of my perfumes. I am a God that speaks to thee,
and the eternal verity too, which was never guilty of the least falsehood, whose
riches have no limits, and whose power is of the same nature with the rest of
my attributes, which are all infinite, I am therefore him only thou should
fear to offend, and in whom thou should place all thy hopes and confidence:
my words should comfort and rejoice thy heart, the title of honor I confer
upon thee, should unman thee so far as to take on the heart and spirit of a
child of God, and the assured demonstrations I give thee of my great Love and
Providence should breed in thee an everlasting abhorrence of the World, and all
it is allurements.

What more shall I say? Deuteronomy. 32.11. Deuteronomy. 1.31.
or to what shall I compare the love which I bear unto thee; the Eagle of all
Mothers, is the most tender of her little ones, and it is therefore the Prophet
says of me, as an Eagle stirs up her nest, flutters over her young, spreads
abroad her wings, takes them, and bears them on her wings, so the Lord has
dealt with thee, nay, thou have seen how the Lord thy God bears thee, as a man
does bear his young child in his arms, in all the way that ye went, until ye
came into this place. What could I do; that I have not done to my People to
wean their affections from the World, and settle them totally upon so good, and
so Cordial a Father as I am to them? I call them my beloved Children, and so
they are indeed, for thou shall find as many authentic testimonies as there
have been Prophets in the World from the beginning, that they are my Children
in effect as well by their Creation as by their preservation from all dangers.
The Prophet Jeremy will tell thee that I have loved them with an everlasting
love, Jerem. 31.
and that with loving kindness I have drawn them out of nothing to what they
are at present, and have preserved them as well from their temporal, as from
their Spiritual Enemies, whilst they remained submissive to my Laws, and gave
me the reverence which is expected from dutiful Children to their Parents; O ye
Nations! says the same Prophet, hear the word of the Lord, and declare it in
the Isles afar off, and say, the Lord that has Scattered the People of Israel
for their Sins, will gather them again, if they will cry to him for mercy, and
if they continue obedient to his commands, he will keep them, as a Shepherd
does his flock. For the Lord has redeemed Jacob, and has ransomed him from the
hand of him that was stronger then He. The same Prophet will tell thee also how
ready, and willing I am to be reconciled to my Children when they repent, He
represents me, as if I were overjoyed at the very hearing of their mournful
voice; I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, thou have chastised
me, and I was chastis'd as a Bullock unaccustomed to the yoke; turn thou me,
and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was
turned, I repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh: I
was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth:
thou has heard the repentance of a sorrowful Sinner; and his firm resolution to
lead a better life for the future. Now observe well my joyful expressions to
him. Yea Ephraim my dear Son? He is a pleasant Child indeed? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still: Therefore my bowels are
troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. All these
propertys exercised by me upon my beloved, deserve to be seriously considered,
for they are certainly able to inflame the most obstinate hearts with my love,
and why not, being I am so much enamored of them, though they be so refractory
to my laws, and such great enemies to their own welfare, that they do not
regard my earnest, and charming invitations.

But to oblige them the more to their duty to me, Joan. 14.15.
I tell them that I am the good Shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of
mine: But how do thou know them, O Lord? with what eyes do thou behold
them? As my Father knows me, even so know I my Father, and with the same eyes
that I behold my Father, and my Father beholds me; I behold my sheep. O most
blessed Eyes! O most happy aspect! O wonderful Providence! What greater glory,
what richer treasure, or what greater Riches can any Man desire, then to be the
worthy object of my divine Aspect, and to be looked upon with the same eyes
that my Father beholds me? Ezech. 34, 11, 12, 13.14. etc.
What! an adopted Son only to enjoy the privilege, and chief prerogative of
the only and dearly beloved Son of God? O the main advantage! O the unspeakable
favor! Hear how the holy Ghost extolls the superexcellent benefit of this
peculiar Providence by the mouth of my Prophet: Behold, I, even I will both
search my sheep, and seek them out, as a Shepherd seeks at night for the sheep
which are strayed or scattered from his Flock in the day; so will I seek out my
Sheep, and will deliver them out of the places, where they have been scattered
in the cloudy and dark day. And I will bring them out from the People, and
gather them from the countries, and will bring them to their own Land, and feed
them upon the Mountains of Israel by the Rivers, Ezech. 34. ult.
and in all the inhabited places of the Country. I will feed them in a good
pasture, and upon the high Mountains of Israel, shall their food be: there
shall they lie in a good Fold, and in a Fat Pasture shall they feed upon the
Mountains of Israel. I will feed my Flock, and I will cause them to ly down
says the Lord God. I will seek that which was lost, and bring back again that
which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken? and will
strengthen that which was sick: But I will keep the fat and the strong, and
will feed them with judgment. I will make with them a Covenant of peace, and
will cause the evil Beasts to cease out of the Land, and they shall dwell
safely in the Wilderness, and sleep in the woods. And I will make the places
round about my hill a blessing, and I will cause the shower to come down in his
Season, and there shall be showers of blessing.

Tell me, O man! what greater care could be expected from a watchful Shepherd,
or what sweeter words could I make choice of to express my unspeakable
kindeness for all mankind, for they are the Sheep that I have taken so much
labor and care to preserve, they are that dear Flock for which I have spilt my
blood, and lost my life, and therefore thou must not understand the words of
the Holy Ghost of any material or brutish Flock; No, no, He means thee and the
rest of mortals, and therefore He concludes, Esai. 40.11
ye are my Flock, the Flock of my Pasture are Men. They are my Sheep, and I am
their Shepherd; neither is it a common Pasture I promise unto them, nor the
abundance of Earthly wealth, but my own Flesh and Blood which contains a vast
treasure of spiritual graces, and of a peculiar Providence, whereby, as a
gracious and bountiful Lord I do rule and protect my Spiritual Flock. All this
is consonant to what another Prophet says of my great care and tender love for
ungrateful mortals; He shall, says he, feed his Flock like a true Shepherd
indeed; Esa. 40.11.
for he shall gather the young and the weary Lambs, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead the sheep that are heavy with young ones, and
carry them in his arms too, if they be not able to go, what can be said more
charming? The words of the Prophet Royal are indeed no less, for they seem to
proceed from a heart thoroughly inflamed with my love: The Lord says he, is my
Shepherd, and therefore it is impossible that I should want; having so good, and
so bountiful a Keeper; He makes me to ly down in green Pastures: He leads me
besides the still-waters, and (which is a far greater benefit then all the
rest) he has converted my Soul, and has restored unto her, her former beauty
which was wholly lost by Sin; and now He leads me in the Paths of Righteousness
for his holy names sake; I might tell thee of several other propertys which are
given to me in Scripture; as that of King, because I govern, and defend my
People; that of Master, because I teach, and instruct them how they are to
decline iniquity, and keep always within the ways of Righteousness? a
Physician, because I cure them of all their distempers, as well Spiritual as
temporal; but the sweetest name of all, and that which pleases me most, is that
of Spouse, because it represents my love, and Providence to mankind more amply
and of greater importance to them, for being their Spouse. Genesis 2.
I must forsake Father and all, to adhere unto them, and put on their nature
too, so that they and I shall be henceforth as two in one flesh: O says St.
Paul, Ephesians. 5.32.
this is a great Mystery: But I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Jere.
3.4.
It Is so great a mystery that thou and all mankind have reason to love me
above all creatures in the World, and to cry unto me, Thou art our Father
indeed, our powerful protector, the Guide of our youth, and the only keeper of
our integrity; nay says St. Ambrose, St. Ambr. de Virg.
thou art all things unto us, if we be wounded, thou art a Physician to cure
us; if We be in a Feverish heat, thou art a fountain to quench our drought; if
We be laden with iniquity, thou art the Lamb that came from heaven to take away
the Sins of the World; if We be in need of help, thou art of an omnipotent
power, and thou have the Will to assist us in all our necessities: if We fear
Death, thou art life everlasting: if We desire Heaven, thou art the way to it:
if We be willing to avoid darkness, thou art the Light; if We want Food, thou
art the life-giving bread. Tell me O Man, can thou imagine any thing in this
World more glorious, more precious, more lovely, more honorable, or more
advantageous to thy Soul then to enjoy me, who am thy Creator, thy Redeemer,
thy preserver, thy Lord, thy Father, thy Shepherd, thy Physician, thy Master,
thy Keeper, thy Bearer, thy Strong wall, thy Defender, thy Castle, thy Spouse,
and thy All in All; What treasure can any man have in this World to confer upon
his Frind that is to be compared to the least of all these benefits. Laetamini
in Domino and exultate justi and gloriamini omnes recti cord Ps. 32.11.
The consideration hereof makes the Prophet Royal invite all the Righteous to
rejoice, and to be glad in the Lord, and all those that are upright in heart to
shout for joy, as if He would say, let others rejoice in the Riches and Honors
of the World, others in the Nobility of their blood, and high extraction,
others in the Friendship and favor of Kings and Princes, others in the
excellency and preheminency of their Stations and Dignitys; but ye that have
God for your Lord, for your possession, for your everlasting Inheritance,
rejoice in good earnest, and glory in the peaceable fruition of so great a
treasure, for your happiness is greater then theirs, by how much God is more
excellent then his Creatures, Psalm. 143.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
as my Prophet declares in these words; Quit me O Lord, and deliver me from the
hand of strange Children, whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a
right hand of falsehood: That our Sons may be as Plants grown up in their youth;
that our Daughters may be as corner Stones polished after the similitude of a
Palace; that our Gardens may be full, affording all manner of store; that our
Sheep may bring forth thousands and ten-thousand in our Fields, that our Oxen
may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in nor going out; that there
be no complaining in our Streets, Happy is the People that be in such a case:
Beatus Populus cui Dominus Deus ejus. Psalm. 143.15.
But He said from the very intrinsic part of his Soul, that happy, and ten
thousand times happier is that People, whose God is the Lord; and he gives this
reason for it; He that enjoys him, is in possession of that one good, which
comprehends all goodness that can be desired, or thought of. Let who will glory
in those terene and transitory blessings, as for my part says he, I will
(whilst I breath,) glory in the Lord my God alone; and so says the Prophet
Habacuk too; Have -- 17, 18, 19.
Though the fig tree should not blossom, though there should be no fruit in the
Vines, though the labor of the Olive should fail, and the fields should yield no
meat, though the flock should be cut off from the Fold, and there should be no
herd in the Stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation. The Lord God is my strength and he will make my feet like Hinds
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high Places: To the chief singer on
my stringed Instruments.

These are the treasures, this is the glory which I have prepared even in this
life for those that serve me, and I think them sufficient motives for all
mortals to love, adore, and reverence me, who am so good and so gracious a Lord
to them. But on the other side, it is a subject of great displeasure to me to
see them, after all my goodness, so prone to neglect my Service, and run after
the false and fatal pleasures of the World, as though I were not worthy their
constant affections; But alas! It was ever so with mortals; their Ingratitude
is as ancient, in a manner, as the very Creation of the World, for the same
abomination I found among the Israelites, and have taxed them with it too, by
my Prophet Jeremy; Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the
families of the house of Israel. Jer. 25.31.
Thus says the Lord, what iniquity have your Fathers found in me, that they are
gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain? Be
astonished, O ye Heavens, at this horrid ingratitude! and what is it? It Is that
my People have committed two great evils; they have forsaken me in the first
place, who am the plentiful fountain of living waters; and in the next place,
they have hewed out for themselves broken Cisterns that can hold no water. O
ungrateful Generation, hear the word of the Lord! Have I been a Wilderness unto
Israel, or a land of darkness. Have they already forgotten the several
victories I gave them of their enemies, and the manifold blessings I have
conferred upon themselves for so many Ages? Is this the return they make me of
all my kindeness, to tell me confidently they will come no more unto me. Can a
Maid forget her ornaments, or a Bride her Attire? yet my People have forgotten
me, days without number, notwithstanding I am all their ornament, their glory,
their beauty, and all that can be thought of to make a People happy. O man! If
I did so much lament and grieve to see the People of Israel prove so ungrateful
to me, as to disown me, after all the favors I heaped upon them, which I must
confess, were but temporal Blessings: how much more reason have I to be
displeased with Christians, who have received from me so many, and such great
blessings as well temporal, as spiritual, and for whom I have suffered the most
cruel death that ever was heard of; and after all these extraordinary great
favors to be slighted by them every day more then other, nay, they every
moment crucify me anew with their wilful wickedness, Non hunc sed Barrabam.
Joan. 18.40. Nollumus hunc regnare super nos. Luc. 18.14. Jugum enim meum suave
est, and onus meum leve. Matthew. 11.30.
they willingly postpone me to a Barrabas, and tell me plainly they are better
pleased to have the world for their Lord and Master (though never so deceitful
and cruel,) then to be ruled by me, whose yoke is sweet and whose burden is
both light and pleasant.


MAN. O Most gracious Savior! Thou have reason to be displeased with us
indeed, had thou cast us off, and absolutely given us over into a reprobate
Sense, Video meliora, proboque; deteriora sequor. Ovid.
our ingratitude has deserved it; We have often experienced the tenderness of
thy love to us, and there is not a day, nor an hour, no, nor a moment of our
life but receives the bountiful influences of thy Paternal Providence; We know
likewise that thy yoke is sweet and that thy burden is both light and
pleasant: Psa. 83.11.
We are also convinced that a day in thy Court is better then a thousand spent
in the World, and that it were more for our Souls advantage to be a Door-peeper
in thy house, then to dwell in the Tents of wickedness, yet notwithstanding all
our knowledge of thy goodness, and of the World's falsehood, baseness, and
horrid deceits; We blind and graceless Wretches will forsake thee to serve so
cruel a Master, who will undoubtedly deal with us after all his ample promises
of great Fortunes, vast Treasures, rare Pleasures, just as the ungrateful Laban
did with poor Jacob, he made him to slave full Seven years to purchase the fair
Rachel, Genesis 19.
and in the conclusion He gave him for all his extraordinary pains and labor
but a blind, deformed and ill shaped Leah. To this Man the World will promise
long life and health, and cuts him off in the flower of his Age; to another, He
will promise Wealth and promotion, and after a deal of slavery to attain it, he
is still in the same station no better then a beggar: He inspires another with
great designs, he will push him on to struggle for a Crown, and when he comes
to it, he throws him into a precipiece with more have and worse luck, and
breaks his neck into the bargain. To another He will promise a great fortune by
Marriage, but when he is possessed of the Lady, and thinks himself happy for
ever; he finds himself more unfortunate then before, for in lieu of getting
Wealth by her, he loses what he had of his own, and is clapped into prison to
boot, for her debts. If I should traverse the circuit of the World, behold
Countries, view Provinces, look into Cities, enter into private Houses, and to
the Palaces of Princes, I shall hear nothing else but lamentable complaints of
the Worlds deceits; one will deplore the loss of his plentiful Estate, another
the sudden death of his Eldest Son contracted, and ready to be married to a
great Fortune. Another mourns for the loss of his Daughter and of her great
Portion too, whereof he cannot avoid the payment, and that adds mainly to his
great sorrow. Another will tell me that he spent much money in courting a rich
Widow, in hopes, to purchase a good Estate with the products of her
considerable Joynter, and that (to his utter destruction) she died as soon as
he was married to her: This Lady will lament that she was deprived of her first
love; another, that she has very bad success in her Lovers, for they do all
slight her. The Merchant will complain of a great loss he had at Sea; The
Soldier, that he is not preferred according to his deserts, and withal, that he
is like to starve for want of his pay. The Usurer will tune up his pipes to the
loss of ten per Cent. and of his principal too, which was very considerable. In
fine, there is no state or condition but will have something, or another to say
of the Worlds deceits.

Can there be a greater deceit then what We see daily before our eyes? The
World does promise renoun, and everlasting fame to all his Followers; yet we
see they are no sooner dead then forgotten. There Is not one, of a hundred
thousand of those gallant sparks (which have made a great figure in this World
when living) now remembered: no, nor once named. What is become of all those
renowned Heroes, those famous Generals, those superior Officers, those
marshial Captains those stout and desperate Soldiers, those learned and wise
Councillors, those Eminent Dukes, those great Princes, those powerful Kings,
and Emperors, those excellent Queens, those worthy Lords and Ladys? who
remembers them now? or who once thinks of them? not one, their memory has
perished with their life, to fulfill the Prophets prediction of 'em; and to
accomplish the words of Job, Perijt memoria little cum sonitu. Psalm. 9.8. Job.
20.8. Psalm. 1.4.
their remembrance shall be as Ashes trodden under foot; and those of holy
David; they shall be as dust blown abroad with the wind. Paul one of the first
Hermits, lived forescore and ten years in a Wilderness, and during so long a
time he never conversed with Men, nor knew any of the World's intrigues, He
made himself altogether an Alien to it, yet the World remembers him still and
honors his memory too; whereas all those great Persons, I but now mentioned,
that made it their chief business to know, and to be known to the World, are
now clearly forgotten; so that I may very well compare it to a covetous and
forgetful Host, who if he sees his old Acquaintance pass by his Inn in a poor
condition, He takes no notice of him, and if the old Cavalier should repine at
his strangeness to him, and tell him that he was formerly a very good Customer
to his house, his reply will be, that he believes so, but so many comes that
way, that he does not take notice of all; such an Innkeeper must be dealt
with, as St. Paul, and others of the same Spirit, dealt with the World, We must
use him ill, and take no notice of him, but pass by him without giving him so
much as a bare salute, this is the only way to oblige him to remember us, and
make him speak of us too, very often, though We should be in another Country, or
perhaps rotten in our graves.

The World was never better set forth in it is own colors, then by a certain
learned Author who tells me, that it seems to the eye noble, goodly, fair,
friendly, free, and gorgeous; but when it comes to the proof, We find it is
qualitys quite contrary, and are experimentally convinced, that it is a mere
shadow, a perfect smoke, and a fine Image of plaister-work, that is full of
old rags and patches within side. And this makes St. Augnstin cry out, Aug. 13.
Medit.
O most miserable and deceitful World! Thy grief is true, but thy delight is
false; thy sorrow is certain, but thy pleasures are much of thy own nature,
fading, failing, vain, and altogether uncertain: Thy pains are permanent, but
thy repose false, and transitory: Thy toils are intolerable, and thy rewards
are most contemptable: Thy promises are great and Princely, but thy payments
are beggarly: Thy miseries are void of consolation, and thy happiness is
mingled with all kind of misery.

A man will easily discover the manifold miseries of the World, if he stands
above it, or far off from it, even as a mist is better seen at a distance, then
close by it; It Is therefore that virtuous and godly men have an absolute
abhorrence of it, because that in their eminent Station, they have a full
prospect of all its vanitys; but whosoever has any commerce with it, the first
entertainment he is to expect, is to be led blindfold with the prosperity
thereof, that he may not see the misery of his own condition, nor the way to
better himself; and in this case the world deals with his silly followers, even
as the Raven does with the poor innocent Sheep, the first thing he does before
he tramples on his back, is, to strike out his eyes, that he may not see the
way to escape his tyranny.

This is exactly the world's practice; no sooner has he bereft his poor and
wretched Citizen of his Spiritual Sight, Matthew. 4.
and put him in that distressed condition, that he knows not how to judge
between good and evil, vanity and verity, true and false pleasures, but he
works him asleep, binds him sweetly, and deceives him pleasantly, torments him
in great peace and rest; gives him a Proud Spirit, which shall place him upon
the Pinnacle of greedy Ambition, and thence shows him all his alluring dignitys,
and charming Preferments. The Worlds projects do not end thus, He has his
deceitful Merchants, that when they make sale of their Cloth and other goods,
show the first and last part of them, but will not admit the buyer to view,
search and see thoroughly, lest he should discover the cheat. He has several
hundreds of false Prophets at his command to flatter, and divert him, (as they
did Achab) from hearing Michael's counsel, 1 Reg. 22.
or taking any notice of the torments of his Conscience, that tells him of the
dangerous state of his deluded Soul. He has a thousand sly and cunning fishers
that will lay pleasant baits to draw him into further mischief. He has a
thousand times more Strumpets of Babylon at his pleasure then Solomon had of
Queens and Concubines, Apoc. 17.
and these he imploys to present him provoking liquours out of their golden
Cups. But alas! it is a draught of deadly poison to their Souls. Jud. 4.
He has at every door of his enchanted Palace, an alluring Jael to entice him
to take off his fatal delights and pleasures; each of them having their hammer
and nails, to drive through his brains when he is in a fast sleep. 2. Reg. 1.
He has also a flattering Joab in every corner ready to embrace him with one
arm, and murder him with the other, Matthew. 24.
and a false Judas likewise, to give him a kiss, and betray him at the same
time to such enemies, as will take delight to torment him. O my Soul! Jo. 21.
let us fly with all speed from so perfidious, so pernicious, and so dangerous
an Enemy, for if We should love him, he will hate us, if we should put our
confidence in him, he will certainly deceive us: If we should serve him, he
will afflict us: if we should honor him, he will debase us: if we should be of
his faction, he will undoubtedly damn us: In fine, if We should be so enamored
with the World, as to love, and adore it more then God himself, and should we
make our selves his absolute slaves to be the more in his favor, he will
certainly prove another Nabal to us at the fag end of our mortal life, and give
us the same answer, and the same entertainment as he gave to David, and to his
Servants, that is, 1 Reg. 25.
to send us into the next world with a surly kick for all our pains taken in
his Service, and with a who is David, or who is the Son of Jesse, that I should
know him. Let us therefore my Soul! take notice of David's advice to all
mortals, and look upon the World hereafter not only as a liar, but a mere
Impostor, let us then fly from all it is pleasures and treasures, and
principally, because thou have O Lord, Psalm. 4. Matthew. 3. Grego. hom 5 in Evang.
called them thorns, as indeed they are; for even as a Man when he is cast
naked among thorns, cannot choose but have his body rent, and torn, and made
bloody: So any worldly man's Soul harrass'd with the manifold cares and thoughts
of heaping up wealth, must be strangely perplexed with the restless pricking of
the same, neither can she be free from mortal wounds, having so many strong
temptations and pressing allurements to bring her to Sin. We have a vulgar
story whose moral part shows that Riches cannot be possessed without anxiety
and great care, A certain man of a mecanick calling, having nothing to support
himself and family but what he purchased by his honest labor, lived
notwithstanding very merrily; and urter'd daily so many pleasant strains, as
evidently avere the products of a mind not only easy, and contented, but void
of all tormenting care. This being observed by an Usurer, (a daily witness of
his poor but happy life) that was not a little amazed to see him so
necessitous, and withal so merry; he resolved to try whether money would allay,
or increase his mirth. And thereupon conveyed a hundred pound into his homely
habitation, really thinking, that Sum would augment the poor man's mirth to
excess; but the conclusion was directly opposite to his expectation, the man
quits his business, is employed in counting his newfound treasure; he sung no
more that day, nor did the night give him any rest, only the opportunity to
muse more deliberately how he should dispose of his Cash, a thousand projects
present themselves: either to enlarge his shop, or to take a whole house and to
improve his wealth by letting of lodgings; now he was for purchasing a spot of
ground to build upon, and immediately for putting it to interest in order to
prefer his Children; in the morning he returns to his usual business, but 'twas
so heavily and with so dejected a countenance, that his neighbors admired at
the sudden change of the man, and asked him what he ailed, and what the cause
might be that interrupted them the hearing his delightful and merry voice that
morning above all others: among the rest the Usurer came to see him, and
hearing what moan his neighbors made for his so sudden melancholiness, he
begged their excuse expressing himself sorry that the man had lost his mirth,
that was so recreative and pleasant to them, demanding withal his bag of money,
which he left there the day before; what said the poor man, does that treasure
belong to you? why then take it in Gods name, for had it stayed longer with me,
I should certainly have run mad: No sooner was he quit of his Mammon, but he
cleared his brows, tuned his voice, and returned to his business and merry
notes.

This is an argument that Riches bring trouble and affliction with them, Eccl.
1, 2, 3, 4. Phil. 4.
and Solomon the wisest of men confirms it; and St. Paul avers that where the
love of Riches is once settled, the peace of God is utterly excluded; and this
is a greater loss then our understanding can comprehend; in a word that man who
puts his heart in his treasure has a restless Soul, and this is the greatest
misfortune incident to mankind. He is like a Clock, (which when winded up)
will never leave it is motion till the weights be down, it is the same with him;
his mind will never be at rest whilst so many cares, and anxietys possess it,
which are to it, as weights to a clock that keep it always going; so when
others are in their sweet repose, he is breaking his brains contriving how to
manage his money to the best advantage.

Of all the Plagues that God was pleased to impose upon the Egyptians for their
many and grievous sins; Exodus 8.
that of the flys was most intolerable because they were so cruelly tormented
by the very creatures they had adored for Gods; I may say the same of worldly
men, that of all the Miserys and troubles which God lays upon 'em for their
offenses, this is one of the greatest, to be tormented and grievously perplexed
with the cares even of that thing, which they adore as their God, and in which
they place their chiefest felicity: And let them use all their skill to forget
these cares, they cannot possibly expel them; and this adds much to their great
disaster: no, they will assault them in the morning, and shall bear them
company all day, neither shall they leave them at night, no, they will enter
the bed with 'em, and deprive them of rest, they shall be the subject of their
dreams; Qui nocte nec die non dabunt requiem. Jer. 16. Quia abstuli pacem a
populo isto, dicit Dominus, and misericordiam, and miserationes. Jer. 16.
so that I may well compare them to those unmerciful Tyrants, wherewith thou O
Lord, do threaten the wicked by thy prophet, which shall allow them no
comfort or ease, either night, or day. This is a very great affliction I
confess, and the only reason hereof, is, that thou have taken away thy peace
from so terrene a People, plunged so extremely in their pleasures, without the
least care of their Souls, or thought of heaven; and therefore have they
merited a divorce from thy mercy, and a continuance of their deplorable state
even without hopes of thy commiseration.

And really (if I give credit to what the Prophet Esaias says of them) their
condition is so bad; Esai. 59.
that it cannot be better expressed then by his own words. They put their trust
in things of nothing says he, and do talk of vanitys: They conceive labor and
bring forth iniquity: They break the eggs of Serpents, and weave the webs of
Spiders: He that shall eat of their eggs shall die; and that which is hatched
thence shall be a Cockatrice. Their webs shall not make cloth to cover them,
for that their works are unprofitable: and the work of iniquity is in their
hands. There Is not a word in all this, the Prophet's description of the Rich of
this World, but contains a mystery: by the first, that they put their trust in
things of nothing, we may very well conceive the vanity of Riches, which if
enjoyed to day, to morrow they may be snatched from us, and perhaps our lives
too, for lucre of them: And he who takes them from us, may likewise lose them
soon after with the same damage, if not a greater, I mean his Soul's loss for
ever. They conceive labor, O what a deal of toil do poor worldlings take to
heap up treasures, how many perilous voiages to the East, and West Indies, how
many tedious journeys by land, to this and that other Fair, how many dangers of
being robbed, and of losing their lives too? Day and night they are afraid of
Thieves; nay, they dare not trust their own Servants, no, nor their Wives, with
the keys of their treasures for fear they should rob them of their money; and
if any thereof be taken away, O what an angry countenance will he put on! what
curses, what Imprecations will he make? What a consternation will the whole
Family be in? every one striving to clear himself, will make his earnest
Address to the Conjurer; and as he is apt to tell lies, being so great a
familiar with Lucifer, he may make the innocent criminal, and the criminal
innocent; for with him favor goes by bribing, and he that gives him most,
shall have his best word, though he were the greatest Knave in the whole Pack:
this is the labor, now let us hear th'Iniquity it brings forth, is there not a
woe pronounced to them, which draw iniquity with the ropes of vanity? The same
Prophet says that they break the Eggs of Serpents. Pliny the naturalist tells
us, (and our own experience confirms it,) that the bird which sits upon the
eggs of a Serpent, by breaking and hatching them, brings forth a venomous brood
that will most certainly be the utter destruction of her self. It Is even so
with a man that sits (as it were) in brood upon his Riches, and does affect
them overmuch; they will certainly be the death of his Soul, and in the interim
will make him a most miserable wretch whilst he lives in this World, always in
fear of losing them; for they are as apt to change Masters, as the Spiders web
is to be broken with the least puff of Wind: this wants no confirmation, for
the man in the Gospel ratifys it, who with excessive care and labor had
gathered so vast a quantity of Riches, that he was forced to pull down his old
barns and build new to lay them in: and when that was done, he bids his Soul
enjoy her self, being really persuaded he should live splendidly and fare
sumptuously upon them many years; but his Soul was snatched that very night
from him, and all his great preparations were useless to him. This inconstancy
of Worldly wealth occasioned the said prophet to say, that the webs of those
weavers shall not make cloth to cover them withal, nor shall their works be
profitable to them, and that none but the works of Iniquity should remain in
their hands: whereby he lets us know that whoever loves, and follows these
vanitys, shall certainly load his Soul with so great a burden of iniquity,
that he will sink into the very lowest Hell, where those who had glutted
themselves with the World's pleasures and delights shall be grievously
tormented, and then they will know that their riches were thorns indeed, that
not only rent their hearts in this World, but will wound their Souls eternally
in the other. These thoughts are now far from their minds, but when their glass
is spent, and that grim Death appears unto them, O how bitter will the
remembrance thereof be unto those men that have placed all their happiness in
Riches? What a grief was it to Alexander the great, O Mors quam amara est
memoria tua homini habenti pacem indivitijs suis. Eccl. 41.
that had conquered most part of the World in less then twelve years, to see
himself seized on by Death, and Summoned to appear before thy most dreadful
Tribunal, when he desired most to live, and taste of the joy and delight of all
his victories? What a heartbreaking will it be to those that employ all their
time in building of houses, purchasing estates, increasing riches, procuring
dignities, making up matches, laying out vast sums to use, when they shall see
themselves, even as so many Princes Mules, discharged of their treasure, and
turned off with backs gaul'd into some nasty stable, nay, it will be far worse
with them, for after their long traveling in this World, laden with gold and
Silver; which had extremely galled their wretched Souls, they shall be
disburthened at the day of death, and sent away with their wounded consciences
to the dark and loathsome Stable of Hell, there to continue for an Eternity. O
my Savior? these considerations well meditated, are able to mollify a heart of
Steel, to move any man to a true repentance of his past follys, to breed in him
an abhorrence of the world, and of all its vanitys, and make him resolve to
employ the remainder of his days in thy Service, that art absolutely the best
of Masters, and whose rewards to thy faithful Servants are far surpassing the
pleasures and treasures of this deluding world, as thou do exceed the
creatures, Eternity, the Time, and the eternal joys of thy heavenly Court, the
short and transitory joys and delights of this Land.


SAVIOVR. HE must be a most perverse and hard hearted man indeed, that will not
love me after all the several benefits, and manifold favors which I have
conferred even in this life upon the generality of mankind, which are in a
manner nothing to what I have prepared for my Elect in the other, for these are
so incomprehensibly glorious, that eye has never seen, nor ear has ever heard,
neither is man's understanding capable of conceiving their excessive greatness;
for I am by nature infinitely good, amiable, and liberal, consequently what I
have promised, prepared, and decreed from all Eternity to bestow upon my Elect,
must be no less then my self (objective) as your Divines call it and
(formaliter) the most clear, the most delicious, the most pleasant, the most
blessed union, and fruition of my divine Essence for all Eternity. O the
Immense, the inestimable, the glorious, the Interminable felicity of a blessed
Soul! that shall live and reign with God who is infinite in beauty, in glory,
in power, in wisdom, and in finite in all his Attributes, that shall enjoy
clearly, and without any interruption his blessed Vision, so unspeakably
comfortable, and satisfactory to all her senses, and this too for an Eternity!
A God likewise, that is the abundant headspring of all delights, the
inexhaustible fountain of all goodness, the most opulent treasury of all
riches, pleasures, Joy, Perfection, and of all things desirable, or necessary
to complete her everlasting happiness! This is the essential and principal
reward of the Blessed. But besides these, there are other innumerable joys,
which I call Secundary rewards, and these are also so great, and so many, that
they do absolutely transcend all measure, and number, and will thou not O man!
love a God, who has loved thee gratis, and to that excess, as to give thee
himself, and all that is in his power. A God that most mercifully loved thee,
when thou were in actual rebellion against him; will thou not love the Eternal
Father who in the excess of his love for thee did not spare his only and dearly
beloved Son, but delivered him into the power of most cruel Enemies that
crucified him; and this was for thy sins alone, as well as for those of all
mankind? will thou not love him that has by the effusion of his most precious
blood freed thee from the power, and unspeakable anguishes of Hell, and it is
eternal torments, to place thee in the most happy company of his beloved in
glory? will thou not love him who has chosen thee even before the worlds
Creation, who has called thee by his Grace, and has predestined thee in
Christ from all Eternity? will thou not love me who am the only Son of God, in
whose Faith, and Grace thou liv'st, who has loved thee, who has suffered for
thee, who has called thee to his Service, who has redeemed thee from the
intolerable burden of the Old Law, from the damnable yoke of Sin, and from
the everlasting thraldom of Hell. O man! Will thou not love me who am so
fervent a lover as to purchase thy lost Soul, not with the Worlds contemptible
Coin, Gold or Silver, but with the most precious and Sacred blood of my whole
body. Will thou not love me who am thy Creator, thy Savior, and Judge, and who
was in mercy pleased to become thy Brother and Advocate too; nay, I am so much
in love with thee, that the day before I departed the world, I bequeathed unto
thee my most precious body and blood to seed thy Soul, as a perpetual monument
of my tender affection to all mankind. In fine, will thou not love me, who
besides the aforesaid Mercys, Benefits and Blessings, have given thee so
compassionate, and so potent a Mediatrix in Heaven, as is my most dear and
Superexcellent Mother; Saluted before my conception in these very words by my
Angel, Ave gratia plena. Luc. 1.28.
Hail Mary full of Grace, the Lord is with thee, Blessed art thou among Women,
Blessed is the fruit of thy Womb. Since I the Essential truth do affirm this,
they must be impertinent and reprobately Wicked, who deny her that Special
Prerogative.

Thou should love as much the Holy Ghost, for by his Wisdom thou were
Created, and by his Providence thou were governed, in so much, that thou can
not produce one meritorious act without his divine Inspiration, or actual
motion. Therefore it is his gracious goodness which gives thee the Will, and the
Power to perform any good thing, it is He that is pleased to inhabit,
illnstrate, and inflame thy heart with an ardent desire of thy eternal
Salvation. In a word, thy Obligation to love and honor the most glorious
Trinity, is the very same, as thou have to each Sacred Person therein
contained; It being the sole Source and cause of thy eternal Happiness. For
what the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost have done, the very same thing has
the Blessed Trinity done; being but one and the same God in those three
distinct persons.

O Man! shall not all these powerful motives replenish thy Soul with divine
love, even as the Dew of Heaven does fill the Vegetives with vivifying juice,
or shall not this make my grace shine in thy Soul, as David's burning Lamps of
affection, Psa 63.5.
which no terene waters could ever extinguish! I say in thy Soul, that it may
disperse those filthy vapors of carnal affections, which have in a manner
lul'd her into a Lethargy; And as thou were created to enjoy the fellowship of
Angels, let these demonstrations of all my Favors to mankind in general, and
to thee in particular, kindle such a fire of divine love in thy Soul, as when
she departs thy body, she may ascend to Heaven in it is aspiring flames. Nolite
voeare vobis Patrem super terram, unus est enim Pater vester in caelis. Mat. 23.
Have thou not heard what I say in the Gospel to thee, and to all men; that ye
should not rely upon them ye call Father on Earth; for you have but one only
Father, who is in Heaven, and is really so in a far more eminent degree, then
is either Carnal, or Spiritual Father whatever: For from him thou did receive
thy Soul by his immediate creation; and whatever advantage thou have of nature,
from thy Parents, or from the Concurrence of any celestial and Second causes,
thou receivedst the same eminently from Him, who is the Principal Author of
all things, (Sin only excepted.) Thy Philosophers confirm this, for they tell
thee that every prime and Original cause does influence the effect more then
any second cause whatever. Omnis causa prima plus influit quam quaecunque causa
secunda. Arist. Ex quo omnis paternitas in Caelis and in terra nominatur Ephesians.
3.15.


If thou by all Laws, Natural, Divine, and Positive art strictly commanded to
love, reverence, honor and obey with all submission thy carnal Parents, how
much more ought thou to love, honor, adore and obey thy Heavenly Father,
who is the Original of all Paternitys, as well in Heaven, as on Earth, and from
whom all causes have their action, their motion, and their Fecundity. The
remisness and frequent failings of all mortals in this their incumbent duty,
gave me occasion to make this sorrowful complaint; Malac. 1.6.
the Son does hear his Father, and the Servant does both fear and obey his
Lord, and Master; If I be then the Father of mankind, where is their love,
their respect, and obedience to me? And if I be their chief Lord, and Master,
where is their fear and dread of displeasing me, and transgressing my
commandments? My Apostle seems to admire, so great a neglect; we have had says
he, Hebr. 12.9.
for our Tutors Fathers of the Flesh, and to those We have paid all submission
and reverence; and shall not We give a far greater respect to our Father in
Heaven, by whom, and from whom. We have our being, and preservation? If even
the very Heathens accounted it a most abominable crime in Children not to obey
their Parents, or to despise them, and not regard their commands and counsels;
and if in the old Law I have ordered all contumacious, Levit. 20.9
rebellious, and Avaritious Children to be even stoned to death without any
further Process, how much more nefarious a crime it is, to be refactory to the
omnipotent God and Father, and to be so great, and so cruel a rebel to him, as
to crucify him every moment in his dearly beloved Son? This is so heinous an
offense that I cannot but resent it, and say by my Prophet, will a man rob God
of his honor, and of all his Prerogatives; this is the common injury which the
generality of mankind has done unto me, for they have indeed robbed me, even
the whole generation of them.

Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth: I have nourished and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me The Ox knows his owner, Esai. 1, 2,
3, 4.23. etc.
and the Ass his Masters crib: But Israel does not know me, neither does my
People consider me. Ah! Sinful nation that they are, a people laden with
iniquity; a seed of evil doers, Children that are corrupted themselves, and
greater corrupters of others; they have all forsaken the Lord, they have all
provoked the holy one of Israel unto Anger. Their Princes are rebellious, and
the companions of Thieves: Every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards;
they judge not the Fatherless, nor does the cause of the Widow come unto them.
But I will ease me of my Adversarys, and revenge me of mine Enemies; then shall
come the utter destruction, and ruin of all Transgressors, and Sinners; and
they that have forsaken me to follow the World and it is unlawful pleasures,
shall be wholly consumed. They shall be as an Oak whose leaf fades, Psalm. 20, 9.
and as a garden that has no water; They shall be as Tow and Fire; and shall
both burn together, and none shall be able to quench their flames, and to
fulfill the words of my Prophet, I shall make them as a fiery oven in the time
of my Anger; I shall swallow them up in my wrath, and the fire shall devour
them.


A Check to MAN.
O Ungrateful man! Genesis 2.7.
have thou not justly deserved these dreadful effects of my heavy indignation
and Wrath? for in the very exordium of the World I created thee to my own Image
and likeness; I have instructed thee in the Law of nature which thou were to
observe, and to regulate thy actions by the dictates and Maxims thereof. I have
also printed the dictamen of Reason in thy Soul, that thou might thereby
discern betwixt good and evil, truth and falsehood, the Creature and thy
Creator: But thou ungrateful Wretch, and most unworthy of such extraordinary
favors, have from the very beginning shaken off my Yoke, broke my Chains, and
have declared openly that thou would no longer live submissive to my decrees,
no longer obey my Commands, neither would thou serve so good and so bountiful
a Master, but be a Tenant at will, to embrace whatever was most pleasant to thy
brutish passions, and most charming to thy rebellious inclinations; wherein
thou have transgressed the agreement that had passed betwixt us, broken the
Contract, violated the Law, and have canceled thy bonds wherewith thou had
bound thy self; and thy Descendents to the World's end, to live upright,
faithful, and obedient to my Will, and to my Commands for ever: And what was it
that engaged thee to incur the guilt of so horrid a crime? the fear only of
displeasing thy silly Wife, O ingratitude never to be paralelled! What, must a
foolish and fantastical creature be honored and obeyed? rather then I, who am
thy Omnipotent God, and Creator. I produced thee with (a faciamus only) out of
the bowels of the Earth, to make thee happy for an Eternity with the perpetual
fruition and vision of my divine Essence; but thou have perferr'd before so
immense and unspeakable a blessing, a created Good, vile in it is self, though
pleasant to the eye, and sweet to the taste, and what was it? It Is an eternal
shame, and an infinite disgrace for all mankind to hear in mentioned; 'twas no
less, then to postpone me, the Fountain of life, and all my Glory, for a
Trifle, an Apple. Heavens are you not astonished! that a reasonable man should
make so unreasonable and silly a choice. Thy incumbent duty, and indispensable
obligation was to adhere unto me all thy life, and to place all thy happiness
in me, who am, and ought to be, thy first and last end; but thou instead
thereof, have scattered thy affections amongst vain, frail and transitory
things, and to complete thy misfortune, thou have plunged thy self into many
several, and most abominable Idolatries. I gave thee express orders, to deal
with thy Neighbor as thou would thy self be dealt with, and to do him no
more injury then to thy self; yet thou have done the contrary a thousand times,
and have been refractory to that, as well as to all the rest of my commands.
And alas! it is too common a distemper with all mortals, for they deceive one
another in weight, measure, rule, signs, words, and tokens. I have commanded
thee to practice those famous precepts of the Decalogue, which are binding as
well by the Law of Nature, as by the very dictates of natural reason, and thou
have transgressed them all without the least Scruple, or remorse of conscience,
so that thou have corrupted thy Soul in all thy ways, and have made thy self
abominable by thy manyfold iniquitys, by thy hatred, by thy thieving, by thy
highway robbing, thy extortion, and oppression of the poor; thou make
nothing of murdering thy Neighbors, and depriving them as well of their
worldly substance, as of their reputation, and good name; Adultery, and even
Sins against nature, are no more with thee, then venial Sins; so that being by
thy Creation the best, and the most noble of all animals; thou have made thy
self a Beast, and more vile then the worst of Brutes, by submitting thy self
wholly to the most unruly passions of thy Sensualitys, and lustful desires; In
fine, all Creatures cry out against thee for revenge of so many, and such great
injuries, which thou have done to thy Creator.

A Check to the Christian MAN.
ANd thou, O Christian Man! have more dishonored me, then even the very
Pagans, and Infidels. I told the Jews a while before my Passion, that had I not
come my self, and spoke to them, their Sins would not have been altogether so
grevious. How much more reason have I to say the same to thee, ungrateful, and
disobedient Christian? I have my self instructed thee, (or to speak more
properly) the Primitive Church in it is very Infancy, and left my Apostles also,
to teach and confirm them in my Precepts, and Evangelical Counsels, which they
firmly believed, and faithfully observed for several years, but especially
during the time of their greatest troubles, and grevious persecutions, wherein
Millions of thousands of 'em have suffered death courageously rather then deny
their Faith, and have wrought so many, and such stupendous Miracles that many
more Souls were converted by them, then had been by all the Preachings and
Instructions of either The Apostles, or their Disciples; so that in a very short
time all the Potentates, Sublimitys, and Dignitys of the World, all the
Subtilitys of Philosophers, all the magic Arts, and illusions of Wizards and
Witches, all the power of mankind, and their Earthly Kingdoms, were wholly
subdued and brought under my obedience. But alas! soon after I had conferred the
Blessing of a profound Peace upon my Church, and had utterly destroyed all her
Enemies, and heaped upon her Honors, Riches, Dignitys, and all prosperity
imaginable, and that her glory shined through all the World, her devotion began
to diminish, her Charity to grow cold, and she made of those very Ornaments,
which were given her by me to set forth the luster of her glory and the
greatness of my renown, the subject of her Pride and Vanity: and her Clergy
too, have changed that which ought to be spiritual, and only for the
maintenance of the poor, into their own temporal Emoluments, and have spent it
to entertain their carnal Friends and Relations, and to increase their own
Ambition and Lust; so that the wonderful beauty of her grace, the splendour of
her exquisit virtues, the glory of her heavenly wisdom, the excellent gifts of
the Holy Ghost, the luster of the eight Beatitudes, of the twelve Fruits, and
the rest of the manifold graces and favors which I conferred upon her, in order
to make her an accomplished Spouse to my self, is in a manner totally decayed
in her, and is her self so much altered from what she was in her Primitive
time, that of a powerful Queen which had formerly the whole Universe at her
command, without any Adversarys to disturb her, she is become a poor handmaid
disrobed by her Enemies, and by them confined to live in one small corner of the
Earth; neither is she there free from persecutions and troubles, but laments
both day and night the sinful and ruinous state of her incorrigible and
rebellious Children. Quomodo obscuratum est aurum mutatus est color optimus
etc. Lament. Jere. 4.1.
Have I not great reason then to bewail her condition, and say, Alas! how is
the gold become dim! How is the most fine gold changed! the stones of the
Sanctuary are cast out into the streets. The precious Sons of Zion comparable
to fine gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers. They that did feed
delicately, are now even hunger-starved, and they that were brought up in
Scarlet do embrace the dunghils. Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were
whiter then milk, and even more glorious than the most glistering Rubys, for
their Souls were adorned with grace, which gave them a far greater luster then
the most polished Saphires: But alas! now their visage is blacker then a coal;
they are not known in the streets: their skin cleaves to their bones: nay it is
withered, and become as dry, and as black as a rotten stick. Thou O Christian
People! have with thy iniquitys; brought all these distasters and horrid
confusions upon my Church; thou art the fatal cause of all her deformity; thou
art the unfortunate instrument of all her dejections, oppressions and
slaveries, thou art likewise the sole promoter, and Actor of thine own
temporal, and eternal calamitys; and therefore the punishment of thy iniquity
shall be far greater then that which I have inflicted upon Sodom and Gomorrah;
for all their abominations and crimes, (though extraordinary great) were nothing
so heinous in my sight as are thy Sins; neither are the unbelieving Nations so
wicked and viciously given as are many thousands of Christians in this wicked
Age; So that, the Infidels who were so much enamored with the Christians of
the Primitive Church (by reason of their unspotted life, godly behavior, and
pious conversation,) that thousands of them forsook their Idolatrys to embrace
my Faith; had they known, and seen their sordid, their wicked, their Scandalous
life and conversation,) in these latter corrupt centurys (though they were never
so much inclined to be of the same belief) they would neither be of their
profession, nor would they so much as converse with so Scandalous a generation,
for they live, as if they were under no Law, and do Sin even against the Law of
Nature; whereas the Heathens have a veneration for modesty and honesty, and for
all other moral virtues, which are now adays totally neglected by Christians,
nay, they are so much avers'd from them, that the description which my Prophet
Ezechiel gives of the Sinagogues, abominations and villanys, may be very well
applied to their enormous crimes and offenses.

This general dissolution, and sinful liberty of Christians gave occasion to
several virtuous and zealous men to shed many bitter tears; and induced them to
believe that the generality of Christians had conspired even with all the
Devils of Hell to dishonor, and despise me, and that so publicly, and with so
much impudence, that even the very Heathens abhor their impietys, and are
opinionated that God has forsaken, and delivered them up into their power to
chastise them for their abominations, and wickedness, even as the People of
Israel were exposed to the rage and fury of Nebuzardan chief Commander of the
King of Babylon's Army; He himself tells Jeremy, Jerem. 41.2.
that he had his commission from me to destroy them. The Lord thy God says he,
has pronounced this evil upon this place, and all it is Inhabitants, and now the
Lord has brought it upon them, and has done according as he has said: Psalm 21^8.
because they have sinned against the Lord, and have not obeyed his voice. The
Prophet Royal is no less dreadful in his description of my Anger against the
Wicked, thy hands says he, shall find out thy enemies; thy right hand shall
find out those that hate thee, Thou shall make them as a fiery open in the
time of thine Anger: The Lord shall swallow them up in his Wrath, and the fire
shall devour them. Their fruit shall thou destroy from the Earth, and their
Seed from among the Children of men; for they intended evil against thee; they
imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to perform. Job. 20, 22.
Nay holy Job says, that the wicked in the fullness of their sufficiency shall
be in straits; that every hand of the wicked shall come upon them; that when
the wicked is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of his wrath
upon him, and it shall come upon him while he is eating. The Heaven shall
reveal his iniquity, and the Earth shall rise up against him: the increase of
his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow away in the day of his Wrath:
this is says he, the portion of a wicked man from God, and the Inheritance
appointed unto him by God.

Thou will tell me perhaps, that Christians would not be so very prone to vice
and wickedness, but that their Rulers and Superiors do spur them on by their
ill examples; and that I am rather to be blamed, because I had committed my
Flock to such mercenaries, and ravenous Wolves, who could not be ignorant of
what might follow in so scandalous a government, and chiefly for that I have
said, according as the Judge is, so the people will be, and that such will be
the Inhabitants of the City, as are the Magistrates; That the Pastors and
Rulers, which I have set over my Flock have acted rather like Tigers then
Pastors to them: for the whole generality of Christians are so missed by them,
that they fix their affections only upon such terene objects, as are most
pleasing to their criminal inclinations. But what is thy intention by making
this objection? Would thou indeed make me the Author of thy Wickedness? That
is not possible, for thou know that I am just in all my ways, and holy in
all my Works. Thou can not be ignorant, but that my choosing such scandalous
Pastors is an evident sign of my anger against the People, nay, Dabo Regem in
furore meo and Principes in indignatione mea. Ose. 13.11. Esa. 3.4.
thou have heard me say by one of my Prophets, I will give thee a King in my
anger, and Rulers in my indignation; and by another, I will give Children to be
their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them; And the People shall be
oppressed one by another, and every one by his Neighbor: The Child shall
behave himself proudly against the Ancient, and the base against the
honorable. Nay, Job. 34.30.
I will make the Hypocrite to reign for the sins of the People. By this thou
may infer, that if I withdraw the assistance of my grace from the wicked, the
fault is their own, and not mine, for I am always ready to comply with Sinners,
Prove. 1.26.
when they answer my expectation, and call; otherwise I will laugh at their
calamity, and mock when their fear shall come. As for those Superiors and
Rulers that do by their ill examples bring their Inferiors and Subjects to
utter destruction and loss of their Souls, I will certainly require them at
their hands, and they shall answer to me Soul for Soul; Ezec. 3.17.
for though I make use of them in this life to chastise my Flock, yet after all,
I shall condemn them to Hell, even as a compassionate Father does cast the rod
into the fire after he has whipped his dearly beloved Child therewith.

A Check to the Religious Man.
ANd thou O religious Man! (in naming thee I mean all those of thy profession)
whom I have chosen amongst all nations to be a peculiar People to my self, to
adhere unto me alone in all sincerity, to love me with all thy heart, and to
serve me with all the purity, perfection, and fervor imaginable. Will thou
also be of the number of those ungrateful Christians that combine with the
World to persecute me? have thou not declared thy self a mortal Enemy to it as
well by thy Solemn vows, as by thy Baptismal protestation? The three fatal
Armies the World brings into the field to fight poor Souls, and worst them too
(if they can) are the concupiscence of the Flesh, concupiscence of the Eyes,
and Pride of Life; to these three thou have declared thy self an implacable
Enemy; by thy vow of Chastity thou have depressed, or at least have sworn to
destroy the concupiscence of the flesh; by thy vow of Poverty thou have utterly
renounced the concupiscence of the Eyes, and by thy vow of Obedience thou have
made thy self an absolute stranger, and a professed Enemy to the Pride of Life;
And besides, thou have solemnly in the presence of God and his Angels protested
to renounce all proper love, as the only offspring, and fatal source of all
manner of vice. I call proper love that whereby a rational creature loves
himself in himself, and another for his own advantage, honor, and pleasure,
without any reference to God, or his last end. This is a monstrous crime, and a
Soul-killing sin: but the only way to destroy it, is to love thy self, and all
things whatsoever, purely in God, and for God alone; and to love God sincerely
for himself more then all; by so doing thou shall reign with God in his eternal
felicity. But if thou do really aim at so glorious a conquest of thy self,
thou must make use of the means to attain it, which are poverty, frugality,
mortification, penance, Fasting, and humiliation, thou must joyfully suffer
derision, injurys, tribulation, persecution, Adversity, Infirmitys, Subjection,
and all things that are able to debase, and depress thy old depraved man. This
is the only way to conform thy self to me, who have suffered all that is here
rehearsed, and more too for thy love; this is the way also to destroy thy
proper love, and to become a proficient in all sorts of virtue, in humility,
patience, meekness, sobriety, and Chastity, in the love of God, and that of thy
Neighbor, in penance, interior peace, and in all the gifts and fruits of the
Holy Ghost. In fine, there is nothing contributes more to the utter destruction
of that cursed and proper love, then the continual mortification of thy sinful
appetite and passions, and the powerful hatred of thy self; for he that hates
his life in this World, shall keep it to life Eternal. The perfect abnegation
of thy self together with the lively and cruciform imitation of me, is a most
exquisit and powerful means to expel it entirely from thy heart. Jo. 12.15.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross
daily, Luc. 11.23.
and follow me, for the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent
take it by force. Mat. 11.12
If thou will but learn to love thy self thus in God, thou will be truly
learned and wise; but Alas! the folly and perverseness of men is so great that
they will not study this holy science, they neglect this heavenly lesson, and
trifle away their time in riding, or discoursing of terrene, sordid, and
impertinent matters contrary to this good advice of the Wife, Eccle. 3.
think always of those things which God has commanded thee.

O Religious Man! had thou employed thy time faithfully in the serious
consideration of thy incumbent duty to God, and of thy main obligation to quit
thy self entirely of that private and proper love, which prevents thy increase
in virtue, and which is also the fatal fource of all disasters and crosses
incident to thee in this World, thou would certainly enjoy plenty of ease and
comfort in thy own mind; and thy Soul would swim in the pleasant waters of my
Grace; thou would also secure thy self from the eternal torments of Hell, and
purchase a most glorious Crown in Heaven. Moreover thou must know that a
Religious life, is a state of perfection, Non progredi, regredi est.
and not to go forward therein is to go backward, which is the utter perdition
of thy Soul; nay, the Holy Fathers are of opinion that it is the highway to
sempiternal damnation. Now lay thy hand to thy breast, and examine what
progress thou have made in this School of virtue; if after so many years in
Religion, thou do find thy self as prone to Pride, Psa. 26.12.
to Vanity, to Anger, to impatience, to foolish and idle words. etc. as thou
were before thy entering into it, where is thy glory? where is the fruit of all
thy labors? where is the faithful performance of thy Vows? Does not iniquity
belly it self, thinking thou art a Religious man, when indeed thou art none at
all; thou only have the name of one. Thou appearest to be living, Devisum est
cor eorum, nunc interibunti. Osee. 10.
but really thou art dead; Thy heart is divided, and the World has the greater
share thereof; but what will follow? thou shall undoubtedly perish, unless thou
do amend thy life. I know thy works, that thou art neither cold, Apocal.
3.15, 16, 17.
nor hot: I would thou were cold or hot, but because thou art lukewarm, and
neither cold, nor hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth: And because thou
say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and
know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, poor, and blind, and naked.
Such men do commonly think themselves to be upon very good terms with God, and
therefore are cock-sure of heaven; but alas! in the hour of Death they shall
find themselves grossly mistaken.

It Is a crime of the deepest die in a Christian, Pro. 29.20. Ibid. 21.23.
but it is much more abominable in a Religious Person, to be incessantly
prating, and uttering words at random; it is therefore the wise man says; see
thou a man that is hasty in his words, there is no more hope of his correction
then of a Fool's, he says in another place, whosoever keeps his mouth and his
tongue, keeps his Soul from troubles. But St. Jac. 1.26.
James is more plain in the case, for he says, if any man among you seem to be
Religious, and bridles not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's
Religion is vain. It Is not the habit that makes the monk, neither is it the
transporting of thy Body out of the World into a Monastery, that makes thee
Religious, as it is not thy being in the World, that makes thee a worldling;
It Is the heart that does it, if that be fixed upon God alone, thou art a
perfect religious man, but if thy affections be settled upon terrene and
transitory objects, thou can lay no claim to the title of Religious, nor to
the least share of God's glory. Another touchstone whereby thou may easily
know whether thou art really a Religious Man, Jo. 13.35.
or not, is, if thou be in Charity with all the World, by this shall all men
know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another: Moreover this is
my precept, and it alone, is enough to work thy Salvation, Romans 13. Pet. 4.
If punctually observed, because that all other Precepts are virtually
contained therein: It Is therefore St. Paul says, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
whoever loves his Neighbor, fulfils the law, and my supreme Vicar on Earth
exhorts all mortals to have a mutual love one for the other, because Charity
covers a multitude of Sins, And the same S. Paul after his return from his
sweet and mysterious conference with God in the third Heaven, says, be ye
therefore followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in love, as Christ also
loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering, and a Sacrifice to God as
a sweet smelling Savor; so ye ought to expose your life's for your Brethren.
And St. Jerome in his Monastical Rule, says, St. Jerome in his Monastical Rule.
that Charity revives a man in God; she alone compleats the Religious man, and
the Monk too; without her Monasterys are Hells upon Earth, and the Inhabitants
are Devils, but with her, they are Paradises, and the Dwellers are all Angels.

By the Premises thou may see that Fraternal Charity is the fundamental
Virtue of a Religious state, ahd of Christianity too; but alas! if I judge of
thy Charity, by thy behavior to thy Christian and Religious Brethren, I shall
find thee altogether an Alien to it; for it is said in Scripture, 1 Cor. 13.1,
2, 3, 4. etc.
though I speak with the tongues of Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am
become as sounding Brass, or a tinkling Symbal. And though I have the gift of
Prophesy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all
Faith, so as to remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing. And though I
bestow all my goods to feed the Poor, and though I give my body to be burnt, and
have no Charity, it profits nothing. Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity
Envys not; Charity extols not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it
self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks not evil,
rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth, bears all things, hopes
all things, endures all things. This is a rule which St. Paul leaves unto all
mortals whereby they may easily conceive whether they be in Charity with all
men, or not; And St. James says if one fulfils the whole Law, and yet offends
in one point, Jacob. 2.10
he is guilty of all. This is thy case O man! if thou have Charity for all, and
withdraws it from one Brother, thou have none either for God, or for thy
Neighbor, no, nor for thy self; for thou art void of Charity in all respects;
and as it is impossible thou should be grateful to God without Faith, so it
is altogether impossible thou should be pleasing to him whilst thou art not
in Charity with thy Christian, or Religious Brother; St. St. Augu. Ser. 20. de
verb Dom.
Augustine gives this reason for it; as the Church of God is grounded by Faith,
and raised by hope; so she receives her perfection, and complement by Charity
alone.

A wholesome Advise to all Mankind.
O Man entertain thy self frequently with these Considerations, The Conclusion.
and with the good Instructions which I have given thee in this Book, for they
are sufficient to move the most obstinate, and the most Rebellious of Sinners
to a true repentance. Remember, that it is not enough to be well grounded in
thy Faith, no, thou must be also well versed in the Maxims and practices of a
Christian life. Suffer not thy Mind to be corrupted with the fallacys of the
World, which will easily deprave as well all thy Actions, as thy whole life.
This was the charge which the Prophet gave to the Jews in their Babilonish
captivity. Baruch. 6.3
You will see, says he, in Babylon Idols of Gold and Silver, carried upon Men's
shoulders, to cause a terror and respect in their Spectatours, but beware you
do not adore them with others. When you shall see multitudes of People coming
in great troops from all parts to adore them, say in your heart, O Lord, thou
alone art he who ought to be adored. I say the same unto thee. O man! Thou will
see many in the World adoring Idols, that is, Pleasures, Vanitys, Riches, Gold,
and Silver, the Flesh, and their Passions; thou will see there, that Vice is in
great request, and highly honored: and that Virtue is depressed, nay, it is a
ridiculous thing in the opinion of Worldlings: Thou will hear there such Maxims
as were never taught in any University, but that of the Reprobates, whose chief
President is the Devil that sits night and day in the chair of pestilence,
uttering his infernal dictates, and dispatching his hellish Agents to disperse
them in the World; but be thou careful whom thou conversest with, and be more
wary in choosing thy Company, then thy victuals, for the worst of this can but
anoy thy Body; whereas the worst of that will certainly destroy thy Soul. But
to animate thy self against all evil occurrences, let the true Maxims of
Christianity be always in thy memory, and let the Eternal Veritys thou have
heard from me in this Treatise be the daily subject of thy serious Meditations,
have recourse to them when thou art assaulted with the World's nefarious
Allurements, and to the end they may serve as certain Rules for the future
conduct of thy life and conversation, peruse them very often, and with the
greatest devotion, and attention possible. If thou shall faithfully observe
what I here prescribe unto thee, thou will move me to give thee further
Instructions in the Second part of this Book. In the mean time the Grace of God
shall not be wanting to assist thee in performing thy duty to me, as well as to
thy Neighbors in as ample a manner as it is here set down. Thy immediate
compliance will contribute largely to the eternal hapiness of thy Soul, and
therefore I give thee the same advice that I gave St. Augustine, which was a
happy beginning to his most happy Conversion. Toll, Lege, Perfice. Take, Read,
and practice punctually what thou read.

Soli Deo honor and gloria.
FINIS.

