TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Great Senators:
GOD has called you to action. Your time to hear is little, to read is less,
therefore there is need that your own prayers be more fervent: and that the
supplications of others for you be the more frequent, and they that have the
honor and trust to preach before you, have the greater cause to deal
uprightly, not as men-pleasers, nor handling the word of God deceitfully: but
that your hearts may be affected, that the word may come not in the letter only
but in the power, and by the manifestation of the truth, 2 Cor, 4 2.
they may commend themselves (not to the ear or fancy) but to every man's
conscience in the sight of God.

It is your wisdom and safety to abhor to be flattered, to love to be
searched, Hezekiah like, to speak comfortably to all that teach the good
knowledge of the Lord. 2 Chro. 30 22.
David, 1 Samuel 24 5.
a Prince both pious and prudent, a man after Gods own heart, yet felt
something in himself for which his heart smote him, and feared many other
things, for which he cries to God, Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a
kindness. --

It is the usual prudence of States, to be jealous, to foresee every plot, to
have an open ear to any that can discover the least probability of danger: and
though this often raises needless fears, yet its safer to fear danger where
it is not, then not to foresee and prevent danger where it is. -- God has set
watch men upon the walls of Jerusalem, and has enjoined them upon pain of
death, that if they apprehend any danger coming, to blow the trumpet, and to
give warning; and if any die for want of warning, Ezech 33.3, 6
he is taken away in his iniquity, yet his blood will I require at the
watchmans hand.

You are not ignorant of Satan's devices, his many plots against you, be never
cease to be a tempter to all, but against you (mighty Worthies) his malice is
most embittered and enraged: by you he has been disposessed and drivan into
the wilderness: Mat 1^.43.
he has been wandering in dry places, seeking rest, but finds none, -- till he
can reenter. His desire is to winnow you; if he can ruin you be knows he ruins
the Kingdom, and all the Protestant party in Christendom with you: he that
durst set on Christ in the days of his flesh, his malice is not now less to
attempt, nor is your power greater to resist: he has been hitherto tempting to
overwhelme you with despair, to make your difficulty so great that your hands
might be weakened from the work, Neh. 6 9.
but your God has strengthened you to admiration, God has made you a wall of
brass: he has thrust sore at you that ye might fall, but the Lord has been
your helper, and has scattered all temptations of this kind as the chafe
upon the mountains. Now he has no way left but to alter his temptations, to
transform himself into an Angel of light: he sees he cannot affright you, he
will try to flatter you into self-admiration and self-confidence, and
doubtless will do his utmost, since if he cannot scatter you by dejection, to
exalt you through abundance of revelations, and so secretly work your ruin by
presumption. To discover and prevent this stratagem, was the earnest desire and
endeavor of your humble servant in this Text and Sermon, Pr^v. 1.17.
knowing that in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird. Now the great
God of Heaven, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that has chosen you,
and ever helped you hitherto, rebuke Satan, pluck you as precious brands out of
this fire also, and tread Satan and all temptations under your feet, and put
this double honor upon you in the sight of this Nation, and all the Kingdoms
round about you, that the whole earth may break forth into singing and say,
Here is that Parliament which adversity could not sink and prosperity cannot
swell: who are taught of their God, to be low in their own eyes, when God has
made them high in the eyes of others; who whiles they rule over others, are
most exact and exemplary in bearing rule over their own selves, and whiles they
rule over men, desire nothing more then to be just, ruling in the fear of God.
This will be the crown of your triumphs, and will stop the mouths of all
gainsayers, and set you upon that rock of eternity, that the gates of hell
shall not prevail against you, and so confirm and establish you, that this
Parliament shall be called the repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to
dwell in, the joy of many generations; which is the earnest prayer of him, who
desires daily to be your remembrancer at the throne of grace, and who is

Your most humble servant, less then the least of all Saints, I. W.

The Danger of Greatness, OR, Vzziah his Exaltation and Destruction: IN A
SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in
PARLIAMENT, and the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES, in the Church of Martins in
the Fields, the 14th day of January, 1645. being a special day of Humiliation
set apart to seek God, for his direction in the settling of the great work of
Church Government.
2 CHRONICLES. 26.15, 16. He was helped marvellously, till he was made strong, but,
when he was made strong, his heart was lifted up to his destruction.


WE are met here this day as they at Ahavah, to afflict our selves before God,
to seek of him a right way for our selves and our little ones, Ezra 8.21.
for the present and future generations. Like as a woman with child, that
draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain, Isa. 26.17.
and cries out for pangs: so are we in the sight of our God this day. The
child has been a long time at the birth (we begin to fear lest the womb
should be overgreat with it) hitherto we have not had ability or wisdom to
bring forth. The occasion is very sad, so is the text full of soul-melting
expressions. The words, I read them not as a charge, but as a caution, they are
a story, not a prophecy. A relation of a great man, a great Prince and
Governor in the Land of Judah, raised up to a miracle of eminency, yet in his
height is made low, his sun goes down at noonday, and all the brightness of
his glory sets under a dark cloud.

The tragaedy is very doleful, but I hope it is acted, not now in acting; we
read it as a thing done, not now in doing. The good Lord keep it as a story,
not a prophecy: a story for us, not a story of us, that after generations may
not rise up and write this sad Epitaph upon your tombs, Here lies that
Parliament, that was helped marvellously, till it was made strong, ^^t Men they
were made strong, then, etc. The former part of the next all the inhabitants of
the world may apply to you, the vision is plain in characters legible, the
truth of it undeniable. God has helped you marvellously, and out of weakness
the Lord has made you strong. For the later part, I say as Daniel, when he
came to interpret the dream to Nebuchadnezzar, My Lord, let the dream be to
them that hate you, Daniel 4.19.
and the interpretation to your and the Lords enemies.

Right Honorable, and the Heads of all our Tribes, God has called you forth
from among your brethren, and has set you on high to be Physicians of this
bleeding state, this languishing dying Church. You have need (as all Physicians
have) to be well versed in that part which is called (...), before you come to
that which is (...): the way to cure distempers, is to know the maladies before
the remedies: and when diseases have proved complex and intricate, how have the
later times adventured upon Anatomies, diffecting the dead; that they might
preserve the living? I bring you this day to a sad Anatomy of a great man; give
me leave to open how he rose, how he became great, how he fell so suddenly, so
irrecoverably, what was his disease, how he took the surfeit, how the disease
was bred, fomented, and became insensible, till it proved fatal. A doleful
spectacle, but our God would have us learn by precedents as well as by rules,
else had he never added so many examples to his precepts. And all these things
are written for our learning, and they happened to them as types and ensamples
to us, Romans 15.4.
and are recorded for our admonition, 1 Cor. 10.11, 12.
upon whom the ends of the world are come, wherefore let him that thinks be
stands, take beed lest he fall.

In the words be entreated to consider, 1. The Person here recorded. 2. The
enlargements bestowed upon this person. 3. His abuse of those enlargements. 4.
The miseries that fell upon him for that abuse.

1. The Person, set out to us by 1. His name here, Vzziah, he is also called
Azariah, 2 King. 14.21. 15.1, 7. 2. By his descent and function. Descent very
high, a flourishing branch from the royal root of David. His function very
eminent: in a good land, over a people, which God had called out to himself to
be his peculiar treasure. 3. His prosperity, higher then most of his
predecessors: From the days of Jehoshaphat till the reign of Vzziah, the time
had been very sad to the people, and destruct ve to the Princes, for sundry
generations. You may read of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat, a desperate
Politician, that the Lord smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease, 2 Chronicles. 21.18, 19.
that his bowels rotted out by reason of his sickness. Ahaziah his son had but
a short reign, but one year, and then cut off by sudden death, 2 Chronicles. 22.2.
for coming to lorain King of Israel, he fell into the hands of John the son of
Nimshi who slew him. 2 Chronicles. 22.9.
After him the house of Abaziah had no tower to keep the Kingdom. Athaliah his
mother, rises up and destroys all the seed royal of the house of Judah. out
of the honse of the Lord, Cap. 23.15.
and slain by the soldiers. Ioash is miraculously preserved, and for a time
exalted greatly, but after his heart departed from the Lord, and his own
servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own bed. After him Amaziah,
a Prince of great abilities, Chap. 24.25.
renowned a while for his victories, but revolting from God, there was a
strange conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and being fled from the City to
Lachish for his life, the violence of the people was so great, that they sent
to Lachish after him and slew him. Chap. 25.27.


It is wondered by Historians, how so many Kings of Judah successively died so
violently; and next to the hand of God, they ascribe it to that error in the
Kings of Judah, in too much affecting an arbitrary government. They delighted
to have the law lie in their own bosoms; and having got great power into their
hands, they employed it rather to the advantage of their own designs, then the
procuring the peoples welfare, accounting the highest honor of sovereignty, to
consist rather in being feared, then in being loved: and when the Princes
remembered not their bounds in ruling, the people forgot their limits in
obeying. Thus presumptuous policy proved oppressive to the people, and in the
end fatal to the Princes. The people embittered and enraged, lay violent hands
upon their Rulers.

In these times of confusion, 2 Chronicles. 26.1.
the people of Judah take Vzziah, a young Prince very hopeful, about 16 years
old, and set him in the throne The government of Vzziah was happier then his
progenitors, his victories far greater, and his reign far longer then any that
ruled before, Jerusalem.

If you ask his inward disposition toward God, which is the main particular
worthy enquiry, whether he was an upright man fearing God, there interpreters
vary, and the question is difficult. As Bedell answers the Apostat, demanding
whether Henry 8th was a good Prince, it is a hard thing to be a good man, much
more hard to be a good Prince. Or as the Roman Orator, who being desired to
declare his judgment, whether such a man was a good Citizen, replied, If I
should not judge him good, of whom I have heard no ill, I should wrong the
person. Yet when I consider how many things must concur to make one good, I
should wrong goodness it self, if I should slightly give that title to
unknown persons: so here in this Vzziah.

The text alleged for both opinions, may seem somewhat dubious. The result of
all enquiries herein prove disputable, not cogently conclusive. His
commendations are very great. 1. He did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, verse. 4. that is one great argument of goodness, not to please
ourselves, not to do that which seems good in our own eyes, but in those
things that be cross to our sinful nature, and are repugnant to the course of
a sinful world, in these things to displease our selves, that we may please
our God, is a great argument of integrity.

Secondly, It adds to his commendation, that he sought the Lord, verse. 5. and
what course can you imagine better then to seek God? whom if we seek, we shall
find, and in finding whom, we shall surely find all good desirable, all good
whereof we are capable. His Saints are described frequently by this character,
Psalm. 9.10.22.26.24.6 etc.

Yet on the other side, to all these commendations are added terms of
diminution: Which leaves his integrity questionable: for though

First, he did that which was right in the sight of God materially, yet it was
but according to all that Amaziah his father had done; it is not said, as his
father David, who was a man after Gods own heart; but for Amaziah, the
Scripture expresses, he did what was right in the sight of God, but not with a
perfect heart.

Secondly, he sought the Lord, a duty very good, if we seek him for himself,
seek him to enjoy him, and place our happiness in communion with him;
Quaerebant Iesum, sed non propter Iesum, Glos. ordin. in John 6.
and not seek him to serve our turns on him, as the Jews sought our Savior for
loaves, and worldlings for corn and wine. For Vzziah he sought the Lord, but
its added, in the days of Zachariah, who had understanding in the visions of
God; which are like the expressions that God uses before of Ioash, Chap. 24.2.
Who did right all the days of Iehojada, but after the death of good Iohojada,
Ioashes revolt is evident, 2 Chronicles. 24.17.

Thirdly, Sin of apostasy of Vzziah seems to be intimated, ver. 5. While he
sought the Lord he prospered. However it was, the Lord has left his name under
a dark cloud, he has set him as a Beacon on a mountain, and an Ensign upon
an hill. As Judges hang up notorious malefactors in chains, to be a terror to
all spectatours: so has the Lord done with Vzziah, he has his Epitaph writ
with Gods own finger, and he cries to all that pass by the way, stand, and
see, and remember, and consider, that you may learn, and fiar, and do no such
thing. God does not only gibbet his open adversaries; as its said of Doeg, the
righteous shall see, and fear, and say, Lo, this is the man that made not God
his strength, etc. but the Lord records the lusts if his Saints, as well as the
graces.

From the words thus opened, according to the four parts aforementioned,
observe,

1. That men may do many things which are materially right in the sight of the
Lord, and yet themselves either not be upright, or if they be upright for the
main, yet in some particulars they may visibly decline from that uprightness.

2. Whiles person or people continue to do that which is right in the eyes of
the Lord, Gods usual way is, to helps them wonderfully.

3. When God helps persons or people wonderfully till they be made strong, then
it is the greatest danger of all, and an evil most common among men to be
lifted up.

4. When sinful creatures, after wonderful deliverances, suffer themselves to
be lifted up, then all their rise is but the forerunner of ruin, their lifting
up, is but for casting down, and the issue is this, it ends in their greater
desolation. Thus they that have been choice instruments in the hands of God,
the Lord may lay them aside, as despised broken vessels in whom his soul has
no pleasure to employ them any further: as Vzziah his heart was lifted up to
his destruction.

Men may do many things right materially in the sight of the Lord, be upright,
or in particulars fall from their uprightness; in opening whereof consider two
partienlars.

1. First part of the Doctr. cleared.
They may not be upright, who do things that are materially right in the sight
of the Lord. I add materially right: The action for the substance of it
abstracted and considered in it self, may be such as God commands, commends and
rewards: but if we take an action formally with the Motives, Ends, and all
other necessary circumstances required to make an act truly right, then it is
certain, that where the tree is evil, it cannot bring forth good fruit.
Augustine contrae Julian. lib. 4. disputes the question largely of Julian the
Pelagian, proving that all virtues of Gentiles, and works of unbeleevers are
but vices: that their chastity so much admired was not chaste, because chastity
has in seal in the soul more then in the body. 1. Fatear primo virtutem esse
pudicitiam. 2. Omnes virtutes quae per sorpus operantur in anima habitare. 3.
Infidelia ani^am fornicari a Deo no^potist negort. Ergo ant in anima (...)
1. How can that person be chaste and free from spiritual fornication, whose
mind goes a whoring from the Lord?

2. Inlian objects the integrity of Fabritius; 2. Qul^ corom qui se Christianes
habert volunr (nisi Pelagiani, aut in ip^^ forte its solu^) justum diacrit
infidele^^, impiu^^ diabole mancipatum? Absit ut sit virtue vera in alique nisi
sit justus, cum nemo justus sine fide. Hab. 2.4.
Fabius, Scipio, Regulus, he answers, How can true justice be in them who are
not just? How could they be just, and not have faith, when the just shall live
by faith?

3. How can any thing be absolutely right; that aims not at a right end? 3.
Nibit bonum nisi referatur ad sumwum bonum, and hoc potest nemo nisi per
Christum, cujus morte mers vincitur, cujus vulneribus natura natura saratur.
Nothing is formally good, that is not referred to the chiefest good.

4. Virtues and vices are distinguished, not by bare acts performed, but by
ends intended; a covetous person abstains from revenging himself by Law, not
our of love to mercy, but money, 4. Virtutes ac vitijs non officijs sed fraibai
discernuntur. Offirium est quod faciendum, finis est propter quod faciendum.
lest the cost (after all contention) recovered, should not answer the charges
in recovering. 5. Possunt bona fieri non been fatientrcus, subvenire
periclitanti hoc malum, sed si amore gloriae bominis sit, non been bonum facit.


5. An ambitious person relieves the poor, rights the oppressed, this is good,
but if it be to be seen of men, he does that which is right, but not
righteously. 6. Ni^ bonum been nisi volunt as bonas volunt ^s non est bona, que
in alijs vet in seipsa, non in Deo gloriatur.


6. No right done righteously, unless the mind be right; but he is not right
that desires more to glory in himself or creatures, then in the Lord.

The acts of the unregenerate in themselves nakedly considered, Vid. Vossium.
some of them may be right, yet their persons are not righteous; and their acts
if completely considered, are extremely incomplete: either, 1. Swerving from
the right rule, Col 2.23. Isa. 29.13. 2. Or not aiming at aright end, Gods
glory. 1 Cor. 10.31. Mat. 5.16. Or, 3. Not proceeding from a good ground,
sincerity of love. Romans 13.10. 1 Timothy 1.5. Or, 4. Romans 14.23. Heb. ^1.6.
Or not mixed with faith, and whatsoever i^ not of faith is sin, and without
faith it is impossible to please God. 5. Being void of faith and love, the act
is carried to an end; that is either not good, or if good, its some particular
good, not that good which is universal.

But though the heart of men be not upright, yet they may do many things that
in themselves are right. 1. Such acts as are commanded for the matter of them:
2. Such as whereby natural conscience any be quiet, Romans 2.15. 3. Whereby Gods
will in part is fulfilled, as the Assyrian did upon Jerusalem, 4. Isa. 10.
Whereby other men may be benefited. 5. Whereby in the day of their account,
though their souls be not saved, Minus Fabritius quam Catilina punietur, non
quia iste bonus, sed quia ille magis malus, minus impius Fabritius quam
Catilina, non veras virtutes habendo, sed a veris virtutibus non plurias ^u
deviando. August. ibid.
yet their torments may be lessened: and so right, 6. As God in this life may
acknowledge them to their praise, and reward them for their comfort. I need not
spend time in examples, Ahab, 1 King. 21.29. humbles himself greatly, therefore
evil deferred. Iebu in a great zeal, destroys the worship and worshipper^ of
Baal. God commends the act for good, in 2 King. 10.30.31. Thou have done well
in executing that which was right is mine eyes: But he condemns his heart to be
bad. Ioash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, yet he and his
Princes forsook the Lord, and served Idols, and so wrath came upon Judah and
Ierusulem, for this their trespasses.

Amaziah goes far in denying his own credit, disdeigning an arm of flesh,
disbanding an hundred thousand mighty men of valor, at the voice of the
Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 24.2. and 18.
choosing rather to adventure their anger, and the loss of his hundred talents,
then to disobey the voice of his God. 2 Chronicles. 25.6, 7. comp. with ver. 2.
What external act of a Prince could be more right? yet his heart was not
upright: He did much, but not with a perfect beart.

Many a man, whose inward parts are very rottenness, may frequent all
ordinances, loving all outward privileges, be very forward in any external
performance, repress sin in others, and be employed as an happy instrument to
reform others, when his own heart abides to his dying day unregenerate.

If you ask the reason, how are rational men carried to things right, and yet
their hearts not upright? I answer.

1. I^ash, all the days of Iehojada, 2 Chronicles. 24.6.
is forward in reformation, his zeal more forward then the Prophets. Herod,
under the Ministry of John, Mark. 6.10.
had his conscience overawed, did many things, and beard him gladly.

2. kepti^^ by restraining grace, when the heart is (...) grace, and lusts are
not only restrained, but many common gifts and graces may be conferred. There
^^^ that go far toward the Kingdom of God, yet fall short of it; their minds
enlight^ed. and taste of the heavenly gift, be made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, in the common works of it, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
taste of the good word of God, and powers of the world to come, and yet all
this while the heart continues false, and after, the relapse may prove so
great, as that it is impossible for them to be renewed again unto repentance.

3. conscience, it may be awakened, and something must be done to still those
clamours, to allay those surges: Romans 2.15.
worst of men, scarce so bad, but may at some times do some good. Doeg. is
detained before the Lord, by his vow: the wicked Jews, 1 Samuel 21.7.
that made no conscience of killing the Lord of glory, yet say, it is not
lawful to put the price of blood into the treasure: Mat. 27.6.
that wicked strumpet, that meets the young man to allure him, said, I have
peace offerings with me, I have paid my vows this day, Prove. 7.14.
therefore came I forth to meet thee. Therefore, says she. What soul without
the height of impudence could have drawn so profane a conclusion from such
pious premises? as to infer, I have pacified the Lord, therefore I may be
bolder to provoke him. Take heed of a seduced conscience, and do not rest in
some outward common duties which the worst may perform, and be under power of
Satan. Those lewd women which lay with the profane sons of Eli, pretend
sanctity, 1 Samuel 2.22.
and assembled themselves at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, as
if they desired to be servants of the Lord, when indeed they were Satan's
drudges.

4. Luke 11.2^.
and whiles the strong man keeps the house all things are in peace.

5. John is forward in that part of reformation which was destructive to Baal,
it was the only way to secure him in his throne: but in the positive part he
was found altogether defective, and from the sins of Jeroboam that made Israel
to sin, 2 King. 10.31.
did not he depart all his days. Its an easy thing to reform those evils,
which if they stand up will keep us low, and till they be laid low, we cannot
get up. In the days of Josiah, the people were marvellously forward in the
work of reformation; 1 Chro. 34.31. c. 35.18.
they enter into solemn Covenant, keep the Passover so religiously, that from
the days of Samuel, there was no such Passover; neither did all the Kings of
Israel keep such a Passover as Josiah kept, and the Priests, and Levites, and
all Judah and Israel that were present; but no sooner was Josiah dead, but all
this reformation died with him. Yet suppose that Vzziah was upright, though the
arguments used to prove it, be not cogent, yet his excellencies were so many,
and his commendations from God so great, that most Interpreters incline to
esteem this opinion to be not only more charitable, but also in nothing to be
less probable in it self. If so: then you may observe;

That its possible for men in the main to be upright, Here observe this second
particular.
yet in many particulars they may decline from their uprightness, though in
the truly regenerate there can be no intercision of grace, which is total,
because they are born of the immortal seed of the word, 1 Ioh. 3.9.
and that seed abides in them: nor finally, because God has promised to give
them such an heart, as they shall not so depart from him, Ier. 32.40. 1 Pet.
1.5. 1 Ioh. 4.4.
and they are kept through the power of God unto salvation: Greater is he that
is in them, then he that is in the world: and those special gifts of grace,
when men are effectually called of God according to his purpose, Romans 11.19.
they are without repentance on Gods part, who does bestrow them, and on the
sinners part that does receive them; 2 Cor. 7.10.
for repentance unto salvation is never to be repented of, because the soul of
a poor sinner that is converted to Christ, finds more good in Christ
transcendently above all that it was possible for a man in a state of nature to
imagine. But upright men, though they cannot fall away either totally or
finally, yet they may decline in many particulars really, visibly; so far as
that in respect of gifts and graces, and in respect of use and service to
others, and of comforts to themselves, it may not be with them as in former
times: their sun may go down at noon, and their lamp, to the eye of men, may be
put out in obscure darkness. Asa that mighty Prince, both good and great, of
whom the Lord gives this testimony, though the high places were not removed, 2
King. 15.14.
nevertheless As^s heart was perfect with the Lord all his days, yet this Asa
sins, 2 Chronicles. 16.3. ver. 7.
in hiring Benhadad the King of Syria, to break his league with Baasha, in not
relying upon the Lord, in not harkening to the admonition of Hananiah: When he
had thus sinned, he could not endure to be reproved, a very sad distemper, that
a good man should be so far transported with lusts, ver. 10.
that he had rather undergo the disease that would kill him, then endure the
medicine that would heal him: Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in the
prisonhouse. for he was in a great rage, not at his own sin, but at the
reproof of the Prophet: At that time also Asa oppressed some of the people.
When corruptions are swelled so high that they cannot endure admonition, there
is no possibility left to keep them within any bounds of moderation. And to all
these sad declinings, there is added in the close, when he was upon his
deathbed, ver. 12.
when his disease in his feet was very great, yet in his disease he sought not
to the Lord, but to the Physician.

If men may go so far in doing things that are right,

1. Mution dixtram suam libens in are reliquit. O sublimit as animi I Regul^^
ne unus pro multis viveret, toto corpore cruces patitur. O virum fortem and in
captivitate victorem! Tertul. Apol. 2 Cor. 11.14, 15.
Let every man be ashamed to fall short of that which men have attained to that
want uprightness, let not Pagans outstrip Christians. Shall a Mutius be more
courageous, a Regulus more faithful among them that are without, then a
seeming Cephas or Apollo among them that are within? shall an Ahab humble
himself greatly, a Iehn reform abuses of worship strenuously, shall an Herod do
many things at the preaching of John Baptist, shall Satan and his messengers
transform themselves into Angels of light, and shall the children of the light
lie covered under obscure darkness? Shall a generation of men that knew not
God, that were strangers from the Covenant of grace, that never called upon
God, shall opposers go beyond professors? and they that could not endure so
much as the form of godliness, shall they do things more justly, less
partially, then those that profess the power of it? Surely our light is
clearer, our rule is purer, our Master whom we serve is better, our hopes are
higher, the rewards we expect are greater: shall we only in our lives be worse,
when in all other privileges we are better? What condition can be more sad,
Ezekiel. 16.24.
then that Judah should be guilty of more abominations then Sodom and Samaria?
and what sentence more just, Mat. 12.21, 22.
then that God should make Nineveh rise up and condemn this generation, and
should pronounce that dreadful saying; Mat. 11.22, 24.
It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah, for Tire and Sydon in the day of
judgment then for you?

2. As we should not come short of them that have done righteous things, when
themselves have been unrighteous: So we should never content our selves with
any common grace received, with any external act performed, till the Lord by
an inward spiritual change has carried us into a state beyond a reprobate:
thus far a reprobate may go. Let not thy soul stay here, do you not all expect
distinguishing comforts when you dye? Why to you not seek distinguishing graces
while you live? Will a righteous God sever thee from the wicked in thy death,
when thou art not at all severed from the wicked in thy life? It was a wise
resolution of that great Prince, Three things considerable in man; (...), there
three have several delights; (...) and (...) Antooin. Pius, l. 3, 2, ^4.
surnamed Pius, If my delights be only those of sense and pleasure, these are
common to brute beasts, whose sensitive comforts may be greater, because their
senses are stronger; if my delight be only to fulfill the will of the flesh and
of the mind, and to do whatever seems good to an eye of carnal sense and
reason, this is common to men, with Phalaris, and Nero, and the like, who were
rather monsters then men. If in duties of an higher nature, I only mind those
that are plausible to the world, this is no more then they may do who deny God,
will betray their Country when it may be for their credit and advantage, and
like them who when the doors were shut, and the curtains drawn, account nothing
filthy or unlawful that is delightful: if all these things be common to the
good and to the bad, surely there is something that is peculiar to the good; As
to enjoy comforts moderately, to endure discomforts patiently, to keep a
contented quiet mind within in the midst of all the storms without, in life to
overcome the fear of death, etc. Our Savior leads us higher, bids us deny our
selves, take up his cross, and follow him, count all things but loss and dung
to win Christ, and assures us, without these we cannot be his Disciples, that
all persuasions to the contrary are mere presumptions, and in the issue will
betray the soul into the hands of the King of terrors; for except your
righteousness shall not only equal, but exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 5.10.
ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Rest not therefore in
that which men may want, and be happy, which men may enjoy, and yet be
miserable.

3. If men may do things that are right, and yet not be upright, then let no
man account himself, because he does something that is right, that therefore he
is righteous, Non minus sine sacramentis salvatus est latro, quaem cum
sacrament is condemnatus est tu^as August.
that you are heirs of life (because you dwell under living ordinances:) the
Sacraments may be full of life to others, not to you; God who works by them,
can also work without them. God may use you as great and glorious instruments
in his hands, and by you bring mighty, things to pass, and yet the heart be
not at all renewed. God knows how to use foolish things wisely, weak things
strongly, instruments that in themselves are bad, to ends very good. Jehn is
employed to pull down Baal, and the house of Ahab that set Baal up. Many were
used to build the Ark that saved others, and yet themselves perished in the
waters. Isa. 10.5. ver. ^.
Assyria is the rod of Gods anger, yet he means not so, neither does his heart
think so, but it is in his heart (to set up himself, and to that end) to
destroy and cut off Nations not a few; therefore the Lord resolves, as soon as
ever he has performed his whole work upon Mount Zion, then he will burn this
rod in the fire, ver. 12.
and will punish the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his
high looks. It is a great honor to preach to others, to show to men the way of
salvation. It is a transcendent eminency, for men to be raised up to save a
dying Nation, a languishing Kingdom. But let not that be truly said of you,
which was tauntingly spoke of Christ, He saved others, himself he cannot save.
Let every soul take heed, as Paul, lest when I have preached to others, 1 Cor.
9.17.
I my self may become a castaway: therefore rest not in this, that great
victories are obtained, that the spirits begin to be made subject, but that
your names are written in the book of life; Luke 10.20.
and make conscience not only to do things that are right, but to do those
right things in your uprightness. To which end,

1. Let your hearts be spiritual, even in acts that are in themselves but
civil and temporal, a carnal man may perform duties that in themselves for
the external act are of a spiritual nature: but then his heart, and the
grounds he goes upon are carnal. when the act is spiritual. But approve your
hearts to God, not only to be spiritual in things spiritual, but to be
spiritually minded, in things that are temporal.

2. Though the acts be but natural, yet even in these actions also let your
ends be supernatural. Let the act be good, and the ground you go upon, and the
end you aim at be good, and let the good you aim at be the highest, the most
universal good, that is the rule we are bid to walk by, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether you cat or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.
Approve your selves to that great God who sees in secret: Go on, doing and
suffering, as seeing him who is invisible; knowing that in your actions toward
men, you serve the Lord Christ: count no reward sufficient which is below
Christ, that he may be all and in all.

4. If men may decline in many particulars from their uprightness, then take
heed, stand fast in the faith, quit your selves like men, hold fast your
integrity, be faithful to the death, let no man take away your crown from you,
lose not the things that you have wrought, 1 Cor. 15.58.
but be constant, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. No man was ever a
loser by cleaving unto God; while Vzziah continues in his uprightness, Gods
helps him wonderfully till he is made strong. And thus we come to the second
part.

When people seek the Lord, and continue to do that which is right in the eyes
of the Lord, Gods usual way is to help them. Wonderfully. This is clear in
the example of Vzziah, if you consider, 1. The help it self. 2. The Author of
that help. 3. The Extent of this help from God, Wonderfully helped.


1. (...), Joseph. l. 9.6.10.
Consider the help it self, he was helped: no question but Vzziah was a Prince
of great abilities, of a good disposition, of an active spirit: he had a
working head, and a dextrous hand, so Historians describe him. There was in him
a concurrence of these three eminent qualifications, that conduce to make
governors eminently happy; the (...), a great Counselor, Soldier, and in
forwardness in Religion exemplary: yet in all these admirable achievements
recorded of him, he was not only an agent, but recipient. The great victories
obtained, had not their rise from his own abilities within, but from the help
afforded him from above. Hence by the way is hinted this conclusion, That all
created abilities which are inherent in us, are uneffectuall without
assistance. Strength within is nothing, can do nothing, unless there be an
influence of strongth from without. In spirituals this is evident: Phil. 1.13.
2 Cor 3 5. Prius est cogitare quam credere, nemo credit aliquid nisi prius
cegitaverit esse credendum. Credere nilaliud est quam cum assensione cogitare.
Aug. de praedest. l. 1.
God works both will and deed. We are not sufficient of our selves to think
one good thought, how much less able to believe. It Is not possible for a poor
soul to move toward him, till moved by him, of his own we must give him. And
in temporals, in the managing of all affairs private or public, it is madness
to rely upon an arm of flesh, for by man's own strength shall no man prevail.
When we are left to our selves, the steps of strength are straightened, and our
counsels cast us down. Man is an indigent creature when he is at the best, and
no creuted excellency can be raised to a condition of independency, so that
helped he must be if he bring mighty things to pasle.

2. Consider the Author, he was helyed; by whom? though this be not expressed
in the words of the text, yet it is strongly intimated here, and fully evidenced
in the context, verse. 5. God made him to prosper, and verse. 7. God helped him
against the Philistims, and against the Arabians, etc. He had the help of men,
of means, a numerous Army, expert Commanders, a confluence of all external
concurrence to help him, yet even these, from the bounty of God affording, and
all these insufficient to make him strong without Gods help assisting. No
help, no assistance effectual without divine concurrence. The worst of
Princes have been forced to confess it, if the Lord do not help, 2 King 6.27.
whence shall I help thee, said that King of Israel to the woman that had
boiled her own son for food in the famine of Samaria. The Saints triumph in
this acknowledgement, Psalm. 124.8.
our help stands in the Name of the Lord that made Heaven and earth. They
disdeigned humane considences; Hos. 14 3.
Ashur shall not save us, nor will we ride any more upon horses. In vain is
salvation hoped for from the hills, or from the multitude of mountains, surely
in the Lord our God is the salvation of his people. They keep their eye on God
when they are in trouble, enduring because they see him that is invisible. My
eyes are ever toward the Lord, for he has plucked my feet out of the net, and
therefore ascribe their redemptions to him, when out of trouble.

3. (...)
Consider the Extent of this help: helped marvellously till he was made
strong. The word signifies, God wrought wonders to help him. His way toward
him was not usual. But God with an high hand and stretched out arm wrought
marvellously for Vzziah. If you enquire what wonders were those, consider,

1. When he was young, and tender, and weak, was it not a wonder, out of all
that weakness to be made strong; and that after the slaughter of so many
Princes, the Lord should reserve Vzziah to set him upon the throne of his
father David?

2. When the people were in a great heat and height, and their hand had been
very heavy upon the royal family, did not God help wonderfully to quench all
those storms, and to establish the Kingdom is his hands?

3. Was it not the mighty work of God, not only to overpower the hearts of the
people at home, that they had an heart to submit, ver. 7. ver. 8.
when power was in their hands to resist, but also that God should subdue all
his enemies abroad? The Philistims, the Arabians, and the Ammonites gave gifts
to Vzziah.

4. Consider the great honor God put upon him, that he was loved of his
friends, feared by his enemies, honored by the neuters, and his name spread
far abroad to the entering in of Egypt, verse. 8.

5. God gave him a wise heart, to improve all those opportunities that were put
into his hands. He fortified himself exceedingly: His victories far greater
then any of the Kings of Iudals that lived before him from the time of David:
His magnificent works equal (if not superior) to any, from the days of
Sol^mon: He built towers in Jerusalem at the Corner-gate, and at the
Valley-gate, ver. 9.
and at the turning of the wall. Besides all this, he had the art to use, as
well as the happiness to procure, in the grounds convenient for husbandry, he
had plough-men: He had vine-dressers in the Mountains, in Carmel and in the
Low Countries, and in the plains he had cattle, and in other waste places,
taken from the Arabians and Ammenites, in their select places fit for pasture:
There he dug wells for water, and built towers to defend his servants in the
desert, and to command those water courses, that none without his consent might
make use of that dry land, whereby he got into his own hand the sole command of
the waters, and of the country.

6. For Martial exploits he was helped wonderfully to grow very famous. You
may read of a vust Army. 1. Raised by him, to the number of three hundred
thousand, seven thousand and five hundred fighting men. 2. This Army well
disciplined, and trained under the command of mighty men of valor. ver. 15.
There were to order this great Army, to the number of two thousand and six
hundred Officers, ver. 12.3. This Army maintained and provided for, for he
prepared for them thorowout all the host, swords, and spears, and helmets, and
besides, many rare inventions; for he made in Jerusalem engines invented by
cunning men to be on the Towers and on the Bulwarks, to shoot arrows and great
stones withal, so that his name spread far abroad; thus when he sought the
Lord he was no loser by it, he sought not in vain, for God helped him
wonderfully till he was made strong. God has not said to any person or Nation,
that they shall seek his face in vain; God will not desert till he be deserted.
2 Chronicles. 15.^.
You may read the same in the example of Asa, of Jehu, and of many others,
which makes the truth evident, that whiles a people seek the Lord, the Lords
usual way is (rather then they shall perish) to work wonders, etc.

1. God helps wonderfully them that seek him, his bounty, or that he may
discover to the sons of men, his own sovereignty, that those that will not see
his hand in the works of creation, may feel his power in the acts of his
providence. When God appears in his beauty to infatuate the counsels, wither
the plots, confound the policies, and to blast all the choicest designs, and
deepest contrivances of the ablest of men, when they think to carry all the
world before them, then God arises, and in one moment undeeth all that which
they have been doing and contriving for many years and ages. Thus is the world
forced to confess (what it is desirons to deny) that there is a God; 1.
discerning, Prove. 11.4. Prove. 24.12. Psalm. 58.11. Is 1.3 5.3.
2. considering, and 3. judging in the earth. Then shall the eyes of the blind
be opened, and the ears of the deaf be unstopped.

2. Those that seek to the Lord, God will help, vindicate the truth and honor
of his despised ordinances. A carnal heart snuffs at Gods service, Mat. 1.17.
Mal. 3.14.
says, its in vain to serve the Lord, and to Walk mournfully before the Lord
of hosts. But while the world is scoffing, the Saints are mourning, and its a
sword in their bones; to have their adversaries reproach them, saying, Where is
your God? Psalm. 42.10.
what is become of your prayers? of your Jesus? But when the Lord looks down
from the height of his sanctuary, to hear the groans of the prisoner, to loose
those that are appointed unto death. Psalm. 101.17, 19.
When he regards the prayer of the destitute, and despises not their
supplication; then shall the world find those contemned and scorned prayers of
the Saints, to be as arrows sharp in the hearts of the Lords enemies, Psalm
45.5.
and that all the wit of man cannot prevail over a people that weep and make
supplication, Hos. 12.4.
and prevail with God.

3. O thou that hear prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come, Psalm. 65.2.
Though they be but flesh and not spirit, yet they wait upon him in their
deepest difficulties, and God works wonderfully, Heb. 11.34.
out of weakness to make them strong.

4. a burning under all their glory, and sprinkles brimstone upon their
habitations, when his judgments meet them in their way, and stare them in the
very faces, yet God works wonderfully to cross the designs, to stain the
pride of their glory, to rescue his servants out of their hands, as firebrarnds
taken out of the common burning. When the Lord of hosts, who is the redeemer of
his people, appears to be strong, and thoroughly to plead the cause of his
people, to give them rest, and to disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon, to
deliver the righteous out of trouble, Jer 50.34.
and to bring the wicked into trouble in their stead. If under all this their
uncircumcised hearts be not humbled, and they will not give glory to God in
believing, they shall be broken as a tree, and the horn of his people shall be
exalted, and the wicked shall see and be grieved, he shall gnash with his
teeth, and melt away, the desires of the wicked shall perish, and iniquity
shall stop her mouth for ever.

1. promotion comes neither from the east nor from the west, but that it is God
that sets up one, and pulls down another. The books of the Kings and Chronicles
are recorded, that God himself has left for Statesmen in especial manner to
peruse and ponder, the many and mighty changes in the state and polity of
Israel and Judah, came from an higher hand then the designs of men: In the
whole story you shall find all experience clearing this, that their whole
state varied in its rise and fall, beauty and deformity, accordingly as they
came up, or fell off from the Lord. When they sought the Lord, God helped them
Wonderfully, but when they deserted God, and resolved to carry all before them,
by power and policy, they were soon brought low for their inquity. Psalm. 106.43.


2. you acknowledge it: this day, (Right Honorable, and the heads of our
Tribes) is this Scripture fulfilled in your eyes, you may see it, and cry out
in admiration, surely God has helped us Wonderfully, God has rained down
miracles of salvations, he has wrought wonders for you.

1. In calling you together in the days of our fears. Call but to mind the
Wormwood and the gall, and let your soul still have them in remembrance. When
the enemy was so high that they were above fear, and the people of the Lord so
low that they were below hope, then you could not but say, this text is
verified on you as truly as on Vzziah, God has helped wonderfully.

2. God has wrought wonders in keeping you together all this troublesome time,
when there has been a great dispersing and forsaking in the midst of the Land.

3. God has kept you when others fell off from you.

4. God has kept you together, when our sins (not to say, yours) have provoked
the Lord every day to make you fall asunder, and when in some particulars,
according to different light, your selves have been divided; yet for the main,
God has kept you together by a wonder of goodness, that so your division
might not prove our confusion. God has also kept you, and the Nation in you
alive, our lives and safeties, and the life of our Nation have been bound up in
yours. God has wrought also wonders every where for you, he has helped you
wonderfully in the North and in the West: He has said to the North, Give up,
and to the West, Keep not back. His deliverances have been clear victories, no
longer disputable, but undoubted. Your friends cannot but admire, your enemies
cannot but acknowledge, therefore it is your duty to believe it with the heart,
and confess it with the tongue, that the Lord has helped wonderfully.

3. in seeking God. You have not fought in vain, God has not been to you a
Wilderness or a land of darkness: had God set us to pull at a rock, that we
should all our life long have been praying, crying, mourning, and we had never
seen any return of our prayers, it had been our duty to have persevered seeking
to our dying day; but when God has so visibly, and so wonderfully risen up,
upon the supplication of his servants, follow God with entreaties. When God
intends to work great redemptions, and to bring deliverances to perfection,
then he has said, Ier. 31.9.
his people shall come with weeping, and with supplication will I lead them.

If God has helped you wonderfully, help the Lord, even the Lord against the
mighty. God has begun first to afford his help to you, be you ready to draw
out all your strength to help him: God commands it, and in all equity he may
expect it. All parts of the Kingdom cry for your help, and the Church as a
woman in travel cries out for your assistance. Look back and consider what
great things God has done, and ask your own hearts, what you have hitherto
done for the name of your God, or what shall we render to the Lord for his
great goodness? Lay out your selves for him, who has spread out his great
power for you, and be willing to decrease, that he may increase; let God be
your strength, and your strong tower; honor God with your strength, this will
be a strong preservative against the venomous infection which surprised Vzziah,
who when he was made strong, doted upon his highness, and his heart was lifted
up to his own destruction.

Thus far you have seen this great Prince in his ascension, Third part.
and in him a parallel of superlative goodness to wards you. The remainder is
very sad, his sin and misery. Vzziah being made strong, his heart was lifted
up, not in the ways of the Lord, as it was said of good Icheshapha^, 2 Chro.
17.5.
for that is ever needful to be lifted up in the Lord against all
discouragements, but his heart was lifted up, swelled, grown great in the
thoughts of his own worth. Oh tell is not in Gath, publish it not in the gates
of Askelon. Yet his fall is recorded for our warning, (...)
upon whom the ends of the world are come.

When good men are made strong, then are they in most danger vainly in
themselves to be lifted up. Look over all former particulars. 1. Of Persons
that have been greatest. Rehaba^m when he was established in the Kingdom, had
strengthened himself to forsake the Lord, and all Israel with him. 2 Chronicles.
2.12, 21. 2 Chronicles. 2.25, 19.
Amaziah when he had smisten the Ammonites, his heart was lifted up to boast.
Nebuchadnezzar when God had used him as a great instrument, his heart was
lifted up, and hardened through pride. 2. Dan. 5.20.
As in Persons, so also in States and Nations. Assyria, Isa. 10.13. Tire, Ezekiel.
28.2, 5, 17. thy heart was lifted up because of thy riches; and verse. 17.
because of thy beauty: and in Egypt. 31 5, and 10.3. See this in the best of
Saints in the days of their flesh: Hezekiah breaths after God in the time of
his streits, and relapses from him in the time of his recovery. See what a
difference in David, when in the cave in the wilderness of Judah, and when God
had given him rest round about: he that enjoyed God so wonderfully at Gath, at
Engedi, lost for a time that sweet communion with God at Hebron, and in
Jerusalem. St Paul when ravished into Paradise, and faw that which no tongue
can utter, yet prone to be lifted up with abundance of revelations, and
therefore the admonitions of God are very frequent, Deuteronomy. 8.10, 12. Take beed
when thou art full, lest thou forget the Lord; etc, and the supplications of
Gods servants have been very servent to prevent that evil; Agur sees how much
ado he has to support his own disability, when he beggs, Pro. 30.7, 8, 9.
Lord, give me neither riches nor poverty, lest I be full and deny thee, and
say, Who is the Lord? Few men have lived, that have been able to master their
comforts, but a worm has bred in their Manna. If you ask the reason why these
men who have not sunk under sorrows should miscarry under comforts.

1. Satun: Shall I impute it to the tempter, who is very active at all times,
he never stumbers nor sleeps, he sets on Christ in the wilderness, no
condition is exempted from his temptations. Afflictions are called temptations,
so they are in themselves, and to the sense: but consolations also are
temptations, and these though not so sensible, yet often prove more dangerous
and fatal: These are the stronger, because more sistable and connaturall to
our depraved disposition. When Satan tempts to despair, there is nothing to be
seen but clouds and darkness, fears, and streits, and a snare, and though all
these set on you with greatest violence, yet nature it self abhorrs, resists;
the end propounded is not desirable, therefore these temptatios are less
taking, because less pleasing: but when the tempter mingles himself with our
comforts, sits with us at our tables, insensibly alluring us to self-pleasing
and self-admiring, this is a cup of sweet poison, so much the more deadly,
because delightful. It Is Angustin in his observation upon his preface to the
51. Psalm Multi res adversas timent, resprosper as non tment. Pericul, for est
res prospera animo quam adversa corpori. Prius corrumpit res prospera, ut
inveniat quod frangat res adversa
And (...), etc. Sicut Pyratae qui mare navigijs infesta^t, non tan ubi na ves
eportu exeuntes conspexerint invadunt. Quid enim his fructus, si j chapham
inanem demergerent? sed ubi redierit onusi a sarcinis, tum demum omnem
expediunt artem. Chrisost. de veibo Isayae vidt, 'Dom, Hom 2.
Chrysostom gives this reason: Pirates that rob by the sea, seldom set upon
ships that go out empty, but when then they have been abroad and return richly
laden, then they use all art, and exercise all violence to master both the
vessel and the prize; so Satan insinuats himself into all our comforts, nay our
graces, nay our duties, that when we think we are in the Haven, and the danger
over, the danger then is greatest. How strongly does he labor, how frequently
does he prevail, to make us forget humility because we have been humble.

2. Shall I say it is from the World that is deceitful; If the world deceive
so many when it is bitter, whom will it not delude if it were sweet?

1. The very change of conditions when it is sudden and great, cannot be
without danger. Physicians observe in crasie bodies, that a sudden eucrasie is
the foretunner of some discrasie, and they that write Politics, observe,
excess of power is a great trial of men's abilities. And all the sons of men
must confess it a difficulty for an unsteady paralyticall hand, to carry a
full cup with evennesse; for those that have been full of fears, straits, to be
exalted, Magistratus ostendit virum
the change is so great, that the hand had need be very steady that carries
this full cup without spilling.

2. From the multitude of suitours or of flatterers: it is the unhappiness of
great men, I^lc v. 16.
that others have them in admiration because of advantage.

3. From the fewness of those that have access or courage to deal plainly;
it is difficult for poor Ministers how to carry themselves, to observe duly
that distance God has made, and not neglect that duty God requires.

It is observed by some of the Learned, that Solomon repenting, wonders how he
fell so wonderfully; and that none of the Ministers about him would deal
faithfully, to show him his danger, and to recover him from that apostasy; in
answer unto which he brings in the Wise man, excusing themselves for this
neglect, that they looked upon Solomon, as one eminent transcendently in
wisdom, and therefore might have a further reach then they apprehended, and
one that did not stand in need of their advice or counsel: Who, say they, is
as the Wise men, and who knows the interpretation of a thing? Mr I.C. on
Eccles. 8.1 4.
or if they thought it not unneedfull, yet they apprehended it unsafe; for
where the word of the King is, there is power; however, they conceived it their
duty not to intermeddle, for who may say unto him, what do thou?

3. Hezekiah, that he might know all that was in his own heart: 2 Chro. 32.31.
and in Gods enemies it is from his just deserting of them, who have deserted
the Lord, and have cast off the fear of the Almighty, that their rottenness
may be discovered, the measure of their sins filled up, and their ruin
hastened: that even in themselves, and in the sight of this world they may
receive such recompense of their former error as is meet, that others may
learn and fear, Romans 1.27.
and see by experience, that he which is lifted up, Hab. 2.4.
his soul is not upright in him.

4. Paul gathered, whilst they are cold lies undiscerned, but when they are
laid on the fire, Act: 28.3.
the viper comes out of the heat and fastens on Paul's hand, and he that had
newly eseaped being drowned at sea, is now ready to be poisoned to death at
land; What a bisnnesse of spirit is in the sons of men, that know not how to
endure evil, or to enjoy good? Have you not known some in a low condition, to
how and scrape, lick the spirtle on the ground, crowck and bow, humble and
debase themselves, hummour, honor, admite, adore them that have had power in
their hands, that by seeming humility they might insinuate themselves into the
favor of great ones, willing to be low in appearance, that they might rise;
and no sooner have these men got up, but they have discoverened unimagined
insolency, like mad men got up to the top of a Tower with baggs full of stones,
throw (without fear or wit) at every passenger; like the man possessed in th
Gospel, who was so fierce that no man could bind him; Mark. 5.3.
or like him of whom Job speaks, he rises up, and when he is got on high, he
draws the mighty with his power, Job. 24.22.
and his violence grows so boundless, that (...) man is sure of his life; And
the Lord tells us, though it be given to him to be in safety, ver. 23.
Whereen be rests, yet Gods eyes are upon the ways of such men, they are
exalied for a little while, but presently they are gone and brought low, they
are taken out of the way as all other oppressors before them, and they are cut
off as the topps of the ears of corn; thus their glory is swift as waters, and
their portion is cursed in the earth, ver. 8. ver. 20.
and wickedness shall be broken as a tree.

1. This may inform us, the hand, but upon the hearts of the sons of men; he
looks not only upon the external act, but upon the frame of the Spirit, and
can declare to every man what is his thought. Vzziah minds nor, regards not
his own heart, but the Lord observes and takes notice, and tells us, that
Vzziah his beart was lifted up. We have need then to study our own spirit, and
commune with ^ur own hearts, search, and try, and judge our selves, and entreat
the Lord, who is the great searcher of hearts, that he would search us and try
us, and if there be any way of wickedness in us, that he would discover it to
us, and lead us in the way everlasting.

2. should be worst to God when God is best to us, that we know not, naturally,
either how to be full or to be empty? what unknown abominations lie in our
hearts undiscerned? a man cannot imagine or will believe that such a world of
pride lies in his spirit, till the time of temptation draw it out. Elisha weeps
over Hazael, ^ King. 8.12.
Hazael wonders that the man of God should weep, Why weeps my Lord? Elisha
answers, Because I know the evil that thou will do to the children of Israel;
their strong holds will thou set on fire, and their young men will thou slay
with the sword, and wilt dash their children, and rip up their Women with
child: Hazael wonders at this Prophecy, cries out in detestation, But what is
thy servant a dog, that he should do this great thing? ver. 13.
but these unhumane butcheries which would not enter into his head when he was
low, yet both entered into his huart, and were executed by his hand when God had
made him strong, and had lifted him up.

This may be for exhortation,

1. To long for that condition in Heaven, wherein we shall be lift up without
pride, wherein we shall be most high and most humble, far above all corruptions
and all temptations. The Angels that are on high, Heb. 1.14.
are willing to be ministering spirits for the good of the Saints that are
below; and the Saints that are now perfect in Heaven, high, and lifted up,
throw themselves and their crowns down at the foot of the Lamb. Rev. 4.10.


2. In the mean time till we enter into this rest, let every one desire to see
the plague of his own heart, 1 King. 8 38. 2 Cor. 11.3. 1 Cor. 7.29.
and be jealous over himself with a godly jealousy, lest us Satan beguiled Eve
through his subtilty, should also corrupt any of your minds: The time is
short, and therefore they that rejoice, are to be as though they rejoiced not,
and they that use this world as not abusing it; for the fashion of this world
passes away. The Psalmist observes, Psalm. 49.20.
that man being in honor continues not. Let no man presume on his own
strength, and let not him that girds on his armor, be as he that puts it off.
The conflict without is very great, but the sharpest combat is with the pride
of our own hearts within; if we conquer this enemy, Satan and all our
actversaries can never conquer us: if this prevail and enter in, Prove. 25.28.
we shall be as a City without bars and without gates.

Now we come to the misery of this abuse, Fourth part.
his heart was lifted up: to what end or advantage alas? that swelling proved
fatal, and the issue dreadful, lifted up to his own destruction: The word is,
(...)
lifted up to corrupt or destroy: To destroy or corrupt, whom? Ad corrumpeadum.
To corrupt himself, to destroy others, to hazard the ruin of the state: yet
this sin of his was personal, and personal therefore was the ruin, God spared
the people, and suffers him to fall in his own transgression, his heart was
lifted up to his own destruction. Hence observe.

When that strength is abused to pride, which God affords to his service,
that strength proves to be the door of weakness, that lifting up and sudden
rise, is but the forerunner of greater ruin. Prove. 16.18. (...)
Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty minds before a fall; Such a
confraction follows a heart thus lifted up, as shivers it all in pieces, and
makes it to be a despised broken vessel. That pride will have a fall, is from
common experience grown proverbiall. Those that are of the highest stature, and
climb the highest, their fall, their downfall is the greatest. Ecquit latreni
scalant ascendent^ invidet, unde post decrsum est praecipitandus? T. Cartw. in
Prove. 16.18. (...).
No man envies a malefactor going up the ladder, though exalted above all the
standers by, because his climbing up is to be cut off in a moment: See this in
Haman, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, weighed in the balance and found too light,
Herod adored as a god, immediately eaten up of worms. Nay, the Saints brought
low when thus lifted up, David when his mountain seems to stand strong, then
God hides his face and he is troubled: A man's pride will surely bring him low,
though he have many friends and great supports to hold him up. Chrysostom. in
Isatain.
Chrysostom observes, that the heart of pride is never content to stay below at
the bottom, but is ever clymbing up, and pride it self stands at the top of the
ladder, with a mallet in his hand ready to strike the sinner down. And this is
not only observable in persons, but in states and Kingdoms; of Edom it is
recorded, Obad. v 3.
the pride of thy heart has deceived thee, thou that dwell in the clifts of
the rocks, whose habitation is on high: Though thou exalt thy self at the
Eagle, and though thou sattest thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring
thee down, says the Lord. And the like is recorded of Caldaa, Egypt, Sodom and
Gomorrah. Nay not only in persons and Nations, but if you ascend higher and
enquire, what brought the Angels so low, that wherever they go they carry their
hell with them. Their sin, Quocunque daemores volitant gebennau su^m portant.
Preesse omnibas, subesse nulli.
says the Schoolmen, was, they would be over all, and under none; not
contented to be advanced above every creature, unless exempted from the
command of their creator, their pride put them on to strive with God for
sovereignty. The Ancients, both Greeks and Latin Fathers, ascribe the downfall
of the Angels to this sinful lifting up. (...). Chrysostom, de vesio Isaiae,
Hont. 3. Isa. 14.12. Nae eadem peccans cum d^a bolo eadem cum isto patiatur.
Chrysostom observes other sins invade a fleshly nature only, but pride sets
upon that nature which is incorporeall and invisible, and cast down Beelzebub
from Heaven, and turned the Angel to a devil, and made him to be a devil, that
before was no devil; will you believe the Prophet Isay? and he admires, How art
thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer son of the morning? for thou have said in
thy heart, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I will exalt my throne
above the stars of God, I will be like to the most High. It may be, says he,
this testimony is not cogent and conclusive, because allegorical: Then read
Paul, who giving direction that young converts should not be ordained, 1 Timothy
3.6. says, not a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the
condemnation of the devil, and lest that sin of pride which destroyed Angels,
should be his ruin and condemnation. So Theophylact and Oceumenius, and
Augustine handling this question, why Christ being God became man, gives this
one reason among many others, Christ would not vanquish Satan with an act of
power but of justice. 'Twas the desire of power, that made the Angels forego
their love to justice, and to leave their first habitation: Non antem diabolus
potentia sed justitia Dei superantus fuit, non quod omnipotente potentior, sed
quod diabolus amator potentiae, etc. Sic and homines eum tanto magis imitantur
quanto magis neglecta justitia potentiae student, ejusque vel a deptione
laetantur, vel inflammantur cupiditate, etc. Vide Augustinum de Trinitate. lib.
13. cap. 13.
And poor men herein drawn to imitate Satan, seeking rather to be great then
good, and to graspe with power then to seek integrity; Satan destroyed himself
and Adam with pride, Christ redeems his with humility, who had lost themselves
by their insolency. Secondly, Christ herein left us an example, never to seek
to conquer Satan with power, but by integrity.

Hence its clear in all persons, good and evil, in all states and Nations, and
in all kind of beings spiritual or corporcall; If pride once get in,
desolation cannot be kept out, all the world can never keep that man up, who
never seeks to keep his own spirit low. Pride and unbelief are the two great
sins that oppose the Almighty in all his attributes. James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.
Therefore the Lord resists the proud: he abhors all other sins, but he sets
himself in battle array, to cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and to
humble every high look.

Pride is the forerunner of casting down, because it is an unruly evil.

1. Assyrian, Hab. 2.5.
he is a proud man, he keeps not at home, but enlarges his desire as hell, and
is as death that cannot be satisfied. 3. Its envious. What made Saul to eye
David, and what makes any man's eye evil? because Gods hand is good. And whence
is it but from the pride of man's heart, that the Scripture says (and that not
in vain) that the heart of man lusts unto envy? James 4.5.
4. It is Contentious, the grand incendiary that sets on fire Persons, and
Families, and Nations, and Kingdoms, and it self is set on fire of hell; Prove.
23.10.
only by pride comes contention.

2. Vnfits the soul for every duty, willing that God should serve us, and yet
unwilling to serve God. 2. It makes the soul unthankefull for every mercy:
Hezekiah a good man, yet when he fell under this distemper, he forgot to return
unto the Lord, according to the mercies he had received. 3. It stops the ear
against all admonitions. Pride is a passion transporting the mind beyond
reason, makes the soul uncounselable, and then leaves it miserable. Asa put the
Prophet in prison. Joash remembers not the kindness of Jehojada, but slayes
Zachariah his son, for speaking so plainly; Why transgress ye the Commandments
of the Lord that ye cannot prosper? 2 Chronicles. 21.20, 22.
Amaziah is angry with the Prophet, asks him, Art thou made of the Kings
counsel? 2 Chro. 25.16.
forbear, why should thou be smitten? The proud men say to the Seers, see
not: therefore faith the Prophet, Isa. 30.10. Ier. 13.15.
hear and give ear, be not proud, give glory to the Lord, before he cause
darkness, and before your seet stumble upon the dark mountains. 4. It scorns
all threats, even when it hears the words of the curse, it blesses it self,
and says, I shall have peace, though I add drunkenness to thirst. Deuteronomy. 29.19.
Nebuchadnezzar his heart was lifted up, and hardened in pride, therefore he was
deposed from his Kingly throne, Dan. 5.20.
and he was driven from the sons of men. Lastly, Pride wars against God,
contends with the Almighty for sovereignty: other sins oppose some one
attribute, this opposes all, setting worms and rottenness to contend with
their Maker, therefore God abhors it, and God resists it, and in this world
lays the proud creature low, which would lay the honor of his creator in the
dust.

What was Vzziahs transgression? He sinned (you say) greatly, his heart was
lifted up; but we would gladly know wherein; tell us plainly, do not fear to
discover the whole mind of God, we stand all here this day befire the Lord,
this day to us is a shadow of the great day of judgment, wherein we jointly
appear to judge our selves that we may not be condemned with the world.

To this question the solution is not difficult, the vision is plain; went into
the temple of the Lord, to burn incense on the altar of incense: And this sin
was

1. Against a clear rule, in usurping that power, and ministration which no way
appertained to him, Levit. 16.

2. Many sins concurred in the bosom of this transgression: as first,

1. An inordinate desire of an undue eminency.

2. Ingratitude against the Lord, who had helped him marvellously, and against
the Priests the servants of God, who had saved his grandfather Ioash from the
conspiracy of Athaliah, who had preserved the seed Royal, and the lamp of the
house of David from being utterly extinguished in that unnatural destruction;
who also taught the good knowledge of the Lord; 2 Chro. 30.12.
whose doctrine had a great influence upon the peope, to appease that great
height and heat of spirit, which they had conceived against the former
governors, that the people willingly submitted to him, nothing all his reign
was attempted against him. Now for Vzziah, when he had got the hearts of the
people, to rise up, and assay to cut the throats of the Priesthood, was an act
of so great ingratitude, as that (though man could do no more but lament under
it) yet God did both abhor it and severely punish it.

3. It was arrogance to attempt to break those ancient bounds of Gods own
appointing: he had an admirable ability of using his other power well, and in
the use thereof the blessing of God was upon him, and upon the Nation to a
wonder: he now affects to have all administrations in his own hands, his
shoulders he thinks fit for all burdens, power no where so well placed as in
himself, nothing can be now well done, in his apprehensions, unless he have a
hand in the doing of it; he stretches out his hands so far and so wide, to
catch at all, that the sinews crack and break asunder, and now he that would
comprehend all, is able to hold nothing, and so striving to receive what he had
not, he is no longer able to retain what he had.

4. It was pertinacy to persist in this design against all counsels, desires
and entreaties, he had got that power that none could control, and now who
shall say unto him, what do thou? whosoever be pleased or displeased, he
resolves his will shall not be crossed, his distempers and his lusts shall be
satisfied; it may be, he had this with his blood, for both his father Amaziah,
and his grandfather Joash died of this disease, could not endure the
admonitions of the Prophets, but added pertinacy to iniquity, and so in three
successive generations, was that sad proverb verified, he that is often
reproved and hardons his neck, Prove. 29.1.
shall be suddenly destroyed, and that without remedy.

5. Add to all these aggravations his impiety against God, who had subdues his
people under him, overaw'd the Nations round about him, set up his throne very
high; Now, when God had freed him from the fear of man, for him to cast off the
fear of God, was to despise the riches of Gods goodness and forbearance, Romans
2.5.
not remembering that the goodness of God leads to repentance, and so left him
without excuse; this was his transgression.

But what was the destruction that the text speaks of?

There is indeed such a destruction abiding children of disobedience, Sol.
the dread of which should make every presumptuous soul to tremble, and to flee
from that wrath to come. But I think that this was not the portion of his cup.
I conceive (and so do most Expositours) and Historians that write of him, that
Vzziah was a good man, a good Prince, he is reputed by most to have been a
Saint: but what have Saints such sins? Yes. 1 Ioh. 1. ult.
The holiest men in the world have a mixture of unholy lusts; the sins of the
Saints are distasteful to God; he knows how to love their persons, and to loath
their transgressions, and though he will not break his covenant, nor suffer his
faithfulness to fail, yet he may, and often will visit their transgressions
with a rod, Psalm. 39.32, 33.
and their iniquities with stripes.

But if it was not eternal, what was then this destruction? was it temporal?
All agree in this (and there is clear ground for it) just in the act of sin God
meets the presumptuous sinner, the word of God could not melt him, and now the
rod of the Lord breaks him, and many judgments meet together to cast him down,
after this his sinful lifting up.

First, Some observe, that first there was a great earthquake, there is some
question amongst Learned men, whether it was at that very instant; but this is
clear, that in the time of Vzziah, there was an earthquake very dreadful,
mentioned by the Prophet Amos and Zechary, Amos 1.1. Zech. 14.5.
that they all fled before that earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of
Judah. And Josephus is clear, that it was in this very moment of time, and the
earthquake was not only dreadful to the people, but rent the rocks and
mountains, especially in the place called Erobe, and half the mountain toward
the West was torn in sunder, and rolled many furlongs toward the East, whereby
the public way was obstructed, and the Kings garden wholly covered.

Secondly, Some add another great wonder, that the top of the Temple was rent,
and a glorious beam of the Sun was darted from Heaven upon the countenance of
Vzziah, Inseph. Antique Iudai. lib. 9. cap 11. Immifit illi in front hoc molo
(...). Chrysostom in Esayam. Hom. 3.
whilst the Censer was in his hand to burn incense.

Thirdly, But this is sure, God smote him with a leprosy, a sad and dreadful
disease, and this leprosy rose even in his forehead: Some inquire, why in his
forehead? and they give this reason, that God would fill that face with shame
that had been so shameless. His desire was after an inordinate excellency, and
God plagues him with an extraordinary deformity.

Fourthly, Upon this he was set apart, laid aside, and dwelt in a several
house, being a Leper, taken away not only from the affairs of the Kingdom, but
which was sadder, driven from the society of men, 2 Chro 26.21. Comp 33. Lev.
46.
and which was saddest of all, cut off from the house of his God.

Fifthly, He was never restored to his dying day, the text says expressly, he
was a leper till the day of his death. Some inquire, why did not the Prophets
pray for his recovery? for in his time lived Isay, Hosea, Amos etc. why did not
they lift up their supplication unto the Lord for the healing of so sad a
breach? Abulens in H. L.
And it is answered, though the Prophets were desirous to pray, yet it is
possible they were forbid, that there was a prohibition unto them, like unto
that which was not long after unto Jeremiah, Pray not thou for this people,
Ier. 7.16.
neither lift up thy cry for them: or, They might pray, and yet God would not
grant; for though the Lord be a God ever hearing the prayers of his servants,
yet his hearing of requests is not always by granting the things requested;
God may deny in mercy, and grant in fury; God can give meats to sinners for
their lusts, but when the meat is in their mouths, the wrath of God comes upon
them, and flayes the fattest of them: and God may deny in mercy: Moses prays
to enter into Canaan, and is denied, yet enters into the rest whereof Canaan
was but a type. Paul prays thrice, that the messenger of Satan, the thorn in
the flesh might be removed; God answers, my strength is sufficient for thee,
and my power is made perfect in weakness.

Sixthly, Some think that this very blow broke his heart, and that he never
lifted up his head after this casting down; Josephus says, Joseph.
he died (...), he that could not enjoy the good of comfort without swelling,
was not notable to endure the evil of discomfort without fainting.

What is all this to us? Vzziah transgressed very much against the Lord? and
what if the Lord was sore displeased with him? Do you not think in your
conscience that there is a great difference bewixt the state of the Church,
then under Moses, and the state of the Church now in times of the Gospel? Were
there not 1. many ordinances then, and 2. transgressions of those ordinances,
and 3. punishments of God upon those transgressions? which are all now done
away in Christ: Those diverse worships and carnal ordinances, being imposed on
the Jew, till the time of Refirmation, and that bringing in of a better hope;
What is this to us? For answer hereunto, Sol.
1. May not this example cry to you, as the Church does in the day of her
calamity? Lament. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you (all ye that pass by) behold and see if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow? Why is this precedent left upon record? All these
things happened to them for ensamples, 1 Cor. 10.11.
and they are writ for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. 2. Consider he was a man, a professor, an eminent Governor, honored of
the Lord, admired of the people, yet he transgressed very much; Chrysostom
admites that a man so pious, a Prince so prudent, should so sadly miscarry;
that he who had attained so many victories, caused all his enemies to flee or
fall before him, now himself in the height of his eminency should fall and not
be able to recover: (...), Quia potiur nihil hic esse debet dignum
haefitatione. (...). Homo res ad peccandum lubrica. Chrysostom. 1 Cor. 10.13.
I wonder and stand amazed at it! But he answers himself, and that answer may
be something to us. Surely, says he, upon second thoughts, there is no such
cause or wonder: Vzziah was wise and godly, yet he was a man; And what is man
but a poor creature, dark and slippery? a thing prone to transgress, and every
moment ready to run upon his own ruin. If he, because clothed with humane
nature was subject to infirmities, consider your selves, that ye also are in
the same body, not freed from this or any temptation that is common to men: and
what man ever left to himself, was able to keep himself from any transgression?
Wherefore (says the Spirit) let him that thinks he stands, take heed left
he fall.

We easily confess we may transgress; Vzziah, nor consequently need we be
afraid of his judgment, for surely where there is no law there can be no
transgression. Is there any rule now in times of the Gospel? has Christ left
any rule in the word touching Government? Is there any platform yure divino? if
there be, we would gladly see it; and if there be not, then is it not left unto
Christian prudence?

They that say that every particular herein is so clearly and so punctually
determined,

In this great question, some things seem more clear, others more disputable;
the things that are clear, I mean, to sober spirits, for to men that are
schepticks and resolved to employ the eminency of their gifts, not in being
humble believers, but rather to be among the high disputers of this world, as
the Apostle says, to the impure there is nothing pure, but minds and
consciences are defiled; so experience finds it true, that nothing is so
clear, but a wanton wit, and an unhumble heart will count it dark, or call it
into question.

It times of the Gospel, Position 1.
Jesus Christ has appointed some, and not all to be Ministers, dispensers of
his ordinances, stewards of the mysteries of Jesus Christ: 1 Cor. 12.28.
For besides that common rule grounded on experience, that which is every man's
work usually proves no man's; Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
the word of God is express, God has set some, not all in the Church to be
teachers. Christ when he ascended up on high, gave peculiar gifts unto men, and
he gave some, not all to be Pastors and teachers, for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of that body of Christ:
and though these gifts and this calling be peculiar to some, and not all yet
the benefit is to redound to all, v. 13. till we all come in that unity of
faith, and of that knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man. Does not
that Scripture expressly distinguish between those persons that are ^ought in
the ward, Gal. 6.6.
and those who are teachers? betwixt the shepherds and the sheep? betwixt the
Elders that feed the flock, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
and those that are to be fed by them? Was it the invention of man, or the
institution of Jesus, that at Ephesus and Miletus, Acts 10.17.
there should be Elders of that Church? who are commanded to take heed not only
to themselves, as other Christians, but to all that flock whereof, not (only
man) but the holy Ghost has made them overseers, 1 These. 5.12. ver. 13.
and to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood? And
if it be the command of the Gospel to all Saints, as the Apostle says, to know
them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
and to esteem them highly for their work sake, then it must needs be a sin
against the Gospel, to revile and scorn those who labor in the word and
doctrine, Heb. 13.7.
whom God would have all believers to remember, 1 Timothy 5.17.
and to count worthy of double honor.

Those peculiar persons (who ever they be) that are dispensers of these
mysteries, must be called unto, Position 2.
before they enter upon this work; For no man takes this honor to himself,
Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God as Aaron was, and those whom God calls, must be
persons qualified to this function. 1. They must be gifted of God, how can any
conclude themselves to be sent of God, when they are not gifted of God? Are
they fit to be Seers by office, and take oversight of the flock, who are
altogether blind in themselves? If the blind lead the blind, both fall into
the ditch; and therefore the Apostle observes, that Christ after his ascension
gave gifts to men, and then he gave some to be Pastors and teachers. Ephesians.
4.8, 11.


Secondly, These called ones must be willing to be set apart, and to lay out
the gifts received, in this great employment, to seed the flock of Christ,
taking the over sight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy
lucre, but of a ready mind. 1 Pet. 5.2.


Thirdly, There gifts must be approved by men of judgment, and such as are
fitted with ability and authority to judge: for if every man may be sole judge
of his own gifts, or they that are not gifted themselves be judges of the gifts
of others, then in a little time clerus Angliae, will be found to be stupor
mundi, not in that sense wherein it was first meered, but in the worst sense
that can be imagined; therefore we read, that when the Apostles had preached
the Gospel at Derbe and Lystra, at Iconium and at Artioch, confirming the souls
of the Disciples, and lest that work should die when they departed, before
their departure they appoint Ministers to lead them on to perfection; and they
ordained them Elders in every City, and prayed with fasting, Act 14.23.
and commended them to the Lord, in whom they believed.

Those that are thus called and sent, have some peculiar charge and special
trust committed to them, Position 3.
to teach, exhort, etc. not only by way of fraternall charity, which is common
to Christians as Christians, to be teaching and admonishing one another, Col
3.18. 1 Pet 5.3. 2 Cor. 1.24.
but in way of ministerial authority; ministerial, not as Lords over Gods
heritage, or as such as have dominion over your faith, but as such as are
helpers of your joy -- Yet is this Ministry accompanied with a special
peculiar authority, otherwise what is the meaning of those Scriptures? 1. Why
are they called not heirs of salvation, which is the common, yet high
privilege of all Saints, but peculiarly the Ministers of Christ, 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Timothy 3.5. 2 Pet. 5.2. Acts 20.28.
stewards of the mysteries of God? 2. Why are they said peculiarly to take ear
of the Church of God, to take oversight of the flock that the holy Ghost has
made them overseers? 3. Why are those special commands given to them, to feed
the flock of God among them, to preach the word of God, 2 Timothy 4.2. 1 Timothy 5.20.
to be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke with all
long-suffering and doctrine, and yet with all authority too; and when men sin
publicly and scandallously, to rebuke them before all, that others also may
fear? 4. Why are such threats denounced if they neglect this charge, and in
stead of feeding the flock, feed themselves? If this belong equally to all
Christians, why should any one say more then another, Necessity is laid upon
me, and woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel; If I do this willingly I have
a reward, 1 Cor. 9.16, 17.
but if against my will -- A dispensation is committed unto me? how can any one
say, a dispensation is committed to me, if no such peculiar dispensation be
committed to any? 1 These. 5.12. Heb. 13.7.
5. Why are there s^ many rules given to Saints, how to carry themselves
toward them? why are believers enjoined to know, to take special notice of
them that labor amongst them, ver. 17. 1 Timothy 5.17. Gal. 6.6.
to remember them that have the rule over them, to obey them and submit
themselves unto them, to court them worthy of double honor, to communicate to
them in all good things? 6. If no peculiar charge be committed to them more
then to all professors, why are they enjoined to watch over the souls of
others, as those that must give an account? which has made the hearts of
conscientious Ministers in all times to quake and tremble; for if he that
offend one be in so sad a condition that it is better a millstone were hanged
about his head, and himself cast into the midsts of the sea; if so hard to
watch over one, to give an account for one, Heb. 13 7.
on how hard is it to give an account for others? Surely if no peculiar care or
charge be laid upon the Ministers of the Gospel, then is the work of the
Ministry far easier then the best of men in all ages have imagined, -- why was
Basil so unwilling to undertake that function?

All those fears, sorrows, that invaded the heart of Chrysostom, Vid. Chrysom.
(...) Vid. Chrysom. (...). lib. 6.
whereby his body was weakened, and his mind overwhelmed, that he stood for a
long time as a man astonished, that could neither hear, nor set, nor speak, and
when he recovered himself, he wept abundantly, powered out his soul in tears.

Suppose we believe all this, for herein God has made this vision plain, and
these are not the particulars that seem doubtful, wherein we are met this day
to seek direction of the Lord: We easily grant that a special dispensation is
committed to the Ministres: But the question is, What those great peculiarities
are which Jesus Christ has committed unto them in the times of the Gospel,
which God would have kept distinct?

Whether is it the mind of Jesus Christ in the times of the Gospel, 1 Quaere.
that Ministers should intermeddle with civil affairs belonging to the
Magistrate, as the Levites and Priests were appointed of old to be judges, and
to determine of controversi^? Are not the Ministers now bound (more then the
Levites then were) to give attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13.
to the studying of the Scriptures, as well as to preach^ and to give
themselves to exhortation and doctrine? (...). Theophylactus. Timothy 1. (...),
in his ^^^o.
If Timothy so charged, why not others whose gifts are weaker? Are they not
commanded to give themselves wholly to these things, meditation them, be wholly
in them, and to this end not to entangle themselves with things of another
warfare?

Whether though Ministers may not meddle with those things that are civil, yet
may not the Magistrate (specially if Christian) meddle with every thing that is
Ecclesiastical?

If God would have the Magistracy and Ministry (qua tales) to be distinct, 1 Timothy 4.5. 2 Quaere. 3 Quaere. Jo^. 25.10, 1^.
then what are those limits and bounds that God has set both to the one and to
the other? Has God done to them, as he has to the sea, set bounds and doors,
and said, Hitherty shall thou come, but no further?

1. Are all particulars herein jure divine? Is this a truth clearly expressed
in the word, or strongly deducible from it?

2. Or is nothing at all jure divine?

3. Or if both the former be equally groundless, and the truth lies between
these two extremes, and that something be determined clearly to be jure divine,
and some other things only fall under general comprehensive rules, which may
admit of a variety and a latitude in practice, without any manifest
transgression, so the general scope of these rules be observed, -- Then we
would know, what are those special both of the first kind, and of the later,
that we may neither assume a liberty wherein God has made a restriction, nor
groundlesly bind up our selves with restrictions, where the Lord has left a
latitude to Christian prudence and pious moderation.

These and the like questions, Sol.
are fitter for a through debate elsewhere, then for a Pulpit: and in debate no
question is more tender then that of power, and about power; what more
intricate, then positively to determine and set exact simits for power, thus
far you may, and in case you must or else sin, and yet no further? Disputes
usually herein have more heat then light, and I am not here this day to add
fuel to the flame, but power out water, and, if it were possible, tears of
blood, tears of blood to quench that burning which our sins have kindled.

We are all met here this day together, not to hear a private man's
determination, but to seek direction from the public Spirit of the only wise
God; the good Lord help us all to do it in all sincerity, that there may be no
Idol in your hearts, Ezck. 14.4.
lest the Lord answer us according to the (...) of our Idols^ but that we may
all lay down all preingagements at the foot of the throne of Jesus Christ, that
we may all cry with one heart and one mouth, Lord, Psalm. 43.3.
send out thy light and thy truth, let them guide us: Make thy servants to know
the way wherein thou would have them to walk: and as the Church in former
times, O thou that dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth before Ephraim,
Beujamin and Manasseh: So wein our generation may cry, O thou that hear
prayers, shine forth before the Lords, Commons and Assembly, before England,
Scotland and Ireland, stir up thy strength, and come and save us.

But is there no direction to be given,

In answer whereunto, Sol.
I entreat you give me leave to lay down at your feet a threefold
consideration.

1. Consider the difficulty in determining; the wisest of men, 1 Consideration.
when left to themselves, how subject are they to miscarry: when we seriously
take into our thoughts the greatness of the danger that may ensue upon
mistakes, it may make every man's heart to quake and tremble, and rottenness to
enter into our boues. 1. If the Lord help not marvellously, mistakes are
easy. 3. If you sin herein you sin not alone; it is not the sin of so many
private men: Noble Senators you are the pillars of the land, the stay of the
Tribes thereof: if the supports fall, what can become of the rest of the
fabric? When Rehoboam forsook the Lord, 2 Chro. 12.
all Israel followed after him; therefore the Lord speaks to you, as Joshua to
the men of Gad, Reuben and half Tribe of Manasseh, Did not Achan commit a
trespass, Josh. 22.20.
and wrath fell on the whole Congregation of Israel, and that man alone
perished not in his iniquity? 3. This sin is likely to live when ye are dead;
and of all sins, every servant of God had need take heed of those sins most,
which may diffuse themselves, not only to the men of the present age, but to
after-generations; which may both go before, Basil Magn. apud Theophylactum. in
^oc. (...), Basil Magn. apud Theophy. in loc.
and follow us to judgment, which some do not only restrain to the case of
Ordination, but extend to other sins that are exemplary. -- Some sins are only
private and personal, when the sinner dies they die with him; but when men
err themselves, and lead others into error, these errors and mistakes follow
the sinner unto judgment, and they shall give an account and suffer, not only
because they themselves were seduced, but because they were authors of
seducements unto others.

2. Consider not only difficulty in determining. but the danger in delaying. 1.
Delays do not lessen difficulties, there will ever be some impediments, and
that which hinders will hinder, till taken away. 2. Breaches and differences
grow wider; all the soundations seem to go out of order, when a bone is gone
out of joint, is it not wisdom, rather to suffer the pain in setting, 2
Consideration.
then to suffer it to abide so long in the dislocation, till at last it fistula
or gangrene, and then after far greater pain, no hope of cure but by resection?
3. Spirits of men grow higher. 4. Expectations of the most in waiting grow
weary. 5. Religion it self through needless disputes is greatly endangered, to
run out wholly into opinion, as seed in a wet season, runs up into bulk, the
straw is long and ear short, and when the crop for the burden of it is very
great, yet the return for profit and use very little, -- Some compare it to the
disease called the Rickets in tender children, who in the face look well, and
swell in upper parts, but shrink downwards. It was the reproach of the Church
of Rome, that it was all head: let that abide still the character of the man of
sin, that there be no cause justly to apply it to any that profess godliness.
It is a common complaint in the bodies of many, that in their disease which
some call (...) viscerum, they find their stomachs to be cold, and their liver
to be hot; but a her head and a cold heart is the worst temper, (or distemper
rather) that can befall a Christian. What sight can be sadder, then to see all
our strength of Christianity in opinion, and nothing in conversation? Surely it
is good that the heart be established with grace, not with meats and drinks,
which have not profited them that have been occupied therein -- Pari passu
a^^^^tlare posssunt omnis religro and rulla^e ligio. Gerhard. de Magist. page
60^. Diascorus Augustine. Epist. 55. Tune, O Dias. core. etc. Scire tua^ ^ibit
est ^^si te scire, boc sciat alter. E^a doctus and pruder us nescias.
R^mpublicam exparva magnan facere. Respondere pos. sit, ^e ista nescire, and
nosse quomodo s^^e is it is bono potest esse bea^us Aug. Diascoro. Epist. 56.
It is observed by learned men, that when Scepticisme comes in upon Christians
as a stood, it has been the next door to let in Epicurisme and Atheism to
overflow and cover the earth as waters do the sea. When Diascorus propounded
some curious questions to Augustine, and solicited him earnestly for a present
answer, Augustine rebukes him sharply, and refutes that desire strongly, tells
him there is a knowledge that puffs up, when we desire to know that we may be
known, that there are many speculations whereof there may be a learned and
prudent ignorance. -- That Themistocles, being at a feast entreated to sing and
play on an instrument, answered, he knew not how to do the one or the other;
and when it was demanded of him, what know thou? he then replied, to make
the Commonwealth of little to become great. If he could say so, why should
thou doubt to answer in these speculations, I confess my ignorance? -- But
though I know not them yet, this I know, that without them a man may be happy.
When men are sick, it is their wisdom to seek out, not those things that may
please the fancy, but those medicines that may purge out the disease.

You tell us there are difficulties in determining, Quaery.
and dangers in delaying, which way soever you turn, dangers and difficulties
are round about us -- It is a kind of contradiction, to press men to forbear
delaying, and yet to tell them, sin lies at the door in determining. Would you
have us determine in the dark?

Here is the strait ^and we cry out this day as Jehoshaphat did, Sol.
We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee. And blessed be the God
of Heaven that has put such a thing as this into your hearts, most Noble
Senators, to seek to the God of your fathers, in this extremity let your eyes
be ever toward the Lord, and he shall bring you out of your distresses; for
the patient expectation of his people shall not perish for ever: And when he
prepares their heart to prayer, he causes his own ear to hear.

Are there no directions which might be some way useful to expedite this great
difficulty?

Give me leave to lay down some general Rules at your feet, Sol.
which may in some degree be as a lamp shining in a dark place.

1. Be afraid rather to mistake your duty in this great cause, Rule 1.
then to grapple with any difficulty. Its a great argument of sincerity, when
the soul is more afraid of the evil of sin, whereby we displease God, then of
any evil of misery, whereby God and man may displease us; and therefore pray,
Lord, teach us the way wherein thou would have us to walk, make us to know
what is our evil, and what is our sin, search us and try us, and if there be
any wickedness in us, lead us in the way everlasting; that in this cause of
Christ, you may prefer godly simplicity above all carnal policy; and let no
man defraud or go beyond another, for God is an avenger of such things: so
shall you partake of that great promise, that integrity and uprightness shall
preserve you in his way, and your steps shall be ordered by the Lord, and he
will delight in your goings. Although the heart be upright, and has Gods
promise to instruct them with his eye, and to guide them with his counsel, yet
the way may be dark and slippery. Therefore observe this,

That when the way wherein you should walk is dark, Rule 2.
yet the end that is to be aimed at may be clear, and the cleernesse of the
end, gives a great deal of light unto the way that in it self is full of
darkness. Now the Gospel holds out the ends we should aim at very clear: As

1. Christ's end is, that the purity of Ordinances may be exalted, that
profaneness might be suppressed, that the old leaven may be purged out, that
offenses may be removed, that the power of godliness may be countenanced; what
ever power Christ has given to his Church, he gave it to that end, for which
also he gave himself, Ephesians. 3 26.
that he might sanctify and cleanse it, till the day come wherein he presents
it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, that so it may be
holy and without blemish.

2. Christ's end is, that mutual love may be enoreased, that believers may
purify their souls, 1 Pet. 1.12.
in the obeying of the truth through the Spirit, unto the unfeigned love of the
brethren, that they may love one another with a pure heart fervently. All light
without love is obscure darkness, that is the great end Christ aimed at: Joh.
15 12.
These things I command you, that you love one another, this is the old and new
command, the character whereby Christ and his Disciples shall be discerned;
without this it is not possible to attain the great end propounded in the
Gospel. Can any building stand, when one stone will not lie upon, nor near
another? Is not the whole natural body joined by bands and ligaments? and are
there no ligaments whereby Christ has joined together the members of his
mystical body? Is not the Scripture express, that the end why God gave
Officers to his Church, was, that the whole body might be fitly joined together
and compacted, Ephesians. 4 16.
by that which every joint supplies, might make increase in the same body, to
the edifying of it self in love? And the end also why Christ gives grace,
effectually to call them that are chosen, and visibly to build them upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.21.
his end is, that all the building fitly framed together, may grow to be a holy
Temple in the Lord, in whom ye are builded together for an habitation of God
through his Spirit.

3. The end that Christ would have us to aim at, is, that tyranny and schism
may be both prevented: and here lies the great difficulty, how Christian
liberty may be preserved without opening a door unto licentiousness: how
licentiousness may be suppressed, and no door opened unto tyranny: how the
major part should rule the less, and yet if the major part be worse, how the
worse should not rule the better.

In all this work be clothed with humility, Rule 3. Gal. 5.26. P^^l. 2.3.
let none be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another, let not any thing be done through strife or vainglory, but in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem another better then himself: Let us not
look every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others,
that the same mind may be in us that was in Christ Jesus our Lord; this
lowliness of mind God requires in stead of all offerings: and as the Greek
Orator said of Pronunciation in the point of Eloquence, so is humility in
practical Christianity; The first part is humility, the second humility, the
third humility; and if you should ask me, says Austin, a thousand times, I
would answer, humility, that humility may go before, and accompany, and follow
upon all the things we do well: That it may be propounded, for the eye of the
soul to see it; that it may be applied to the heart to cleave to it; that it
may be imposed upon the spirit, that begins to rejoice in things done well, to
bal^nce the soul, to keep it from swelling, or sinking, that when sincerity has
got the victory, pride may not steal away the triumph.

Be you lift up in the ways of God, serve God in this your generation with all
integrity; Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting
doors, and the King of glory shall come in; this will make us active for God,
when we behold his greatness; and when we have done all we can, this will
preserve us from being lifted up in our selves; when we look upon his
infiniteness, Isa. 40.16.
to whom all Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor all the beasts of the
forest sufficient for a burnt-sacrifice; therefore let us all endeavor to lift
up God above our selves, and above all creatures, who has been our glory,
psalm. 3.3.
our strength, and the lifter up of our heads.

Have your eye upon eternity, shall fail them with fear in looking for the
things that are coming upon the world; the Lord may single out you, and say,
lift up now your heads, Luke 11.18.
for the day of your redemption draws nigh. When you shall be made higher then
the clouds, the soul for ever lifted up, and yet the heart ever kept humble.
Paul was exalted with revelations, but when your souls shall be made perfect,
you shall not only have the same revelation, but the fruition and enjoyment of
those things that it is not possible for any man to utter: 2 Cor. 12.4, 7.
And yet never be exalted, either by the abundance of revelations, nor with the
perfectness of fruitions; When the grace of redemption shall carry you higher,
and make your condition safer, then the grace of creation made Adam when he was
in Paradise, or the Angels in Heaven, who left their own habitation, and are
reserved in everlasting chains in utter darkness to the judgment of the
great day; where we shall have peace without war, and joy without grief, where,
as Austin says, there shall be a day without evening, where your Sun shall
never set, nor your Moon go down, where your light shall be clear, without any
possibility of error, for we shall see him as he is, Vocabimus and vi lebimus:
videbimus and amalimus, amabimus and laudabimus Aug. de Civit. Dei.
where our love shall be perfect without any mixture of self-seeking, for
Christ shall be all in all, where we shall have an eternal Sabbath, where we
shall rest in his bosom and ever see him, see him and ever love him, love him
and ever praise him, and never be weary in admiring and adoring him to all
eternity.

FINIS.

