THE QUAKERS NO Deceivers, Or the Management of an unjust Charge against them
Confuted.

BEING A BRIEF RETURN to a Pamphlet, Entitled, The Quakers Proved Deceivers,
and such as the People ought not to listen to or follow but to account
Accursed, in the Management of a Charge given out against them to that effect,
By John Horn, who calls Himself Preacher of the Gospel at South-Lin in
Norfolk, who is a chief Teacher among the People called Mooreans or
Universalists.

Who has given forth a pretended and imperfect Relation of a Discourse, which
was between him and George Whitehead, in the Chancel of South-Lin, wherein he
has falsely made his boast, how that he made good his said Charge against G.W.
before some Hundreds of people; but many unprejudiced persons who heard the
Discourse between them, can witness against the said I.H. as a vain Boaster in
his Pride, of a Victory where he had it not.

And herein i^ the said J. Ho^ne proved to be such a one, as he has falsely
charged the Quak^rs proved to be, and ^is false Doctrines, touching several
things of much Concernment Discovere^ and his slanders and perverting the Truth
reproved, and the Truth of God cleared. For the Information of the People
called Universalists, and other Professors and People.

See PSALM. 7.14, 15.

By one who is counted a Deceiver, yet true, George Whitehead.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the
West End of Paul's 1660.

^Lessed are they that are not offended at the truth, (...) ^bide in the love
of it as it is made manifest, (...) who live in the life and power of God,
(...) ^^i^h fathomes over and comprehends the sub(...) S^rpent, which greatly
appears these our d^y^^ (...) the seed of God, and the wisdoms and power of G^^
b^ing manifest in a large measure in his Servants, which gives them dominion in
the life, and innocence to reign over the haters of the truth, and wisdom to
discover all their subtilty and crafts; this is their torment and vexation, and
the more they strive against the truth which we are in, the more they are
drowned in their confusion, and overwhelmed in their darkness: Therefore let us
whom the Lord has called into his work, go on in the name and power of our
God, with boldness and confidence in him in this day of the Lambs battle, for
the Lord is with us; and it is in his strength that we are made able to tread
over our enemies: and to trample over all their malignity and deceits, which
they appear in against the truth of our God which is dear unto us, and after
many contests and much opposition which we have passed through, and met with
from the deceivers of many sorts in this age, who are of the Dragons Army, who
like their Leader are wroth with the seed of the Woman which keeps the Commands
of God. I have of late time met with one John Horn one of the same Army, who
has showed his rage and madness as much against the truth, both in his Books
and Papers as any that ever I met with, and his torment being begun his rage
and malice is the greater; notwithstanding by many he is had in reputation, and
set up beyond the Priests of the Nation, but has foamed out his shame more
then many of them. The occasion of my last disputing with him (on the 13 day of
the 11th month, (59) was his posting up many Papers publicly in Lin, wherein
he charged the Quakers to be Deceivers, and such as the people ought not to
hear or follow, but to account accursed; and said, that he should be ready to
make it good, as and when thereto lawfully called: Upon which I several times
for the Truth sake sent to him to come forth in public, before I could get him
so out, for he would have had us met at his house, or at a friends house of
his, which was not convenient, for such a meeting as was to be; but at length
he proffered to meet me in the Chancel in the Steeple house end, where we met,
and after I had heard him speak a pretty time against us, and had some liberty
to answer to some of the chief things he objected against us, we had some
discourse about several weighty things; as freedom from sin, and the newborn
state, the redemption of the body, and the coming of Christ; and the chief
thing I. H. drove at was to make people believe, That there is no man living
upon earth that sins not, or that could be perfectly freed from sin in this
life, and that the Proph^^s and Apostles had sin in them so long as they l^ved,
and so he made War for his Fathers Kingdom (which is upheld by sin) as much as
he could, as the rest of the deceivers chiefly do, and in the power of the
Lord, I speak in Vindication of the truth, to clear it from his false
aspersions and slanders, as much as I might have liberty to; for I. H. and some
of his Company were very uncivil toward me in many of them, clam^uring at once
against me, but the Lord appeared with me and his truth, which then reached his
witness in the Consciences of many, and many heard me with soberness, which as
appears was a grief to my adversary, and as is probable was some cause of his
publishing an imperfect Relation of the dispute in Print, to render me and the
truth odious, and in his pride to make people believe he had gotten the victory
or maistery, touching which his vain boasting and deceit is hereafter
discovered, and the Truth cleared.

And now from sufficient grounds and trial, I affirm, and can (through the
strength of God) make good these things against the said J. Horn, and charge
them against him as follows, etc.

1. That he is out of the life and steps of the true Ministers, and in the
steps and practices of Deceivers, and so is a Hypocrite, and no Minister of
Christ, who being a Parish Priest is guilty of the Priests iniquity in many
things whom he has declared against.

2. That he upholds a dead and formal Worship like the World, whereunto people
are not called by the Spirit of truth for it, is not the true Worship, so that
he keeps people from the life of God, his Ministry being both dead, formal and
corrupt.

3. That his Ministry (wherein he contends for sin, pleading that none can be
perfectly free from it in this life) is Antichristian and both against the
commands, promises, and works of God, and tends to the making both the
preaching and praying of Christ and the Saints ineffectual.

4. And that he the said I. H. (like a choleric envious man against the truth
of God and his people) is a forger of lies, a false acc^^^^, a slanderer, and
so is one of the Dragons Army, who was wroth with the woman that brought forth
the man child, and the remnant of her seed that kept the commands of God.
These (...) last charges against him are hereafter proved in (...) Treatise,
and the rest with them am I willing to pro^^ and make good to his face in
public, where I may be heard, either in the Market place, Steeple-house, or
our meeting place in Lin, or at some other public place in the Country that
way if thereunto I be lawfully called, and have an opportunity that way, that
the Lord make way for me to it; and if I. H. will upon that account meet me,
through the strength of God, I am free to do it as he makes way for the Truth
sake, and their sakes who would know it.

The Management of an unjust Charge against the Quakers Confuted.
AFter that the said John Horn the Priest has laid down these words, viz.
People, I am come hither to make good a charge formerly laid by me against the
people called Quakers, viz. To prove them to be deceivers, and such as people
ought not to hear, or follow, but to account them accursed, and for proof that
there are such he brings, Gal. 1.8, 9. And then he says in these words, viz. I
shall pitch upon two heads of trialls. 1. Touching the manner of the coming of
the true Prophets and Apostles in the way of their doctrine. And, 2. The matter
delivered by them therein, for the manner of their coming I shall note. 1. That
true the Apostles and Prophets of God and Christ always, use to come with
abasements of themselves in the presence of God, and with exalting and lifting
up God and Christ, they use to confess themselves sinners, to be weak and
brutish in themselves, as of themselves; never any of them used to vaunte
themselves or speak of themselves, or one another, as sinless, but always
abase themselves and glorify the Lord, they therefore that come otherwise
preaching themselves sinless and perfect: and much more that vilify and
Reproach others for confesing sin, these have not the badges of the true
Prophets and Apostles, by this we may discover this people called Quakers, (he
says) and afterward has charged us for not coming as the true Prophets and
Apostles, and then he brings several Scriptures to prove that the Holy men of
God use to own themselves to have sin in them (or to confess sin,) as Psalm.
19.12. and 38.16. and 143.2. and 1 King. 8.46. Eccles. 7.20. Pro. 30.2, 3. Isa.
6.3, 4, 5, 6.7. 1 John 1.9, Isa 65.5. and Chap. 59.10, 11, 12, 13. and Isa.
64.6. and Jer. 14 7, 8 9.20, 21. and Dan. 9.22. and Mat. 3.14. Rom 7.17.20. 1 Timothy 1.15. James 3.9. 1. Job. 2.1, 2.

To which I Reply, in all which John Horn has proved nothing against us called
Quakers, nor made it appear that we come not abasing o^^ (...) as the true
Prophets and Apostles did, for we own their confessing sin, and have confessed
ours to the Lord as they did, and are come to deny our selves and sins, but the
Holy men of God were not always confessing their sins, as the Priests are who
make many confessions of their sins and never forsake them, but plead for them
and so their confessions are but feigned, for its such as confess their sins
and forsake them that shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. And this we witness, and
herein is Christ and his Righteousness exalted, and not our selves, and so all
your feigned confessions, and your feigned praying to be cleansed from your
sins: when still you continue in lin and plead for it, to Remain in all men the
term of life we deny, knowing that such are out of the life and Spirit of the
Prophets and Holy men of God, who suffered the terrors of the Lord for sin, and
did confess and forsake their sins knowing the fear of the Lord which is to
depart from iniquity, which fear keeps the heart clean, and such as live in it,
shall not depart from the Lord, Ier. 32.40. But out of that state are you all
shut, who continue in sin, pride, and deceit, and contend for it, who thereby
would make all the commands of God, and his promises, and works, and the
prayers of the Saints of none effect, the end of all which is Righteousness and
perfection, and so John Horn his charging us as being accursed, and not to be
heard will Return upon his own head, as one who has cursed where God has
blessed, and brought an evil Report upon them that fear the Lord, and he has
herein done no less sought to make people hate the judgment of God, and then
to he^r or follow it, but to account the judgment of God accursed, according
to his own words, for he and Thomas Moere have in their discovery, acknowledged
us (called Quakers) to be a heavy judgment of God that he ordered to them to
punish them for their neglect of Christ the salvation of God, and the truth of
him so long abused by them, and where he says as that never any of the true
Apostles and Prophets used to speak of themselves, or one another as sinless;
this is false, for the true Prophet said, all his judgments were before me,
and as for his statutes I did not depart from them. I was also upright before
him, and have kept my self from mine iniquity, therefore the Lord has
Recompeused me according to my Righteousness, according to my cleanness in his
eyesight, 2 Samuel 22, 23. And the Lord has promised, that his people shall be
all Righteous and clean from all their filthiness, Isa. 60.21. Ezekiel. 36 25. And
these that John saw on mount Sion (to which mount they were come, the Apostles
writ to in Heb. 12.22, 23.) who followed the Lamb whithersoever he went, and
such Reigned as Kings on the earth; they were without fault before the throne
of God, Rev. 14.4, 5. Chap. 5.10. And such could sing to the Lord a new song,
and exalt God, which they that are in their iniquity and pleading for sin
cannot sing nor exalt for they are enemies to the State of the new creature in
Christ; where all old things are past away and all become new, and so with the
Spirit of life we see through the State wherein all are sinners into the State
wherein all that come into Christ must be Righteous, and so we have a cloud of
witnesses and many true evidences for our Testimony that it is of God; and what
we hold is truth and all that own God must own us therein, who are counted
peceivers (as the Saints were) yet true.

(John Horn in page 3. says, True, it is he says in 1 John 4.17. As he is so
are we in this world he cannot mean in it we are without sin as he is, because
that is contrary to his own saying, that if we say we have no sin we deceive
our selves, nor will it Reach to all things, for then we might say as Christ is
without a visible personal body in the world, subject to aches and pains, and
mortality, so are we too, etc.

I Ans. Here his deceit and perverting the Scripture is seen, and though it
cannot be said of I. H. and such as he is that they are without sin as Christ
is in this world, yet I ohn who knew that State wherein they had sin and in
which if they had said they had no sin they deceived themselves, he said if we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 Ioh. 1.8, 9. So he did not say they
should have sin so long as they were in this world, for he says little
children let no man deceive you he that does Righteousness is Righteous even as
he is Righteous, 1 Ioh. 3, 6, 7. Plainly implying, that they are deceivers who
say the contrary, that men cannot be without sin while they are in this world,
and such a deceiver is this John Horn, and it is evident that when John says
as he is so are we in this world, it was in Relation to their dwelling in God
and God in them; that they might have have boldness in the day of judgment, 1
John 4.16, 17. And he that abides in God sins not.

I. H. Says, you see this proved, that the true Apostles and Prophets use to
confess sin in themselves and none of them to glory in their perfection and
sinlesness, etc.

Answ. If the true Apostles and Prophets use none of them to glory in their
perfection, then they use not to glory in Christ, (who is it will believe this
deceit,) for Christ was their Righteousness and perfection as he was become all
to them who were the Righteousness of God in him, and in him they glorified and
Rejoiced. Again John Horn's words are these, viz. And this George White-head
have lately reproached us for joining our selves with the Nation in confessing
sin, and that the Quakers are ordered of God as a judgment, to us (namely this
Nation, whereof we are part) for our neglect of Christ the salvation of God and
the abuse of his truth, how do they insult over us for this. G. W. Among the
rest has Reproached us for owning our selves as part of the Nation guilty of
sin with them.

Ans. So this John Horn has owned himself, and such as own him to be joined
with the Nation as a part of it guilty of sin with them, who are neglecters of
Christ and Abusers of the truth, when in their other Book against us, this I.
H. and Thomas Moore do much exclaim against both the Teachers and the people
of this Nation, against the Teachers for being such as Isaiah speaks of, Isa.
56.10, 11, 12. As blind watchmen unto whom the preaching of the Cross is a
sealed Book, and they call them dumb dogs that cannot bark, and that love to
slumber and take their ease, and to content themselves with dreams in stead of
searching out the truth, and that they are dogs strong to appetite, hunting
after livings and maintenance, etc. These things and much more have John Horn
and Thomas Moore charged the Priests of this Nation with, and they charged the
people generally with neglecting Christ and his truth and taking no pleasure
therein, but rather in sloathfulnesse, formallity, coveteousness, pride, and
vanity in Aparrell, etc. But now mark, for all these men's declaring thus
against the Priests, and People of this Nation, they are now joined with them,
and are guilty of sin with them, as J.H. confesses, who has joined himself
with the blind watchmen, and the dumb dogs, who content themselves with
dreams instead of truth, and so he is guilty of sin, and a false dreamer with
them. Oh! what deceit and hippocrisy are these men in, one while to declare so
much against the Teachers, and People of this Nation, and another while to
join with them, as guilty of sin, and abusing the truth with them, so whether
they be fit to teach others or not, any wise man may judge. And as for his
saying that we reproach or villifie them as for confessing their neglect of
Christ, and their abuse of his truth, herein he mistakes us. For we witness
against them for their hyppocrisie, and deceit, and being such abusers of the
truth as they are. And also witness against them for their striveing against
the heavy judgment of God, and their revileing and abusing that judgment which
he has ordered to punish them for their neglect of Christ, and the truth of
him so long abused by them, which heavy judgment they acknowledge us called
Quakers to be, and yet they continue revileing and reproaching us, when as they
should rather bear the judgment of God patiently, seeing they have sinned so
much against God in their long abusing his truth, as they have done, and yet do.

2. And now touching the matter of doctrine I.H. charge the Quakers with, as
for subverting the faith delivered by the Apostles, and undermineing the hope
of the Gospel. He says they subvert the faith in denying Christ to have that
body in Heaven glorified in which he suffered and rose again, etc.

Reply, As for his lies, and falsely accuseing us about this (which will fall
heavy upon his own head) they are clearly seen by many that know our belief in
these things, wherein we own what the Scriptures do declare. And how does this
charge of I. H. against the Quakers agree with his, and Tho. Moore's saying in
their Book: That we said the same body that suffered was glorified at Gods
right Hand in Heaven? when now he says we deny Christ to have that body in
Heaven glorified in which he suffered; Who will believe this man's confusion?
who also says in one of his Papers against us, that we are men of noe judgment
about the Person of Christ. Now I say then if it were so, how should we either
affirm or deny any thing about it? for if we do either, we must be of some
judgment about it: And how should we subvert any ones faith about the Person of
Christ, if we be of no judgment about it? for if it were so with us, I. H.
should rather have informed us about the Person of Christ, to have brought us
into some true judgment about it (if he could) then have charged us with
preaching other Doctrins then the Apostles did, touching such things as he has
falsely charged us to be of no judgment about. Thus his confusion and falshhood
is apparent. For though we cannot own his and their imaginations, who have
affirmed that Christ is in Heaven with a humane Body of flesh and bones,
without blood in it, wherein their blindness much appears, and therein they
distinguish not a spiritual Body from a humane Body, which is natural or
earthly, yet we own that the Body of Christ which suffered and ascended was
changed. And so his Body is a spiritual glorified Body in Heaven, in the nature
of the same glory which he had with the Father before the world began, wherein
he is glorified, where that which was mortal is swallowed up of life and
Immortallitie.

I. H. again charge us with subverting the hope of the Gospel, in denying the
resurrection of the bodies of men, etc.

Rep. This is another slander for we own the resurrection of the bodies both of
the just and unjust according to the Scriptures, and see how again this accuser
is confounded, He and T. M. in a Paper to me say, That we we are of no judgment
about the Resurrection: To which I say, then how should we either deny it, or
affirm ought of it? Several other things has I. H. also falsely accused us
within in his fourth page, which I have answered elsewhere: And to my saying
that Christ bid, Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, I. H. says,
Exhortations to things prove not those things to be perfectly attained by any
here, nor does the Scripture ever say, Let not sin be in you, as if men might
get it all out, though it says, Let it not reign in your mortal bodies. Rep.
Then if the things which Christ exhorted men to upon earth may not be perfectly
attained by any here, to what end or effect was his Exhortation? What must men
be under the commands after death which they had in their life time, and not
till then fulfill them? Here Is darkness indeed manifest, and the commands of
God put afar off, and made of none effect by such as are out of his love, for
he that loves God keeps his Commandments, and is it not all one for the
Scripture to say, Be ye perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect, as if it
said, Let not sin be in you? Or the same to say, Wash you, make ye clean, or
keep Gods Commandments, and love, and serve him with all your heart, soul,
strength and mind, which must be fulfilled, then what part of man must be a
subject for sin to dwell in, while he lives here, as J. H. would have it? if no
part of man be a subject to sin so long as he lives, then it cannot abide in
him, as take away the body of it, and its members cannot remain. And to my
saying that J. H. had not proved that the Prophets and Apostles had sin in them
so long as they lived; he says, How false that was, appears in what J. H. said
on Psalm. 143.2. To which I say that Scripture does not prove that the Prophets
and Apostles had sin in them so long as they lived, for there its said, Enter
not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified; and what J. H. said on this, will not prove that the
Prophets and Apostles had sin in them while they lived, seeing the Scripture it
self does not prove it, its no matter of his words who perverts the Scriptures,
and that Scripture does not include the Saints as to prove them unjustified who
were changed from that state, wherein no man living could be justified in the
sight of God, and were come through the death, and the many trials and
tribulations into the life and righteousness of Christ, wherein they were
justified, and the Prophets of the Lord, who desired the Lord to cleanse them
from their secret sins, and from all iniquity in their life time: they prayed
not in vain, as this Priests Doctrine in effect accuses them, in his accusing
them to have sin in them so long as they lived, for the Lord gives the
righteous the desires of their hearts, Psalm. 37.4. Prove. 10.24.

Again, J. Horn relates part of our Discourse deceitfully and imperfectly in
these words; Viz J. H. Was not Paul born of God when he says, We also that have
the first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption, the redemption of the body; and then these words he
lays down for G. W. his Answer, viz. Paul when he traveled, and was groaning
for deliverance, and waiting for the redemption of the body, was not as yet
born of God, but afterward he witnessed a being redeemed from sin, and then he
was born, as a woman when she is in travel to be delivered, the child is not
yet born. J. H. then says, People, I pray, did you ever hear of a woman in
travel, before that woman was born, was there ever such a thing? here he says
all the people fell a laughing at G. W. and then J. H. urges 1 John 5.1.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God; Paul did believe
Jesus to be the Christ, when he was an Apostle and writ to the Romans, and then
he says, here George was pitifully put to it, and all the people generally
see his confusion, and says that G. W. was pitifully shackled and nonplust.

Here John Horn has both belyed me, and wronged my words, and left out the
greatest part of what I said, that cleared my Answers to the understandings of
such as had any soberness and seriousness in hearing the discourse. And that
People generally see my Confusion, or that I was shackled and non-plust, these
are some of I.H. his lies and scornful aspersions cast upon me, as many that
heard the dispute can witness against him for impudently belying and slandering
me, the sum of what I answered and chiefly intended (though I could not have
liberty to open what I said so much there as here) it was thus, Paul witnessed
the groaning and traveling in pain before the birth was born in him, or before
he was born of God, or in the state of him that is born of God (intending as in
1. Joh. 3.) who cannot sin, which Paul could when he did the evil he would not,
even when he traveled in pain for deliverance from the bondage of corruption,
for where the son or birth from above is born, the glorious liberty of the sons
of God is enjoyed, which the creature waited for, and there the traveling in
pain for deliverance is ceased, and the bondage of corruption removed, for the
travel is before the birth be brought forth; and as for my instancing the
woman's traveling in pain before the child was born, J.H. has perverted my
comparison, it was not intended to prove that Paul was not born into the world
(according to the flesh) wherewith he traveled, as if a woman were not so born
when in travail, but in reference to the travail before the birth which was
from above was born, and according to what I said, Christ spoke when he said to
his disciples, Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice, and ye
shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy, a woman when she
is in travail has sorrow, because her hour is come, but as soon as she is
delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish, for joy that a man
is born into the world, Joh. 16.20. and so it was evident that the disciples of
Christ knew the travail in the sorrow before the man or birth from above was
born in them, and they believed and hoped when they were in travail and pain
before they became that birth, for that birth is free, and is not that which
travails in pain; for that is in bondage while in pain, before the birth is
brought forth to reign, which brings to the healing and to the rest in the
glorious liberty; which before that state was witnessed, even the Prophets also
knew the traveling in pain, for thus says the Lord, We have heard a voice of
trembling, of fear, and not of peace, ask ye now and see whether a man man
does travail with child, wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his
loins as a woman in travel, and all faces are turned into paleness, Jer. 30.6.
And like as a woman with child that draws near the time of her delivery is in
pain and cries out in her pangs, so have we been in thy sight O Lord, we have
been with child, we have been in pain, Isa. 26.17. but when the Prophet
witnessed that unto them a child was born, and to them a son was given, who was
the wond reful Counselor, he brought the peace, and ended the travail and
pain, he being the Prince of peace; but these states I find J. H. never knew,
for to my knowledge he has judged our speaking of a babe within, but to be a
dream, and is in his scorn, and lies thereby making many of the people light
and vain against the truth like the false Prophets: And where he says, that
here all the people fell a laughing at G. W. In this he would make all the
people ignorant, and scoffers like himself, and herein many of the people who
were at our dispute can witness against this J. Horn for wickedly belying them
also, for there were many both of our friends and others who were sober minded,
and did not join with him nor them of his company that scoffed in their
laughter and scorn, which did much manifest his shame and theirs who therein
joined with him, seeing he was such a bad example among so many hundreds of
people, soberness and seriousness might better have become him in reasoning
about the things of God.

Again J. H. says, I flew to another shift, for that Paul condescended in his
writing to those of low degree: to the state of some he writ to, (as if the
believing Romans or Saints at Rome were not borne of God, or did not then
believe that Jesus is the Christ) etc.

Reply. As for his urging, that whosoever be lieves that Jesus is the Christ,
is borne of God, he has done it without understanding, and without
distinction, though it be true according to John's Testimony of a true believer,
who by faith has victory over the world. and so being borne of God is not
under the bondage of corruption, nor can such a one sin because he is borne of
God, and his seed remains in him, so he witnesses that Jesus is the Christ,
in saving him from sin; but such, in being born of God I. H. does not own while
men are here; and let me tell him, that a man must believe that Jesus is the
Christ, and believe in him too before he be borne of God, as Christ said,
Believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the light, John 12.36. so
as for his urging, that whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God, without any true discerning or distinction to such a multitude of
people, to make them believe that he had shackled me, herein his deceit was
clearly seen; for what people is there of any understanding in the whole
Christendom, (and even among these Priests in England, whom this Priest Horn
has called greedy dumb dogs, strong to appetite) that do not believe that
Jesus is the Christ? are they therefore born of God? examine and see. And that
Paul condescended to the Romans to several States which he had passed through,
and which were below his own when he writ to them is evident, (for which thing
affirming, this scornful Priest has so much reproached me) For Paul spoke
unto them after the manner of men, because of the infirmity of their flesh,
Romans 6.19. and he could not then be in all those states, (as in relation to his
own particular condition) which he condescended to the Romans as one in: For he
spoke to them as one under the Law, and as a wretched man, and as one that did
evil, who was led captive to the Law of sin in his members, and asked who
should deliver him, like one that did not know who should: though then he knew
his deliverer, and deliverance, having bin a Minister many years, Romans 15.23.
And he said, I know that in me, that is in my Flesh dwells no good thing, and
yet was not Christ then in him, and in his Flesh? and he spoke unto them as in
the warfare, in the pain, and bondage, and as one who found not how to perform
that which was good; which states, as in relation to his own condition he had
passed thorough, for he was at peace with God, and freed from under the Law,
and dead unto sin, and so free from it, be being a Servant of Christ, and one
who was more then a Conqueror, even when he writ to the Romans. See Romans 5. and
chap. 6. and 7. and 8. so that any that understand thesest ates may see that
Paul condescended to many states below his own: for when he was free from all
men he made himself servant unto all, that he might gain the more; for he says
unto the Jews, I became as a Jew that I might gain the Jews, and to them that
are under the Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the
Law; and to them that are without Law, (being not without Law to God, but under
the Law to Christ) that I might gain them that are under the Law; And to the
weak became I as weak, etc. 1 Cor. 9.20: And so what I spoke, touching Paul's
travel and condescending was true, and upon good grounds, though J.H. and some
of his company were so uncivil toward me in their bawling or wrangling, many
of them at once against me, and obtruding many Questions together upon me, at
the dispute (several times) before I had explained my self to one, and they
would have tied me to Answer them Yea or Nay, when often the things questioned
did of necessity admit of a larger Answer then Yea or Nay, showing themselves
both to want moderation and true understanding; and they would not suffer me
several times to explain what I laid down as I would, for their bawling and
heap of Questions, though J.H. durst answer to very few Questions that I put to
him; and as for his accusing me, as that I would feign have bin reading in
their Book, to have diverted from his Question, (or turned off from the
discourse in hand) In that I would not have long bin off the discourse, for I
would only have showed them one or two of their Apparent Lies, and then have
disputed further with him, but like guilty persons neither he nor T. M. would
let me then read one clause of their own Book, though I. H. soon after fell a
reading in one of ours, and falsely interpreted our words, as is hereafter
discovered, and when they were so afraid, to suffer me to read one particular
in their book, many there took notice of their deceit, though I was content to
dispute on with him, when they would not suffer me to read it, for I feel the
Power of the Lord over them.

I. H. says, Then it seems Paul wrote a Lie as touching himself, that he
waited for the Redemption of the body, and traveled in pain, when it was false
of him, he did not so. I Answer, nay, do any charge Paul with falsehood but J.
H. Paul writ true, for as he could condescend to the low estate of others, he
could weep with them that weep, and wait and travel with them that waited for
the Redemption of the body where it was not redeemed; and as he traveled for
the Galatians, that Christ might be formed in them, when he knew Christ already
formed in him, Gal. 4.19. J. H. says, Did Paul then witness or experiment the
Redemption of his body from corruption before he died? and then he asks, Is not
the body sown in corruption when it dies? It is sown in corruption, it is
raised in incorruption. And again he asks, but is not that corruption which is
in death, in which the body corrupts? and did not Paul wait for the
Redemption of his body from that, and so he tells of the corruption of
mortality.

Answ. Here again is a piece of this J. Horns deceit, in leaving out the word
bondage, which I used in speaking of the creatures Redemption from the bondage
of corruption, and that Paul witnessed the Redemption of the body from the
bondage of corruption, when the creature was delivered into the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, and this the Saints had before their decease: and
here J. H. so much urging, as that Paul waited for the Redemption of the body
from the corruption in which it is sown in death, the corruption of mortality,
in which the body corrupts. This manifests, that he cannot discern between
the bondage of corruption upon earth, and the natural corruption of a dead body
in the grave, as if that corruption of the dead bodies in the grave were the
bondage of corruption which caused the whole Creation to groan, and which Paul
waited for the Redemption of the body from, when he lived upon earth, was ever
such confusion and folly uttered by a Teacher as is by this J. H. herein? for
did Paul wait for his body to be redeemed from the corruption of mortality, in
which it was sown in the Grave before it was in it? and needed he wait and
travel for such a Redemtion in his lifetime? it is absurd that J. H about this
has affirmed, which people may see, that he, and such as own his principles,
do count the bondage of corruption (which Paul waited for the redemption of the
body from) the corruption in which the body corrupts in the grave, and so
would make men believe that Paul waited for the redemption of the body from
that corruption of the body in death before it was in it, and that his body is
not redeemed from the bondage of corruption till it be raised again out of the
grave, so that from this then Paul is not yet come to the redemption of his
body which so many hundred years he groaned and waited for, seeing that
resurrection of the bodies is not yet come, so you may here see that this
Priest Horn has not spoken the language and doctrine delivered by the
Apostles, and therefore is not to be listened to, nor followed, but to be
accounted accursed, according to his own sentence, it must be measured to him
again, for Paul groaned, not for that he would have been uncloathed, but
clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5.4. and the redemption of the body was the adoption
which the Saints waited for through the Spirit of adoption, and which they
received, seeing for that end God sent forth his Son made of a woman made under
the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons, Gal. 4 4, 5, 6.

J. H. says, Well George, hitherto I have made good my charge, That you come
not as the true Prophets and Apostles, thou have not been able to prove that
any of them preached themselves free from sin, so as to be without sin. I reply
here, I. H. has again added to his former lies and folly; for how is his
charge like to be made good by my not proving that the true Prophets and
Apostles preached themselves free from sin, so as to be without it (if I had
not done it, but herein has he spoken deceitfully) but his charge should
rather have been made good if he had proved that all the Prophets and Apostles
had sin in them, and were sinners so long as they lived (according to his
words) and then that we preach our selves free from sin, and not to have
confessed our sins as the Apostles and Prophets did (which is according to his
words or charge against us) which things he could never prove against us, for
he knows not the confessions we have made of our sins; and we preach not our
selves perfect, as if our preaching made us perfect, or as if we were so of our
selves, but we preach the work of Christ, which does truly free from sin and
make perfect, and he it is that is made to us Righteousness and Perfection,
who has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, unto him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever, Rev. 1.5. And so I.H. his saying, that a
man may be perfect in a Scripture-sense, and yet have sin. Asa's heart was
perfect with the Lord all his days, and yet he sinned. To which I say, It is
not said that Asa's heart was perfect all his lifetime, for if it were, it
might as well be said he was perfect when he was in the natural state, and when
his heart was turned from the Lord, that he relied not on him, but on the King
of Syria, for which the Prophet reproved him for dealing so foolishly: insomuch
that Asa was in rage with him, and put him into prison, and oppressed or
crushed some of the people at that time, and when he was diseased in his feet,
he sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians; so could his heart be perfect
with the Lord, when it was so far gone from the Lord? If any shall answer Yea,
then I say, may it not as well be said now of them who are oppressors and
persecutors of the servants of the Lord, and whose hearts are departed from the
Lord? that their hearts are yet perfect with the Lord? So it being said that
Asa's heart was perfect with the Lord all his days, 2 Chronicles. 15.17. was
intended while he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, while the
Land was kept quiet under his Reign: but after he departed from the Lord he had
wars, for as Azariah said unto them, the Lord is with you while you be with
him, and if ye seek him, he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he
will for sake you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. and said Hanani the Seer unto Asa, The eyes
of the Lord run to and fro thorowout the whole earth, to show himself strong in
behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward him: herein have thou dealt
foolishly, therefore from henceforth thou shall have wars; which manifests,
that then his heart was not perfect toward the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 16.7. to the end.

Oh! I see this J. H would willingly have men accounted perfect with the Lord,
when they are sinners; and if such a perfection were, he would own it. But this
will not serve his turn against us, for we own another kind of perfection
then he would have, not a perfection in the sinful state, or where men are
departed from the Lord into the persecuting nature, but such a perfection as is
enjoyed through the sanctification of the Spirit, where they that fear the Lord
shall not depart from him.

And whereas I. H. tells a story of one Giles Rose (who came when we were in
discourse) whom he says is a poor deluded man that was one of the first that
turned Quakers in Lin, and that it has been said he objected sometimes against
them some dishonest carriages between some of their speakers, and a woman of
them, etc. The people hearing him (^he said Giles) being at a distance like a
kind of a distracted man, I. H. says, and Thomas Moore said to me, see the
fruit of thy Ministry George, thy principles are ready to lead men into
distraction, and he says the people laughed, etc. To which I say you may here
see the malice and wickedness of the men in laying down (as they eount them)
his words as an evidence against us; whom they count but as a distracted man to
render us odious to the world and to make them laugh at us: which so often I.
H. has boasted in, and yet he has some of this relation touching what the
said Giles should say but by report of him, and not all from his own mouth as
appears, which shows himself like one of the Prophets enemies who said Report
and we will Report, Ier. 20.10. and the things he has given forth against us,
as in that distracted man's name (as they count him) are lies and slanders, and
will be the burden of the inventers and spreaders of them; and as for that
man, whom this Horn brings as a Witness against us, he was for some time
convinced of the truth, but running from his measure into his vain
imaginations, friends disovvned him, and then he turued into envy sgainst us,
and so it is no matter what he, and such as believe him say against us, the
truth in which we live (and our principles, which are not any ground of
distraction, as J.H. and T.M. accuse them) shall stand for ever over all our
enemies who hate the truth, and over all who turn into Judas way to
perdition But J.H. who thus have shevved thy venom in spreading lies and
slanders against us; do thou think, if I would go about it, that I could
not lay open much wickedness and ranting carriages, that have bin among you
and several of thy company, and tell you of your Loves, and of a woman and her
levvdnesse, that was highly set up as a Preacher or Instructor among you, and
several others? But I had rather be a sufferer by you, then shame you, if you
do not give me the more occasion by your malice and slanders against the Truth
to lay you further open. And now to Horns other part of his charge in his
Argument where he says thus, viz. They that undermine and destroy the hope of
the Gospel preached by the Apostles they are preachers of another Gospel or
doctrine then the Apostles, preached, and are to be accounted accursed and not
received or followed. This I charge you Quakers with, and you G. W. by name in
that you say, the coming of Christ at which the dead in Christ are to be Raised
is already past and over, etc. I Answer, Here J. H. Thou have charged us
exceeding falsely, and belyed us shamefully? for we never said that the coming
of Christ, at which the dead in Christ are to be raised is already past and
over, but that the saints remained unto the coming of the Lord, as the Apostle
says, we which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord according to
our words which thou have falsely and slanderously grounded thy charge upon,
which are against thee and Thomas Moore, where we said, as for that, 1 These.
4.15. Concerning the coming of the Lord from heaven, which these men aforesaid
would blindly put afar off as to a coming of Christ with flesh and bones, the
Apostle says we, which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall
not prevent them which are asleep; so that coming of Christ, the saints who
then were alive remained unto it. To which John Horn says, judge good people
is Christ yet come, are the dead bodies of the saints raised and the living
changed, and all caught up together in the air to meet him? If these men be not
such as we are to avoid and account accursed who be? To which I say thus have
thou wrested our words, and made a false construction of them, contrary to the
end and intent of them; for what we said was against your imaginations who look
carnally for the coming of Christ as many of the world do, of whom Christ said,
I go away and the world sees me no more, John 14. And I vindicated these said
words of ours mentioned, and witnessed to the several comings of Christ as he
was revealed in the saints from glory to glory; because thou opposed these
words to render us odious, and I never denied the coming of the Lord from
Heaven when he shall bring with him them that sleep in Jesus; and raise the
dead in Christ, nor ever said I that was already over and past as thou have
belied me, for when I urged the Apostles remaining till the coming of the Lord
as in, 1 These. 4.15.17. Thou to render me odious urged, ver. 13.14.16. Which I
never denied nor doubted of her, and so I slighted disputing about it, though
thou would have made it disputable against me to make good thy charge and
slander against me, and what confusion would thou charge upon us, as to say the
coming of Ghrist, at which the dead in him are to be raised is already past and
over, as if that which is yet to be were over and past, with this nonsense
thou might as well have charged the Saints as us: who remained unto the coming
of the Lord, and yet did not prevent them which were asleep from being raised,
though I did mention that of Joh. 5.25. touching the dead hearing the voice of
the Son of God, that these that were dead or asleep in their sins might come
to be raised out of them, and live; this I knevv was the most needful for many
people that heard us, to know, they having such as thou art for their
Teachers, whose Ministry does greatly tend to keep them in their sins, when
so much they strive for sin, in contending and pleading for it, as thou have
done. And in thy eleventh page thou have laid down many words in my name which
I never spoke, thy wickedly wronging me will come heavy upon thee one day. And
oh! how lame and doubtful is thy Relation against me? who when thou have
oftentimes laid down answers for mine, thou say, or to such purpose was his
answers, and so have but often guessed about my answers, and often belyed me,
and perverted the words of truth, and broken my answers often, putting but
pieces of them down, as any impartial reader of thy relation who heard our
dispute may easily see. And after thou have for a pretense laid down part of my
Answers, thou again say, to such purpose was his answer, but with more
circumstances, and tells of my running into a long circuling discourse, and so
have left out many things I said, which tendered much to the clearing of my
answers, to the understandings of "the simple. And where I said that of God in
the people must be Judge, John Horn says, he appeals to that of God in them
all. See what a dissembling imitation he is in here how can he appeal to that
of God in all the People, when he denies that all have the light of Christ in
them? which is that of God in all which we speak of, and appeal to in all, and
to my knowledge this Priest has often contended against our saying the light
of Christ, or a spiritual light is in all men, which is that in every one
which the true Minister must appeal to, and be a good savor to both, in them
that are saved, and in them that perish, which the blind guides of this Age do
so much contend against. And where I laid upon this Priest Horn, his writing so
much against the Priests of this Nation, and his calling them such as Esaias
speaks of, Isaiah 56. Watchmen that are blind greedly dogs, and dumb dogs,
etc. when he himself is in the same stepps they are in. To this he replies
thus to me, viz. Nay George, thou do not findt he to the us dumb dogs, we
are made able, blessed be God, to worry thee, and put worst, ando. and at the
dispute he told me he was able to worry me, and such Foxes as I am, so you may
see the falsehood and vanity of this man and his Reason: which is no better then
to say, a dog that is a worrier is not a dumb dog, because he can worry, when
as the dumb dogs use to be the greatest worriers, as the blind Watchmen in
Israel, were compared to such, when they fed themselves, and sought for their
gain from their Quarters, but destroyed and scattered the Flock. So here J. H.
has not cleared himself from being one of the Watchmen whom he has called
dumb dogs, seeing that according to his own confession he is a worrier, and so
not as Christ 's Ministers were, who were Lambs among Wolves. Again J. H.
answers me thus, viz. The Lamb is a Lion to George, and makes Israel a Lion
too. Ge^. 49.9. Mica. 5.8. And it is in his strength and power, that we are
enabled to tear and worry thee, etc. To which I say, here again has he falsely
boasted in his folly and falsehood, and of that power which he was manifest to
be out of both in the dispute, and when he sought to break up the meeting, and
fled out of it, before I would have had him, and left several Questions
unanswered which I put to him. And it is said at the end of this his relation in
the next page, that the Churchwarden M. H with other Friends, seeing J. H. much
spent with speaking so long, and so much, and fearing be might wrong himself
therein, and that he being tired, and much spent, withdrew, etc. When a little
before he boasted of his being in the strength and power of the Lion, and as a
Lion that could tear and worry me, counting me a Fox, and now he is tired and
much spent, and he fain to flee for it, was ever the like confusion and
ignorance heard of? Did you ever hear of a Fox that out-stood a Lion so far in
battle, as to cause the Lion to be so tired and much spent, that the Lion was
first fain to flee for it, and so many of John Horns Friends who count
themselves in the strength and power of the Lion were afraid he might wrong
himself he being so much spent and tired. You may see here that his boasting of
his God, and of his being in the Lions power is come to naught, and that he is
a mere Hypocrite and dissembler to boast of being in that which he is out of,
and if we be Foxes, and he a tearer and a worrier according to his own words:
how is it he cannot fear us, or affright us away?

And to that where it is said, J. Horn and others of his friends, laughing at
the Quakers, and G. W. to see some of his confusion; and to prove his laughing
he brings, The righteous shall see them, and laugh them to scorn: I say, It
has in this thing largely manifested his folly and vanity, in his, and his
companies laughing and scoffing among such a great company, which did encourage
profane and ignorant people in their scorn and laughter, which is madness;
which these Professors stirred up in them, but many that were sober saw their
folly and profaneness therein; so that J. H. was not a Minister of grace to
the hearers, but of that which stirred up folly and madness among them. And now
what impudence is he in, to boast of such vanity and wickedness in print, and
bring David's words for a cover to it? when he never knew the state of David,
nor truly understands when to laugh, and when to mourn, as appears by his
unsavory practices: So that the righteous who sits on high will laugh him to
scorn, who has scorned the innocent, and caused others so to do as he has
done; and woe unto them that laugh now, for they shall mourn and weep, Luk 6.25.

J. H. accounts, that he is completely righteous, though in himself he
acknowledges sin, and for proof he says the Apostle said, Colos 2.10. In him
ye are complete: and yet in the same Epistle to the same people, he says;
Chap. 3.5. Mor^ifie therefore your members that be upon earth, fornication,
uncleaness, etc. If these were not in them, how could they be called their
members upon earth? To which I saying the Apostles writing to the Churches,
writ to diverse states, some of them were complete in Christ, and others were
not, etc. J. H. says, the Apostle makes no such distinction; and he says,
What (...) think the Apostle writ one Chapter to one part of the (...), and
another Chapter to another? Reply: The Apostle never said that they that were
in the fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affections, evil concupiscence,
covetousness, were then in that state complete in Christ; for they that were
complete in Christ had put off all these, and knew the old man with his deeds,
and the body of the sins of the flesh put off, Colos. 2.10, 11. and 3 7, 8, 9,
10. So that the members of that body could not remain where the body on which
they were was ^ut off, and so the Apostles exhorting to mortify their members
which were upon earth; as fornication, uncleanness, in which they walked in
time past, does not prove that all the Colossians were in the fornication, as
follows from J. H. his words: who makes no distinction of the state among these
Paul writ to, but blindly cavills at me for distinguishing the diverse states
when I distinguished the state of being complete in Christ, where the body of
sin is put off from the state of fornication and uncleanness, and his asking,
if the Apostle writ one Chapter to one part of the people, and another Chapter
to another, does manifest his blindness; for the Apostles Epistles were not
divided into Chapters when he writ them, as now they are. And as for that 1
King. 8.46. where it is said, For there is no man that sins not, which Jo.
Horn and T. Moore have much cavilled at me for owning it but as belonging to
that state wherein all men were sinners, and so J. H. says, There is no man
living sins not, Jesus Christ excepted. In this have they contradicted John's
words, who said 1 John 3. Whosoever is born of God sins not, neither can he
sin; and he that abides in Christ, sins not: and he that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as Christ is righteous; so that such is not
included in these words mentioned in 1 King. 8.46, they knowing a better
Covenant then that which the Israelites were under when that was spoken by
Solomon, 1 King. 8.46 and J. H. and T. M. in page 8. acknowledge, That they
that are born of God cannot sin, or do any thing against the truth: and that
sin dwelt in Paul, but it was not he that did it; so that this flatly
contradicts his saying; There is no man living that sins not; and their
applying that Scripture, 1 King. 8.46. to them that cannot sin, nor do any
thing against the Truth, and ^^cusing such with it, as being sinners: Thus
their confusion and folly appears in striving for the Devils Kingdom, by
contending or pleading for his work, which is sin, which Christ comes to
destroy, and thoroughly to purge and sanctify the creature from: who is the one
offering by which God has for ever perfected them that are sancrified. And at
the end of J. H. his Relation of the Discourse between us, it is said thus, viz.
[To such purpose was the Discourse between J. H. and G. W. we have here given
the substance and scope, if not also the very form of the Answers, and the very
Words and form so much as could be remembered, etc.] To which I say, Here J.
Horn seems as if he would make people believe, that he himself did not give
forth the said Relation, but some others, but then who these were is not
mentioned; for they have not subscribed their names to it, and here it is but
related doubtfully, as if the Relators thereof had but depended upon their own
memories, as relating so much of it as could be remembered: But dare J. H. say
that he was not the Author of the said lame and imperfect Relation of the
Discourse? nor the cause of its being published? and that it was all as it is
related in the particulars thereof, taken from our own mouths, as and when we
disputed? Let the Reader judge of his deceit in these things.

And where in the said Pamphlet it is said, The wh^le company seeming generally
well satisfied against the Quakers, to the no small trouble of the Quakers, as
might be conceived for their coming diverse of them in the next Lord's Day after
with G. W. to the Congregation, etc. These are more of the lies which J. H.
boasts in, as many that heard our discourse (who saw the truth over him, in
which we had peace, and were not at all troubled) can witness against these
things as lies, and that diverse of the Quakers came with me on that day to the
Congregation, is false: for I went alone to the Steeple-house, and their coming
was not known to me before I went, though they came, desiring to see what
became of me there; and so they saw the abuse that some of this J. H. his
hearers did against me, in not suffering me to speak to them in the Steeple
house when he had done, but violently pulled me down, tore off my Hat, and
haled me out; insomuch that many that were not of the Quakers, spoke against
them for it, and would have had me spoken: and as a friend told me that day, an
Alderman of their own company said to him, as that if I went again to that
Congregation he feared I should receive harm or prejudice to my person,
though I did not look out at that. And whereas I said I had a word from the
Lord to the people, J. H. in his Postscript does declare, [That he judge it as
well done in those persons in power, not to suffer the said G. W. to utter his
pretended Word from the Lord: and that it is well done of the people not to
hear it: and that they shall do evil, if hereafter they any of them permit me
to speak, and much more if they hear and liften to me, or any of us in such way
of doctrine, he says.] To which I say then J.H. would encourage those persons
in power to persecute me, and to cause the outward man to suffer (upon the like
occasion it seems) and thus he would stop the witness of God in me (which
torments him) from speaking: though it was not the persons in power ( viz. the
Magistrates) that did so abuse me in his Steeple-house, as I was abused, for
some of them in power endeavored to preserve me from the abuse of them that
did chiefly abuse me, and the people did hear me in the Yard, contrary to this
Priest's words and mind: But if neither J. Horn nor any of his hearers,
(according to his direction to them) must permit me to speak, then from this,
they must either cruelly punish me some way or other, to stop my mouth, or else
they must murder me; how should they hinder me from speakingels? And here he
has not only included himself as one that must persecute me to hinder me from
speaking; but also he has given liberty to the people who are not in power or
authority, to persecute me, as if he were some great tyrannizing Magistrate,
manifesting himself to be in Cain's Way: So whether this Priest Horn does
intend with his Hearers to proceed lawfully against me, ot not, the People may
easily judge; for which I leave him to the Lord to be judged for his malice
herein. And here also you may see that J.H. was not able to tear nor woory me,
nor to stop my mouth with his words, as falsely he would boast, seeing he is
fain to encourage them in power, and the people to hinder me from speaking: And
this is the beastly shift these silly Priests are fain to flee to when their
Gospel will not defend them; neither can their God give them victory by it.

And J.H. says, As for this People the quakers, unless they see and turn from
their evil Way, God's hand will be against them, and that their root is
rottenness, and shall be dried and perish, he says.

To which I say, J. Horn has but here judged us in his malice, and prophesied
from the envy of his own heart, and we doubt not but his Prophecy will prove
false, and come to pass upon himself; and many such lying Prophets against us
as he is, there is in the World; and if our root were rottenness, how is it we
we are such a heavy judgment, burden and torment to him, and such deceivers
as he is? And how is it we increase and grow so much in the power of God, that
our Borders are so much enlarged, that We are a burden to our Enemies, such
false Prophets and blind Watchmen as J H. is, who with his Brother T.M. has
acknowledged us to be a heavy Judgment that God has ordered to punish them
for their neglect of Christ, and the abuse of his Truth; and yet since he has
boasted of their being able to woory and tear me, and now accuses our root to
be rottenness; which is as much as if they had said, They can woory and tear
the heavy Judgment that God has ordered to them, and that the Root of that
judgment is rottenness, according to this Priest H orn's own Words; and herein
has he sadly blasphemed against God, who is the root of his own Judgments;
one of whose Judgments we are ordered by him to punish J.H. and such as he is,
for their neglect of Christ, and the abuse of his Truth; and therefore we must
do the Work that God has sent us for: And what presumption is it of J.H. to
persuade his Hearers not to permit us to speak, nor to liften to us, but to
account us accursed, when we are the heavy Judgment that God ordered to punish
them for their abuse of his truth, which is all one as if he had said, Permit
not God to speak by his Judgment to us, nor listen to the Judgment that God
has ordered to punish us for our our faults, but account it accursed. And thus
his blasphemy and hardness of he^rt is manifest, like theirs who repented not
of their evil deeds, (spoken of in Rev. 16.9. but blasphemed against the God of
Heaven when they were in torment under the Plagues of God, whose Judgments
are all righteous upon the disobedient.

J. H. says, The King Christ shall rejoice in God, and every one that swears
by (or confesses) him shall glory, Psalm. 63.10. Let them alone, neither abuse
them with incivilities, etc. To which I say, If every one that swears by Christ
shall glory, then must the Drunkards and Liars, and all such profane persons
as swearby him, glory; and so this doctrine of his tends to the encouraging of
Drunkards, and profane persons in swearing, which is against the Doctrine of
Christ, who put an end to the Oaths and swearing which was under the Law,
where there was swearing by the Lord; for Christ and the Apostle commanded
not to svvear at all: and he that transgresses and abides not in the doctrine
of Christ, has not. And if people must let us alone, and not abuse us with
incivilities, then J. H. and his company ought to permit us to speak, and he
ought not encourage them to persecute us, as he has done a little before: thus
he still discovers his own confusion, whereby he has so long abused the Truth
of God, and been fighting against the heavy Judgment of God (which is his
due) as he has done, who by his carriage and Doctrine has encouraged
drunkards, scoffers and svvearers in their wickedness. Thus all that come to
the Truth may see how evil men and seducers wax worse and worse.

And to these words in J. H. his Pamphlet, which are thus laid down, viz. Our
Lord Jesus teaching his Disciples to pray to God as their Father, and in the
first place to breathe or desire the hallowing or sanctifying of Gods Name, the
coming of his Kingdom, and that his will might be done in earth as it is in
heaven, and yet teaching them to pray for forgiveness of their trespasses; does
he not strongly and plainly imply, that even such as are the children of God,
and so born of God, and that have their hearts through his grace, set for the
glory of God's Name above all things, and so for the coming of his Kingdom, and
the doing of his will, have sins and trespasses against God, of which they need
forgiveness.

I answer; Men may call God Father, as he is the Creator of all: Mal. 2 10.
before they are born of God, or before the birth which is from above, be
brought forth in them, which is endued with power from on high; and before the
Disciples were endued with that power, or come to that state, they were to pray
for the forgiveness of their trespasses: Now that which was in the Trespasses,
was not the Seed in them which the Promise was to; neither in that state was
the Seed brought forth to reign, while the first Birth or trespasser against
God which the Law takes hold upon, was alive and acting them; and no man can
truly call God Father, but by the Holy Ghost; and that which called him Father
in the Disciples of Christ, (when they were begotten to the belief of the
Truth) was begotten of him; and they praying in that (as being begotten before
they were in the statof him that is born of God, as mentioned in 1 John 3) they
received what they asked, and so came to have their trespasses for given as
they forgave others theirs, and to inherit the Kingdom of God and his Power,
which they prayed for, Col. 1.14 Rev. 12 10. In which Kingdom there is no
sin, nor unclean thing can come; and they that are come to the childrens
state, that are born of God and abide in Christ, they sin not; and the
childrens state must be witnessed, before the Kingdom be inherited; also there
may be children begotten, and not in that which is born of God, nor in the
Kingdom, if they abide not in the Seed; such as Paul traveled for, that
Christ might be formed in them.

J.H. again says, Or is it not evident that our Savior teaches thus to pray,
till his Name be perfectly every where hallowed, his Kingdom fully come, and
his Will perfectly done every where, even in earth as in heaven, which is not
in this world, says he.

I answer; Why should Christ teach his to pray that his Will may be perfectly
done every where, even in earth, as it is in heaven, if it be not in this World
so to be done? What darkness is this J. H. in, and confusion? And how has he
herein appeared against the end for which the Disciples of Christ prayed as he
taught them, who prayed that the Fathers Will might be done in Earth as in
Heaven, which this Priest has denied to be in this World; but Christ's
Testimony contradicts him; for Christ says, What things soever ye desire when
ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them, Mark 11.23, 24.
And they desired the Will of God to be done in Earth, as in Heaven, where there
is no sin.

J. H. says, But by adding the Prayer for daily Bread, and that before Prayer
for forgiveness of their Trespasses; does he not imply that so long as men have
need of Bread for their life, they have also need to pray for pardon of, and
keeping from sin: if then the quakers (so called) will say they have no sin in
them, let them manifest it in living without Bread or food, and we may then (it
may be) think there is ground to believe them, that the Name of God is so
hallowed, his Kingdom so come, and his will so done in them, that they have no
sin nor trespasses.

Answ. Here J. H. has showed himself to be a scornful tempter, and a blind
unbeliever; For Christ when upon earth did eat Bread and Food, but that did not
argue that he had sin; and he has left us an example that his steps should be
followed who did not sin, 1 Pet. 2 21, 22. And how shall men pray for keeping
from sin, if they may not be kept from it, according to J. H. his Words, who
also would make Christ's praying of none effect, if none may be kept from sin;
for Christ prayed to the Father that his children might be kept from the evil,
even in the World, and be perfect in one as he and his Father were one, John
17. And twhen some of the quakers have fasted certain days together as they
were moved, (and as many of Gods People have done) and been upheld in it by the
Power of God, some of this generation of tempters have slandered them, as being
in delusion or Witchcraft; and one partaking of their iniquities is this Priest
Horn, and he says that they may (it may be) think there is ground to believe
us if we will live without bread or food: It appears its but doubtful whether
they will believe us or not, if such a thing might be: Thus J.H. thy folly and
deceit is gone abroad: Oh! gross darkness is thy Habitation.

J. H. says, Note, whosoever is born of God sins not; whosoever is
perfectly born of God, as the spirits of just men made perfect, that is
deceased, they cannot sin; nor the men when their spirits and bodies shall be
reunited in the Resurrection; but none are so perfectly born of God here.

Answ. Oh what pitiful stuff is here, to imagine that men are not perfectly
born of God, so as not to sin, till they are deceased, and when their spirits
and bodies should be reunited in the Resurrection! And this would make the
work of God imperfect here, when all his Works are perfect: And what were these
that were born of God in the Apostles days, (who the Apostle said, could not
sin) some that were deceased and risen again, having their bodies and spirits
reunited then in the Resurrection (according to what J.H. speaks?) Surely J.
H. had I said as much as thou have done herein, thou might well have said that
I undermine the hope of the Gospel; and much more of thy confusion and lies
have I left unmentioned here.

And where J.H. says, that G.F. and G.W. uncivilly pos^^d him up as going away
on purpose (intending that they posted him up as going on purpose out of Lin to
avoid disputing with them) this is falsehood: For what we posted up, had not
those words in it, but was a true Relation to certify the people why we could
not then have a public meeting (as we demanded) neither with J.H. nor T.M.
that they might not think that the canse of our not meeting with them at that
time, did lie upon our parts, but upon theirs, and this was occasioned by J.H.
his many slanderous Papers which he posted up before, wherein he charged the
^^^kers with being dec^ivers and accursed; and in some of his Papers he
promised to make that charge good, as, and when thereto lawfully called; which
he has not yet done, nor can do.

Some of J. H. his Doctrines and slanders against us, are here again laid down,
which all that are sober-minded who read this, may judge of, and see that he
has not made them good against us.

One particular he urged, and in effect affirmed, was, That the corruption
which Paul groaned and waited for the redemption of the body from, was the
corruption of Mortality in which the body is in death when it is in corruption.

That the Prophets and Apostles had sin in them so long as they lived.

That the Scriptures never says, Let not sin be in you.

That there is no man living that sins not, Jesus Christ excepted.

That the Quakers are deceivers, and such as the People ought not to hear, but
to account them accursed.

That they (to wit, the Quakers) come not as the true Prophets and Apostles
did, viz. With abasements of themselves, and lifting up God and Christ.

That they subvert the Faith, in saying that the knowledge of Christ that is to
eternal salvation, is the knowledge of him after the Spirit, as he was before
the world was.

That they deny the resurrection of the bodies of men.

That they deny Christ to have that body in heaven glorified, in which he
suffered and rose again.

That the Quakers say, the coming of Christ in which he shall descend with a
shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of God, and when the
dead in Christ shall be raised, and the living believers be changed, is over
and past.

J.H. said, he is not a dumb dog, for he is able to tear and woory me, and such
Foxes.

Now these his charges against us called quakers, which are but a few of his
many slanders, I return them back upon him, and reject them as lies and
slandars; and if he further assay to make them good, I shall know further how
to proceed against him, as the Lord shall make way; for I have much more of his
confusion, false doctrines and slanders, which are not yet gone abroad, which I
have noted, and are upon Record:

One thing more I note, That the said J. Horn and T. Moore in a Paper against
me, say (of us called quakers) That we be indeed Vipers and Scorpions,
Cockatrices not to be charmed, and like the Locusts out of the bottomless pit,
whose sting is in their Tales, they say: And yet these men that have thus
reproached us, have confessed that we are a heavy judgment that God has
ordered to them, to punish them for their neglect of Christ the salvation of
God, and the Truth of him so long abused by them. Now from their own
confession they are such as have not the seal of God upon their foreheads; for
the Locusts were only sent to punish these men that had not the seal of God
upon their foreheads; Rev. 94. Thus their malice and confusion is gone abroad,
who shall know one day that we are another manner of Judgment against them,
then the Locusts; and the more they strive against the heavy Judgment that God
has ordered to punish them for the neglect of Christ, and abusing of his
Truth, the greater will their shame and torment be.

And all People in whom there is a simplicity of Truth appearing, and a desire
stirring in you after life for your souls, beware of the Leaven of these
Deceivers and abusers of the Truth, who are so contending and pleading for
sin, whereby the Devils Kingdom is upheld and strengthened, and his subjects
encouraged in his service; for the hand of the Lord is against them, and God
will assuredly confound and overthrow them; their confusion and folly is
already much gone abroad, therefore feed not you upon their confusion, nor upon
their chaff (dead words) but come off from among these barren Mountains, and
heed the appearance of the Light of the Lord in you, and feel it, that you may
come to the bread of Life, and to feed upon the flesh of Christ which comes
down from Heaven: For the Lord is exalting his holy Mountain above all the
barren Mountains that have lifted up themselves against him. Blessed are they
that come into the love of the Truth, and wait in the Light of it in them,
whereby they may be undeceived, and escape out of the snares of such ungodly
men who make a prey upon souls.

The End.

