JOHN WHITE'S DEFENSE. In the behalf of himself, his honored Commander, the
Lieutenant of the Tower and the other his Fellow Warders.

Against a lying and slanderous Pamphlet written by John Lilburne, and entitled
Liberty vindicated against Slavery.

The Author of which Pamphlet, is here reprehended for his slandering, taxed
for his Libelling, and incited the spirit of disaffection abandoned.)

To submit himself to his Rulers, As he is Commanded.

To live in unity with his fellow Commanders, As he ought.

There be six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven is an abomination unto him.

A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands that shed Innocent blood.

A heart that devises wicked abominations. Feet that be swift in running to
do mischief.

A false witness that speaks lies, and he that sows discord amongst
brethren

Proverbs. LONDON, Printed by E. G. for JOHN HARDESTY at the Sign of the Black
spread-Eagle in Duck-Lane, 1646.

To the Intelligent Reader.
AS we are not bound to reveal all truths, so are we tied to vindicate the
truth being evil spoken of. Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, a man whose folly the
world talks of, whose presumption all men admire, and whose wrethed Estate,
as being a man given up to himself, all men ought to deplore, having Taxed,
Defamed, and Despised even the Governors and Rulers of this Nation, may cause
those that are inferiors the less to set by, and slight his Calumnies.

But forasmuch as those Powers have already begun, and at their pleasure, may
proceed to punish his sauciness, which privilege, I and others of the Commons
want: is therefore remains that we may assume that liberty, as by writing and
speaking to vindicate our selves.

First, therefore forasmuch as in a Pamphlet lately Printed, he particularly
enveigheth against me falsely, taxing me of that whereof I am not the least
guilty, I thought good gentle Reader, in the behalf of my self, my Lieutenant
and other my Fellow wardens of the Tower unworthily by him calumniated, to
publish this my Answer, which the Highest knows to be truth, and nothing but
the truth, which follows.

First, he cries out and bitterly exclaimeth of the great Fees, which the
Lieutenant of the Tower, and the Gentleman Porter extort; let therefore all
men Judge, what reason he has to say so, when as they never received any of
him, nor ever demanded any, and here let me discharge my conscience freely; I
protest not out of favor or affection, but out of the entire love I bear to
the worth of the party, Who adventured his life for the Parliament at the
^eleife of Gloucester.
I conceive there was never a more pious upright and well-affected man
Lieutenant of the Tower, then he that executes that office at the present, one
for whom we have cause to bless God, and acknowledge our thankfulness to the
Parliament and City for their care for their choosing of so accomplished a man as
he is, to execute that Office of so high a concernment; the Gentleman Porter
also an upright man, for ought ever I could perceive, who have been an eye
witness of his Actions; but Lilburnes carriage and calumnyes are such, that
some of his best friends begin to desert him, some of them have said to me,
that they were sorty to see his unworthy carriage and behavior; how basely
has this man Lilburne abused and vilified the ever to be honored Earl of
Manchester, who has ventured his life, and slighted his Estate, to advance the
public good? and indeed who is there truly virtuous, that has not tasted of
his slanders? but whosoever shapeth not himself to his cut, and walks not in
the same path of error that he does; by him is accursed; and not only he, but
also all his accomplices with their new lights placed in dark Lanthornes,
misguide themselves, and deceive others, and refuse all fellowship save with
their Brethren in -- but now to the matter intended.

The Pamphleter says,

One White a Warder of the Tower, 1 Complaint.
who came to the Lieutenant Colonel in Newgate, and gave him their evil and
provoking Language, does with contumelious, and reproachful words, and
gestures, frequently affront and abuse, etc.

Here observe he taxes me once to have visited him in Newgate, and there to
have given him evil and provoking Language; what my words were he recites
not, but I shall; with the reason why I went to visit him having formerly some
acquaintance with him, when he was an Apprentice, with a Cloth-Drawer; I then
being a Clothier in Reading had occasion to have much Cloth pass through his
Masters hands, and some time after hearing of his being Prisoner in Newgate, I
went to see him there, and being admitted into his chamber, I found him writing
of a Letter, one standing by him to receive it; when he had finished, he asked
me, if I had any thing to him; I told him, I came out of my love to see him,
and desired him for the glory of God, Fools despise Counsel says Solomon.
to carry himself humbly, and as one possessing the spirit, as only
professing the Gospel, for if he had a good cause he would spoil it in the
handling; here he abruptly asked me, if this were all I came for, and rudely
pulling me by the Coat said, if I had not been an old man, he would have
thrown me down Stayrs; his rough speeches and sturdy gestures gave me cause
to fear he would do as he had said; being down the Stayrs I told him, I had
heard much of him, now had seen, and if wariness prevented not, spiritual
pride would be his overthrow: which he hearing was coming down the Stairs
after me, but I fled away and escaped his hands, and this was all the evil and
provoking Language which I then gave him. I appeal to all the Prisoners in the
Tower, how I have carried my self to him; I wish Master Lilburne no more ill
then mine own soul, I hate not the man, but his manners; and therefore let all
the world judge, what cause this man has to exclaim of my ill usage of Him.

The second Complaint.
His next complaint is, that I have often affronted him in the Tower, and given
him reproachful words. I know none that ever J gave him except once, when upon
his commitment to the Tower, he came to the Lieutenants house, A soft answer
turns away wrath, but fools are implacable.
I came and bowing to him with my Hat in my hand * said Master Lilburne, I am
sorry to see you come hither in this manner, J pray God help you and give you
grace to demean your self in all things as becomes his Child; upon which in a
rough manner, he bade me go further from him, he needed not my Prayers or
company, at which many of his friends that stood by said they were sorry for
his averseness, since which time, I have not had the least conference with him.

The third Complaint:
He thirdly, complains that on my waiting Day, J keep back those that would
come unto him, and do affront them to this I answer.

When I did visit, I never kept back any that would come unto him, provided
they would give me their names, Answer.
and the place of their dwelling; now there have come many that denied to
discover their names, and where they dwelt, but used threatenings, and
contumelious speeches, saying that we should Answer the prohibition of them
from going to visit Colonel Lilburne, and that the time was at hand, when they
would come in whether our Lieutenant would or no; now those that would discover
their names, and abode, had free entrance at all times; diverse we have proved,
who under pretense of going to the Mint, have gone to the chamber of that
Coyner of Lies Lilburne; as for Instance, there came one in a Coach, I asking
him whether he would go, he said, to my fellow Frankling; I asked him, if he
went to no place else, he said no; I mistrusting his falsehood, sent one of my
fellows after him, who found him inquiring for Lilburns Chamber; my fellow
approaching to him, told him he did not ask for Lilburne, but for Frankling
when he came in, and brought him back with him to me. I told him he did ill in
celling an untruth, to ask for one place and go to another; yet
notwithstanding if he would write down his name, and his dwelling, etc.
herewith the Gentleman, grew greatly enraged, and fured as one had been mad,
and threatened me and my fellows very severely, that he would make us dearly
Answer, etc. and to say truth, there repaires not to Lilburne, any one of note
save two or three, but often men's wives, and waste-coat mayds, and some
straggling Soldiers; and those that come from him, report that he does not want
for money nor wine, now let all men judge, I doing nothing but what I am
commanded to do, and what I must do at my peril, what cause this defamer
has to complain of me? which when I consider, as also his standering of
others without all ground, I cannot but conclude he has the Frenzy, and his
wits the issue of a distempered brain, but as long as he persiseth in those
Ambition, Pride.
two Capital sins, the one the overthrow of the Mother of us all EVE, the
other, the damning of that once glorious Angel Lucifer, I cannot conceive how
he should shake of those bonds of obstinacy, and malevolencit, or break those
yoakes, of malice and revenge wherewith he is fettered, and pinnion'd. For mine
own part, let Master Lilburns and his accomplices know, I lost more for adhering
as I ought to the Parliamene then ever he was worth; my sons having been in
the States Service, ever since the beginning of these wars, under Lord (...),
and with him in all his Fights, and since his Resignation under the truly Noble
Sir Thomas Fairefax, and with him in all (...), one being a Captain under him,
in his own Regiment, who is now Governor of Wallingford, the other Enngne in
the same Regiment; yet I do not blow a Trumpet nor proclaim what has been
done. His accomplices, what ever they put forthy, O how often do they iterate,
and set down in Letters Capital, the worthy sufferer for his Country,
LIEUTENANT COLONEL LILBVRNE, as if the Titles of the party could expiate his
crimes, whereas it is rather an aggravation thereof and according to the Poet,

Great is the crime it cannot choose,
If he be great that does it use.
Satan's Policy.
But this I have observed in my time, that who ever has undertaken to maintain,
any error or heresy, * the devil has still furnished his mind with
arguments to wrestle with all opposers, nay, and so far to prevail, that in
outward esteem, sometimes the DEVILS SOPHISTRY has triumphed ore the CHRISTIAN
VERITY for my part I esteem it my chief glory, my conscience bearing me
witness, that I am to number my self with those solid Citizens, and with them
who say in the Poet;

We are no Partners with those Factious fellows,
Who bring the fuel, or who blow the bellows
Of civil discords, nor of Time-Servers.
those that vary
Their principles, when their designs miscarrie,
Nor of That ty^ their faith on others, and will believe as did their
forefathers.
their Creed who will believe no more
Then what they have believed heretofore.
Or what their Grandsires did believe of old,
Or what shall by their Priests to them be told;
Nor are we of their mind who therefore do
What Obstinate and blinded Persons.
they have done, because they have done so;
But we are men who good advisement had,
Of what we do, though some yet think us mad;
Men that have all our best endeavors vowed,
To True Christians.
loose no freedom, reason has allowed
Men who resolve to seek a perfect way,
To walk it as uprightly as we may,
To keep unchanged, God's and Natures Laws:
And change all other things, as there is cause.
I would desire Master Lilburne to remember the Fate of BROVNE, an obstinate
Heretic in the days of Queen Elizabeth, and the Father of that stubborn
Sect, the Brownists. And as from Reverend Calvin, the maintainers of his
righteous Tenets were called Calvinists, so from misled Brown, the confirmers
of his wicked tenets were called Brownists; this Brown. the giddy multitude
followed in heaps, to hear him preach the Doctrine of Sedition and Rebellion;
this man, Master Lilburne zealously imitares, and once like him on Tower Hill,
was surrounded with a company of mechanics, who at the Constables approach he
exhorts to stand on their defense, and to kill the Constable; and about to draw
his sword, the Constable closed in with him and withheld him, and presently
disarming him, his Audience being dispersed, brought him guarded to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, who used him with all lenity, far better then he
deserved: He, by whose favor I know not, escaping without the payment of five
pound due by the Law of our Land, and to be paid by him that shall dare to
affront or hinder a Constable in the prosecution of his Office. But I now
proceed to Answer his fourth Complaint, wherein he averreth, that great and
extraordinary Rents are taken for Chambers, whereby I conceive he hoped to
insinuate, and according to the proverb, to curry favor with some of the
Gentlemen in the Tower; but they are so well acquainted with his Lies, that
they know this is not the first.

The fourth Complaint.
This medler and busy body in other men's matters, without all ground, or the
least reason on his part, complains, and falsely accuses some of the warders
to take of some fifty shillings, of other forty, of some thirty, etc. as
notorious a Lie, as the Father of Lies could have belched; true it is, that
some of the Warders have been so much a week the worse for some of their
Prisoners; but there is no warder but is well content to take ten shillings a
week for his Chamber, with all furniture belonging to it, neither is any man
compelled to give any more then what he lists but say we did take more,
accounting also the great care and pains we take so watch and ward all the
year long, day and night, for 14. pence a day, and of that we are behind on
Arrears almost five years, some of us having nothing else in the world to
live on, but the Honorable Committee have taken Order for our better payment
for the future; I would entreat Master Lilburne not to add to the wickedness
of his friend, Master B. who has already sufficiently wronged the warders; and
although it pleased his friend aforementioned to say, that there were not above
two or three in all the company that could be trusted without scruple, yet it
cannot be proved, that ever any one of them failed in his trust, or let escape
any Prisoner during this dangerous time: And here let the Reader take notice,
of the wavering, and unstable mind of my accuser; who in this Book highly
advances (Magna Charta) and yet in another standerous lying Libell, entitled
An ALARVM to the house of LORDS, he terms it a beggarly Law; and says also
that the Laws were made by Kings, to keep men in slavery -- and yet the Lord
Strafford, and the Archhishop of Canterbury lost their heads, for going about
to alter them, -- and in a Book of his entitled, The Freemans Freedom
vindicated, page 11. He raileth against all Power and Authority: whatsoever,
and sets up an absolute Anarchie. His words are these.

A POSTSCRIPT, Containing a General Proposition.
GOd the absolute Sovereign Lord and King of things in heaven, and earth; the
original Fountain, and cause of all causes: who is circumscribed Governed,
and limited by no rules; does all merely, and only by his Sovereign, and
unlimited good pleasure, who made the world, and all things therein for his
own glory; and who by his own will and pleasure, gave man (his mere
creature) the Sovereignty under himself, over all the rest of the Creatures,
Genesis 1.26, 28, 29. and endued him with a rational understanding; and thereby
created him after his own Image, Genesis 1.26, 27. and 9.6. the first of which
was Adam a male man, made out of the dust or clay; out of whose side was taken
a Rib; which by the Sovereign, and absolute mighty creating power of God, was
made a Female or Woman, called EVE, which two are the earthly original
Fountain as begetters and bringers forth of all and every particular, and
individual man and woman, that ever breathed in the world since; who are and
were by nature a like, and equal in Power, Dignity, Majesty, etc. none of them
having by nature, any Authority, Dominion, or Majesteriall Power one over or
above another; neither have they, or can they execute any, but merely by
institution, or donation, that is to say, by mutual agreement or consent
given, derived, or assumed, by mutual consent, and agreement, for the good,
benefit, and comfort each of other; and not for the mischief, hurt, or damage
of any, it being unnatural, Irationall, sinful, wicked, and unjust, for any
man or men whatsoever, to part with so much of their Power, as shall unable any
of their Parliament men, Trustees, Deputies, Viceroyes, Ministers, Officers, or
Servants, to destroy, and undo them therewith and also, unnatural, unjust,
sinful, and divellish is it for any man whatsoever, spiritual, temporal,
Clergy man, or lay man, to appropriate, and assume unto himself power,
Authority, and Jurisdiction, to Rule, Govern, or Reign over, any sort of men
in the world, without their free consent; and whosoever does it, whether
Clergy men, or any other whatsoever, do thereby as much as in them lies,
endeavor to appropriate and assume unto themselves, the Office and Sovereignty
of God, who alone does, and is to rule by his will and pleasure; and to be like
their Creator, which was the sin of the devils, who not being content, with
their first Station, but would be like God, for which sin they were thrown
down into hell, reserved in everlasting chains unto the judgment of the
great day, Lude v. 6. and Adams sin it was, which brought the curse upon him,
and all his Posterity, that he was not content in the Station, and condition,
which God had created him, but did aspire to a better, and more excellent,
namely to be like the Creator; which proved his ruin; yea, and indeed, had
been the everlasting ruin, and destruction of all his, etc.

Let the wise and understanding Reader, judge the Authors intention, in framing
the Proscript before recited, whether or no his inclination serves not, were
the reins in his hand, to dissolve the whole Frame of Government, to set up
confusion, and give license to every evil work, to be acted without
control; and yet such was his boldness, that a the tail of his Proscript he
adds his name, as glorying in his Lines.

Thus per me, JOHN LILBURNE.

Oh Master Lilburne, if e're these lines come to your view, peruse them with
patience, and consider what a rash and unadvised course you have taken; having
been another ACHAN, a troubler of Israel; I remember what I once learned at
School, nunquam sera est, ad benos mores via, now at length recollect your
selve, set forth your recantation for the past, and your resolution for the
future; which will for the glory of God, and the comfort of his Church.

But if this shall be hid from your eyes, and the spirit of delusion have taken
so sure possession on you; all I can do, is to deplore your miserable
condition, and to pray God to open the eyes of your mind, that you may see, in
what a Labyrinth of evils you are involved; as also this I Will wherein we live by
your means, and those bearing as evil a mind as your self: was ever a
Nation so miserably divided, and according, as one of our Modern Poets said
truly, in a Poem of his lately Printed.

Some for the Parliament partake,
Some for the King a party make,
As he is King, and some that he
A Tyrant might become to be.
Some would a Where the people ruled.
popular Estate;
Some Arbitrary Government.
Aristocracie Create;
Some are a Faction for the Pope,
Some to maintain the Prelates hope;
Some for the Presbiterians Vote,
Some Independencie promote;
Some strive for this, and some for that;
Some neither know, nor care for what,
So wars go on, and get they may
Free Quarter, Plunder, and their Pay;
Some fight their liberties to save,
Some that they others might enslave;
Some for Religion, and for Christ,
Some that they might do what they list;
Some for the Commonwealth avail,
Some for themselves, with Tooth and Nail;
And they that have the basest end,
As fairly as the best pretend.
"This is our Posture, and whilst we,
"So foolish false, and factious be;
"Or while affairs continue thus,
"Who knows what will become of us?
I have read in the Chronicles of a Speech of King HENRY the Eight, to the
French Ambassador, now being in hand with that glorious work of abolishing
the Popes power* If your Master (said he) will be ruled by me, we will not
leave Mass in all our Kingdoms. O that God would put it into the hearts of
our Rulers and Governors, not to leave one Heresy in the Kingdom
unabollished; the smallest capacities may conceive, and the blindest eye may
discern, that if they be not taken away, it will cause God to take away his
Gospel from us, and prove the inevitable ruin, and destruction of this
Nation, which has till of late years been renowned through the earth, for
peace and plenty; and peculiarly blessed, in having the Gospel sincerely
preached, void of Faction and Schism. But I hope the honorable Houses of
Parliament will ere long, aided by him, who has hitherto aided them in a
wonderful manner, wipe away and leave no blemish of this great spot, and
manifest stain to our Nation; in the mean time it were to be wished, that the
Framers, Printers, and Divulgers, of Slanders, Heresies, and lies, were by some
strict course prohibited from their frequent and customary use of spreading
abroad books and Pamphlets, the contents whereof tend to the dishonor of God,
the breach of peace, and the infecting and seducement of the people, apt enough
of themselves in this wavering age, to fall into errors without a prompter. I
know this will be taken in evil part by some, but let them know, what a great
man of this Realm once said to one, that desired him to be a means of calling
in a book, sharply but truly rebuking the deeds of some notorious offenders,
that it was fit THAT THOSE THAT DID WHAT THEY SHOULD NOT, SHOULD HEAR WHAT THE
WOULD NOT.

Was there ever a president since the worlds foundation as this, that God, and
his Christ, and his holy word, should be so blasphemed and evil spoken of; the
King, the Commons, and all sorts of men so abused, and railed on: as now they
are by Paul Best, and John Lilburne! the one denying the distinction of the
Trinity; the other averring, there ought to be no subjection to any. And here I
cannot but wonder at the wilful blindness of those men, who will not be
convinced of their error, and in particularly Mr Lilburne, who against the
clear light of nature, obstinately affirms his imprisonment is unjust and
illegal, and seems to wonder at his usage, as in his book, entitled, THE
FREE-MANS FREEDOM VINDICATED, p. 7. where relating the manner of his own
apprehending, and being brought before the Lords he has this passage, My usage
to me seems strange, for doing my duty in a just way, etc.

Why should it seem strange to any man (if putting his finger in the fire, it
be burnt?) or why should it be a wonder to Master Lilburne, if that for his
false accusations, and rebellious proceedings, he be called to an account, and
suffer for unjust, and unholy actions; All Histories, both Morrall and Divine,
relate that diverse, for less crimes then his, have undergone the rigor of the
Law, In 88 Penree took the same way to stir up sedition, as you do now.
and suffered death: as Penree in days of Queen ELIZABETH; and to my
knowledge, it is the fear of his best Friends, that his end will be violent,
who persisteth without remorse from ill to ill, and places his Felicity in
casting calumnies and aspersions on the innocent: as on my self, who never
wronged him in my life, any way, either by word or deed.

Did Mr Lilburne consider what a capital crime it is before God* to censure
the innocent, he would be more wary what he penned or published; and it will be
surely a blemish to the many pious actions of those who might, but were
remiss to prohibit it. It therefore behooveth every man the least virtuous, to
pray unto the Lord God, that he will put into the hearts of the ever honored
Lords and Commons to remedy this evil.

POSTSCRIPT.
THus not out of any malice, or former grudge, I take God to witness, have I
wrote this small Tract, but only to vindicate my self, so grossly and
manifestly abused by Mr Lilburne. And here perhaps some man may say (and that
truly) that I needed not to have troubled my self, to have put forth an
answer, all men knowing his lying humor, and his frequent slanders are such,
that all wisemen count the party so much the more virtuous, by how much the
more he is calumniated by him; but let him be pleased to consider, that
although his cause would have been so, and no otherwise looked upon by the
truly judicious, yet the vulgar are apt, on the least instigation, to
apprehend the least accusation tending to the defaming of any in Office, not
looking on the cause of his accusation, nor the wickedness of the party, Who
has adventured his life for the Parliament at Marston more, and was to be
pulled out of the House when the King came for the five members.
his accuser. As for instance, how has his lies taken impression, and eat as
a Canker into the honor of the right Noble the Earl of Manchester, Col. King.
etc. Therefore if those potent and honorable persons, could not shake him off
without some damage, what could I have looked for, if I had sat still, and
not answered his false accusation.

And here I cannot but take notice of one passage, which Master Lilburne has
in a Letter annexed to his Treatise, as if penned by some other man, entitled,
An excellent Letter, written by a prisoner to a worthy member of the House of
Commons, his words are these: O where is Justice? may not those Royal
plunderers as well justify all the House of Peers, these imprisonments and
commitments. Let the Reader reading this, admire at the unheard of impudence of
this man, who sticks not to compare the Acts of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament to be as illegal, and unjust, sinful and execrable,
as the worst of the Royal party. Mark how this man makes the Word of God his
rule, who commands not to speak evil of Dignities, muchlesse to affront and
vilify them falsely, and on no ground save malice; and when they are taxed, or
suffer the least for their exorbitancies, cry out, Magna Charta is broken, and
unheard of cruelties are used, the subject is enslaved, and brought into
Egyptian bondage. And yet these men, and in particular Mr Lilburne would make
the world believe, that this is the way that he Word of God allows, which if
it be, as every good man will acknowledge: how comes it to pass that he and
his accomplices transgress therefrom, He lies at home every Sabbath if never so
good a man do preach.
venting their own corrupt doctrine in Houses, and obscure places, contrary to
the example of our Savior, who delivered nothing in secret, save those things
which he had himself ordained the Jews for their wickedness should not
participate of, and that so the Scriptures might be fulfilled; but else how
often is it said, And he sat down in the midst of the people and taught
them? not in houses and corners. For my own part, in tempory affairs, and as
concerning the execution of my duty, wherein I am entrusted; I dare any man
Religious, to utter the worst he can of me; and for Mr Lilburne, he in
standering me has not detracted from my reputation, but sinned against
himself.

FINIS.

