A True RELATION OF ALL THE PROCEEDINGS IN IRELAND FROM The end of April last,
to this present: SENT From Tristram Whetcombe, Mayor of Kinsale, to his Brother
Benjamine Whetcombe, Merchant in Low LONDON. With A Certificate under the Hand
and Seal of Sir William Saint-Leger, Lord President of MUNSTER. As also The
Copy of an Oath which was found in a Trunck in Kilbrittaine Castle near
Kinsale, after the Rebels were fled from thence, the first of June, 1642.

Presented to the high Court of Parliament, and by them Ordered forthwith to be
Printed. Hen. Elfinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 164^

This Oath was found in a Trunck in Kilbrittaine Castle, near Kinsale, after
the Rebels were fled from thence; June 1. 1642.
I A.B.C. D, etc. With firm faith, believe and profess, all and singular the
Articles and Points, which the holy Catholic and Apostolical Roman Church
believes and professes, and to my dying day will by Gods grace defend the
same Faith against all Sectaries, Sects, Atheists and Enemies thereof,
whatsoever, even with the loss of my Life, Estate, and Goods.

I vow also, and in my conscience sincerely believe, and acknowledge King
CHARLES to be my Sovereign Lord, and King of England, Scotland, Ireland: and
France; whose Privileges, Prerogatives, and Attributes Royal, due to His
Imperial Crown, and Royal Dignity, I promise and vow to God to maintain and
defend by Gods grace, against all evill-affected persons, be they of what
Country soever, or Sect; even with the loss of my Life, Goods, and Estate.

I promise and vow likewise to be true to my poor oppressed Country, and
Kingdom of Ireland, with the loss of my Life, Goods, and Estate, and endeavor
to free it from the bondage and tyrannous Government, and oppressions under
which it groneth by the means of evil Officers, and Ministers of Justice,
contrary to His Majesty's gracious intentions.

I do promise and vow to God to wrong no Catholic, nor challenge any Estate
of Lands of his, so he be possessed therewith before the last Plantations.
beginning in the year 1610. nor any Lands possessed by any of them since then,
which he or they bought or purchased for their Moneys or otherwise.

And further I do promise and vow to make no difference, or disparaty between
them of the mere English, and them of the Pale; between the old Irish, and new
Irish, be they of what Standing, Calling, or Quality whstsoever, so they be
Professors of the holy Catholic Church, and maintainers of their Countries
Liberties. All these, and every of these present Articles, I the said A. B,
etc. Do promise, vow, and swear to maintain and defend inviolably, by Gods
grace: So God be my help, and the Contents of his holy Gospels. Amen.

From Kingsale the 30 of May, and 1 June. 1642.
Brother Benjamin Whetcombe,
MY last unto you, was of 22. April by Master John Brooks, who I hope in few
days after his departure from hence, was with you, and that he has procured
employment for our Ship Charles, and some recompense for the great charge we
have been at; lying for the defense of the Harbor, To that time I then gave
you a full Relation of the Passages of these parts.

The next being the 23. Ditto going abroad to meet Captain Aderly, that
commands our Town Troop of horse; for the examination of thirteen Rebels that
were brought in a day or two before, some of the Kings Shipmen came into the
Room where I was, and most uncivilly abused themselves and me; threatening to
fire the Town, unless those Rebels were presently hanged, or delivered over
unto them, one of these I caused to be disarmed and committed, until upon his
extraordinary submission, I was moved to release him; the particulars at that
time, and the sequel of that day, I referie you to a Copy of a Letter written
to my Lord President, which I send inclofed, and to it can only add this, that
four of these men had lain a shore, five or six days before, and never
aboard, but pillaging, and keeping disorders by night, and we durst not to
punish them as they deserved; But presently it was cast forth 160. of them
should come shore at a call, and burn our Town; and indeed some complaint was
made to the Admiral of their insolences, and whether they were punished or
rebuked for the same in private we know not, but the appearance to us was, that
he gave more credit to his Seamen, then to those that complained of them? But
no more of this, I wish the thirty sail of Ships were come, and the Earl of
Warwick, or some other Nobleman Commander of them, it must needs be much
better, then when men of lower degree do govern. My Lord President was much
troubled at the murder of the said Mellifont, and half our time since has
been in examination of witnesses, for the Seamen clear themselves, and lay it
upon the Townsmen, and the Admiral advises the Lord President, that there
were but four of his men in the Act when there were near fourscore. If the man
had been a Rebel, and not protected by the Lord President; yet the affront
taking the man by violence from me, was equal with the murdering of him, only
the latter did aggravate the former. We went abroad daily, and did little good,
only brought in provisions; the division whereof, did often breed difference
among the pillagers, until the second present. We besieged a very strong
Castle, standing upon the River of Bandon, called Carganas, carried a Piece of
Ordnance by Boat, and the people of Bandon brought a small Iron Piece from the
Town; with both we continued about thirty hours without doing any great hurt,
for it was a very strong built and well contrived Castle for defense, as most
in the Province. Our forces were about thirty Seamen, with the Piece of
Ordnance in the Boat, about 300. Horse and Foot from Randon, and about 150.
Horse and Foot from this Town, in all, could not make 500. fighting men, who
seeing the Ordnance did no good, and that the service wasted so much Powder,
which we could not well spare, our men fell desperately upon the business,
made way through the Walls of the Bane to come to the Gate and Iron Grate, in
short time unhung the Grate, fired the Gate, and entered the Castle under an
Arch, the Rebels were gotten over the Arch, and being impossible for our people
to go up to them; we proffered them quarter, which they most resolutely
refused: So we had no other means but to gather what straw and fuel we could,
and made such a fire under the Arch, as it grew in few hours to hot for them,
that some of them made through the Rouse in hope to escape, but they killed them
all as they came down, only two were kept a day or two, to try whether they
would discover any thing worthy of their lives; the fire continued all night,
and the next day, till at last were brought forth such a pack of roasted Rogues,
as never were in man's life time seen; and at last, as many as were not roasted
enough, were hanged; we did at the same time with the number of men aforesaid,
environ the Castle of Polelong, lying on this other side of the River, and not
two Musket shot distance from Carganas? they were very resolute for a long
time, and refused both quarter and speech with us, until they saw what
success we had upon their neighbors, they sent to entreat a parley, and
yielded upon quarter, to go away with their lives, and their clothes upon their
backs, but without any Arms. These two Castles were taken in three days, and
found in them abundance of good provisions, chiefly Wheat, Malt, and Oat-Meal,
and in Carganas Castle abundance was burned; It is thought there was
susticient to victual five or six thousand men, for many months together,
and it lay for their purpose very commodiously, if they had besieged this
Town-Fort Cork and Bandon, there was a third Castle upon the River possessed by
them, who hearing of their Neighbors fear, did very valiantly run away by
night, and carried away with them what they could; so the Castle of Kilgobane
was left void; and in our Retreat we took away what was left, and fired the
Castle; so that now the River is clear, and two men can now pass better then
100 could before; and in all this we lost but three men; many men's clothes
shot, and no hurt in their bodies; others (but very few) were hurt, and since
well recovered. The 16 Ditto, Bandon men marched forth toward Cork, 2
Companies, and about 40 horse, and set upon an Island; they call it an Island,
because it is environed with such a Bog, as the Kingdom has not another like
it; they held it the strongest Hold they had in all their possessions: it has
but one way to go into it; upon which passage they had cast up Forts and
Sconces, in such manner, that 20 men might have kept out 1000: Our people,
coming to the place, set the Horse round the Bog, fearing any of them should
escape: The Foot made no stand, but entered resolutely, put them from their
works, and they all ran presently into the Bogs, where it was impossible for
our Nation to follow them; they killed many men, amongst which, was one Captain
mac Swinn, who was taken and killed by a boy of 14 years of age, that had but a
little Staff, in manner of a half Pike, brought away the Captains Sword,
Musket, and Head: they brought away about 16 Muskets more, the rest were
drowned in the Bog, and abundance of the Rebels drowned with them: They fired
all the Cabbins upon the Island, which were near 200, and brought away what
Cattle they found, which were not many; for upon some apprehension of fear, or
advice of their coming, they had driven away most part of the Cattle three
days before, into Muskrie,

The 18, The Lord Insiquin, and Captain Iepsonns Forces took a Castle in
Condons Country, not far from Donneraile, where they found great store of
Provisions, and that night, or the next day, provided carriage to remove it
from thence, having about 200 Horse and Foot to convey these Carriages, Condon,
and my Lord Roch his Forces in number 700. at least lay in ambush with much
confidence they should have a day of it; but so it pleased the Almighty, that
it proved dismal and shameful to them, at least 150. of them killed upon the
place; and the rest running away, were pursued to the very Gates of Roch his
Castle, where our people burnt all the Cabbins round about it, in despite of
all they could do from the Castle, and came back to their Carriages, lodged all
things where they desired, and not passing a man or two hurt, none killed: Such
was the work of our great God.

The 19, here landed Lieutenant Brokett, with 480 soldiers, part of Sir John
Pawlets Regiment, and has brought with him Commission to be Governor of this
Town and Fort; which is here confirmed unto him by the Lord President, and
yielded up by the Admiral, yet no other Soldiers placed in the Fort then what
were formerly; and those Captain Thomas Kettleby the younger does command as
formerly, but by order from Governor Brokett: The said Governor is a discreet
Gentleman, and deserving his Command: He does honor me, in making of my poor
Cottage to be his abode.

The 25, We marched forth about 300 men, to besiege Mountlong Castle; and
coming thither, we found nothing to do; the people were all run away before we
came, and had carried away the best of their Provisions with them, only a few
empty Chests, Stools, Bed-steeds, Hutches, and the like were left: It was made
a very defensive place; had their cause been good, and they hearts to maintain
it, might have wearied us, but it is Gods Work: It is a very stately Building,
the like cannot be built for 2000l; which would be a commodity for him that
should enjoy the Land hereafter. But my Lord President, not willing to scatter
his Forces upon trifles, has given order to demolish it; but till then, we
keep a Ward in it of 32 Musketeers. About the same time the Lord President
marched out of Cork, and took in two very strong Castles, Bully, and
Bullycollick, without the loss of a man of his.

This day came in the Heart Pynnace from the River of Lymrick, where she left
Sir Henry Stradling, and Captain Cole of Bristoll employed to relieve the
Castle that wants Powder and Ammunition; they did what could be done, but not
what they desired; It was so blockt up, and the river on each side so placed
with Musketeers, that they could not come within a mile of the Key; neither
durst they stay long in the place where they were, without endangering their
Ships, and therefore a necessity of having, or sending of Landforces to join
with the Ships, and to clear the upper part of the River: Whereupon, my Lord
President is resolved to march thither with about 4000 Foot, and 600 Horse, and
carries with him 3 or 4 Pieces Field-Ordnance. We are now at the first of June.
Yesterday our Governor Lieutenant Colonel Brocket, by my Lords Command,
marched toward the river with his own Company, and Lieutenant Byrne commanding
the Foot Company of my Lord of Baltinglas: I believe they are to be joined with
the Forces that march to Limricke. we have still in Garrison 300 Soldiers.

This instant have received certain advise from Bandonbridge, That yesterday
very early, they marched forth from thence four Companies toward the Castles
of Colemaine and Kilbrittaine, one of the Companies commanded by Captain Hooper
(to whose lot it fell,) went directly to Colemaine, and approaching something
near, espied abundance of people upon the top of it; but presently vanished
away, left the Castle, and betook themselves to Boats, which lay near them for
the purpose, they rowed up the River of Tymeleague, and it is supposed they
sheltred themselves for the present in Tymeleague Castle. Captain Hooper left
in Colemaine a ward of 18. Soldiers, and marched to Kilbrittaine, where my
Lord Kinalmeakie proffered quarter, but they refused it, only desired to have
two days respect, until they could send to Mac Cartie, which was denied them;
whereupon our forces began to play their Piece of Ordnance upon the Castle, and
a Sow carrying toward the Walls, to set the Myners a work, they began to make
signs, and cried for quarter, and it was granted and agreed upon, That they
should march away with their clothes, two horses, and two or three swords, for
some of the chiefest of them: The Rebels at the first were very busy with
their small shot, but did none of ours any harm; a ward of 32. Musketeers were
left in the said Castle, until the Provisions and booty be brought away, which
they value in both Castles to be worth 1000 l. ster. at least.

My Lord of Muskry, General Barrie, with all the chiefest of their Associates,
and the greatest part of their forces of this Province are gone to besiege the
Castle of Lymrick, which if they should take, it would in my opinion, be in
great advantage unto them; my reason is, That our Ships are, and will be
Masters of the River, so that no relief can go to them by Sea; neither will
they be able to run away by water; and my Lord coming round about by Land with
his forces, will take them all in a Net, which could never be so well done by
any other means. So that now if the forces intended for these parts, come away
timely, that we may reap the Harvest, and bring the Cattle from Mnskry, by Gods
affistance we shall make short work with them, which will better, then to make
another years work of it.

The great desire I have to make you acquainted with all passages, takes away
the scruple of being tedious, I will now add a line or two of business, in
answer of yours, 16. March, 19. April, 3. and 16. May, which came to hand all
in one day, the 22. past, being very glad, my rude style, yet true relation
came so seasonable to that honorable House; my request unto you is, you will
continue your humble supplications in my behalf, for the giving of allowance
for our Ship Charles, The Admiral has not yet given us a Certificate, but at
first made some scruple of doing it. because he had news, some had written
scandously of him into England, and had a jealousy of me, but now is of
another opinion, and will grant what we justly desire; but it will be these
three or four days before we shall get it done, if he shall deny it, we will
send a Certificate of 200. English Inhabitants of the Town, That the said Ship
was a Seller for the best of the Goods, and a sanctuary for their persons: but
of this more at large, when I have seen how far I shall prevail with him.
Touching that Noble promise of those worthy Members, to be a means to procure
me the Farm of Polelong, it would be a favor, and a perpetual obligation to
me and mine, to remember them, and the rest of that honorable House in our
prayers, which is our only, and best way to express our thankfulness: But I
beseech you with as much modesty as you may, put them sometimes in mind
thereof, Touching the Certificate for the debts owing me, I know not in what
manner to draw it, or by whom it can be certified; I believe it would be held
folly for me, being Sovereign, to certify any thing under my hand and Town
Seal, that concerns my self, it is between 6 or 7000 l. ster. as I have
formerly written, and the most part by specialties.

I am glad Governor Brisket found so good a fortune, if God send him home, I
know he will pay me: the news is consirmed by a Ship that came in yesterday.

A Holland man of war, from whom the said Brisket had his Commission, came
from Saint Christophers, about eight weeks since, upon here is one Secretary
Robinson, and some other English passengers, who report that Saint
Christophers, and all the rest of the Carribia Islands, are in Arms, complaining
of their Governors, and manner of government. I am glad, the London Merchants
have undertaken so good a work as the setting forth of 15. sail, and 1500.
Land-men, for a running Army, I wish they were come, and shall pray for their
good success, if what I wrote were any means to induce them thereunto, I shall
account my self the more happy toward God and Man.

Several men that have written, and are come out of England, do report, that
many base scandalous reports and speeches has been given of me England;
especially by John Barker, John Treglyne, and a lewd women Borly Long, late
wife to one faithful Bishop, whom if she had not gone away as she did, I had
caused her to be carted and whipped out of Town, one hearing such report, I
wrote enclosed to my Lord President, who presently sent me a Certificate which
goes here, which I pray, if it be needful, show it to the Lords Commissioners
for Irish affairs; and if it must remain there, take out a Copy under the Clerk
of the Parliament hand, and send it down to your Friends in Bristoll, that
these people may be enquired after, and sent back to be examined by my Lord
President, whereby, if they prove what they report, I may suffer according to
my desert; but if they wrong me, they way receive such punishment, as my Lord
shall think sit to inflict upon them.

It is generally reported that His Majesty has an intent to come for this
Kingdom, which to my poor understanding is most strange and terrible, the Lord
of his mercy direct his heart, and the hearts of that grave Council; sure I
am, that all things will be for the best, to those that love and fear God, in
whom I remain,

Your loving Brother, Tristram Whetcombe.

The humble Petition to the Right Honorable the Lord President. May the
seventh, in Kinsale.
Right Honorable,
YEsterday advised your Lordship by an express of the taking of the Castles of
Carganas, and Polelouge, the Messenger not yet returned, and now Captain Aderly
goes to give your Lordship a full relation, Viva, voce.

May it please your Lordship, that a Barque came from Bristoll, brought
several Letters to my self, and some of this Town advising that diverse
malicious people, which lately stoal away from hence, and gone thither;
especially one John Treglyne, and a lewd woman, known by the name of Borly
Long, a late pretended wife to faithful Bishop, now in Cork, whom your
Lordship ordered to be sent hither, and pillored for his misdemeanors toward
the Corporation, but never came hither, have divulged in all Bristoll, and
fully possessed the whole City, that I am a rebel, and more dangerous then any
of those openly declared themselves, and that their escape, or going over, was
chiefly to make it known to the Parliament.

My most humble suite unto your Lordship is in regard, they made not complaint
to your Lordship, before they went away, nor had no leave to depart, being
housekeepers in the Town, and ought to have staid to help bear the charge that
lies upon us.

And for as much, as I weekly, or daily gave, when the passage was open, a due
account to your Lordship of my actions, that you would be honorably pleased,
to look upon your poor servant. By giving two or three lines, that I may send
for England of my loyalty to His Majesty, and obedience to your Lordships
commands, which I will ever continue, thereby to take away the pernicious
scandal, and that they may with the rest be sent back to be examined by your
Lordships appointment, That if any crime be by them, proved against me, I may
suffer according to my deserts, to the utmost rigor of the Law, or if it be
maliciously done, as indeed it is, they may receive condign punishment as your
Lordships grave wisdom shall think fit, and your Petitioner shall ever pray,
and remain,

Your Honors humble servant, Tristram Whetcombe.

By The Lord President Of MUNSTER.
WHereas Tristram Whetcombe Esquire, has been for this last year elected and
chosen Sovereign of the Town of Kinsale (the said Sovereign being both an
Englishman, and a good Protestant, which sort of men have not been accustomed
to bear office in that Corporation;) And whereas diverse ill affected persons
have divulged several scandalous and calumnious reports in prejudice of the
loyalty, and the fidelity of the said Sovereign.

These are to certify and testify unto all persons, whom it may concern, or
to whom these presents shall come, That the said Tristram Whetcombe, Sovereign
of Kinsale aforesaid, has in all his Actions and Demeanors, touching the
Magistracy of that place, carried himself with singular Judgment, Discretion,
and Moderation toward the Inhabitants of the said Town; the affairs whereof he
has managed with good advantage and security to the place in these times of
danger. And has not only expressed singular Charity and Christian affection
toward his Countrymen, by relieving and supporting very many poor and pillaged
Protestant English. But has also manifested his Zeal to the public Cause, and
His Majesty's service, by expending a great part of his Estate and livelihood,
in means and materials, tending to the safety and security of the place
committed to his charge, and His Majesty's good people therein. Of his
proceedings, wherein he has from time to time given me a good and satisfactory
account of his integrity, wherein I could not at his instance, refuse to give
him this testimony. Whereunto I have subscribed my hand and Seal at Cork, the
10. of May. 1642.

William Saint-Legere.

FINIS.

