A TREATISE OF THE POWER OF Godliness: Consisting of THREE PARTS.

1 Wherein it consists. 2 Cautions against, and Discoveries of, several
mistakes and hindrances, most common to the people of God. 3 Several means and
helps for attaining of it.
By THOMAS WHITE, Preacher of Gods Word in LONDON.

London, Printed by R. I. for Joseph Cranford, and are to be sold at his Shop
at the Sign of the Kings Head, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

White's Power of God liness.

To my dearly beloved friends, the Inhabitants of Andrews Holborn, Grace,
Mercy, and Peace.
Dearly beloved in the Lord,
BY the special, and I doubt not, by the good hand of Providence it was, and
is, that God has appointed me to be a Co-labourer in this part of his
Vineyard, with your reverend Pastor, who it is that bears the burden and heat
of the day; and I bless God for that encouragement that I have received from
you, in respect of your love, and great appearance, whereby God has put a
great opportunity into my hand of doing good, and I hope my labors have not
been in vain in the Lord; I do account you my Crown, and my joy, and I have
with much comfort and rejoicing preached amongst you; and when I have had
occasion sometimes for one Lords Day (though but for one Lords day) to be
absent, I have returned with as much satisfaction to my self, unto the
Congregation, as I have done to see my dearest friends, when I have been a long
time from them. Of those several subjects upon which I have preached amongst
you, I have judged this that I have now published, most to edification, being
plain and practical; for you can, and mine own conscience does bear me
witness, that I have not used the enticing words of men's wisdom, but have
endeavored, in some measure, to Preach in the power and demonstration of the
Spirit, which I account not only fittest for those which are, as they call
them, of the more ignorant sort, but even for those which are learnedest,
wisest, and of greatest understanding; for we are commanded to Preach as the
Oracles of God, and Oracles use to be plain, as to their language, though (it
may be) profound, as to their sense; and I account it the hardest task of
learning, to make the Mysteries of God plain, and that wood to be fittest for
building, which is least knotty; therefore I desire you would not be offended,
but edified by the plain style and matter of this Treatise: If by reading of it
you be brought to that which is the title and sum of it, viz. The Power of
Godliness, it suffices; when one chooses a Sword, not for ornament, but for
use; one looks not so much to the Scabbard, or other curiosities of it, as to
the mettle; and therefore we rather choose one, whose blade is made of steel,
than of gold: The two-edged Sword of Gods Word, if it pierces, and divides
between the joints and the marrow, it does the work for which we use it,
though it be not sent forth, and made glittering by humane eloquence: though I
desire in this particular also to avoid mistakes, for though I decry a garish,
yet I commend, and I desire to use a decent dress for Truth to walk abroad in.
I remember it is said of a young Painter, who was to draw the picture of a fair
woman; Pulchram non potuit, pinxit divitem, he could not paint her fair, but
painted her rich, so that her picture was rather gaudy, than comely and
beautiful; and therefore, though I desired you would pardon the plainness of
this Treatise and my preaching among you, yet now I do recall that request,
accounting it unpardonable, because it is not a crime; but I can advise you so,
that you may commend the Treatise, and indeed no other commendation do I desire
of it, viz. practice it, and I dare considently say you will commend it, or
rather, that you will bless God for the truths and directions that are set down
in it: Live those holy books that you read, and you will like them, and
doubtless it is impossible to like holiness, without practicing of it; for when
by reproofs, or practical directions, the conscience is awakened, it will be
clamorous, if not obeyed; for if it sleeps not, it will not be silent, it will
be telling of us our duty, which if not performed, our guilt: it is index,
judex, vindex, it shows us what we should do, which if we do not, it
condemns us, and becomes not only our Judge, but our Executioner, for this is
that worm that dies not, but if we hearken to the whispers and teachings of
conscience, guided by the Word of God, it will prove the best friend we have,
next to Christ; besides your practicing what you have heard, and may read in
this Treatise. I have one thing more to request of you, which is your continual
fervent prayers for a blessing upon me, and my labors amongst you. And it is
not easy to determine, whether those your prayers will bring greater advantage
to your selves, or me; for if by your supplications God shall enlarge his
gifts and graces in me, I shall endeavor to lay them out to your edification,
which also I desire you would beg of the Lord for me, who am

Your Servant for Jesus sake. Tho. White.

Wherein the Power OF Godliness consists.
CHAP. I. In Inward Admirings and Adorings of God.
1. TO admire and adore God in Spirit and in Truth, for in such inward
admirings and adorings, consists the very spirit, life, and power of Holiness,
if the knowledge we have of God does not raise our souls so high as to admire
him, and humble them so low, as to adore him; it is but carnal, and utterly
unworthy of God; this is that frame of spirit which the Angels have, Matthew.
18.10. it is not a glance of the eye, but behold, that is, looking upon with
admiration; and this is continual, they never have their eye off, they always
behold, though their employments are, as to the object various, for they are
Ministering Spirits, sometimes employed about the preserving, or delivering the
people of God from temporal dangers.

Now let us seriously consider, whether we have not as great cause to admire,
adore, love, and praise God, as they; it is true, they are in possession of
that happiness, which we have not as yet in possession, but are as sure of, as
if we had; we have the Word, the Covenant, the Oath of God for it, in which
it is impossible for him to fail; if we have not strong consolation, it is not
his fault, but ours, that we do not believe him; nor should our not having
possession be thought any sufficient cause of the least abatement of our love,
or thanks: To that purpose this simile has much satisfied me, viz. Suppose
there were twenty poor men, to whom some very rich man had promised, and upon
his promise was actually bestowing one hundred pound apiece, the tenth, or last
of those poor men, would have as much joy, and love, and high, and grateful
thoughts of the rich man's liberality, (except) he doubted somewhat his
performance, as the first man that had the present possession. God is bestowing
on his Saints, as fast as may be, the Crown of Glory, it is but a few hours,
nay, but as a moment, compared to Eternity, before the Crown of Glory shall be
set upon thy head. Is it not enough that thy fears and doubts rob God of the
glory that thou owe to his truth, but they must be accounted a sufficient
reason why thou should withold and deny the praise and love that are due
to his goodness? nay, let me freely and truly say, that we have much more to
praise God for, and admire him, than the Angels; For to which of the Angels
said he at any time, I will pardon thy sins, and blot out thine iniquities, as
a thick Cloud; though thy sins be as red as scarlet, I will make them as white
as snow. And surely he never forgave them one sin, he has forgiven us
thousands; and that which exceedingly adds to his goodness, is to consider how
dear it cost him to pardon us: Suppose a servant should rise up against his
Lord, and the sword with whom he intended to slay him, should be beat back
again upon his own head, but his Lord taking compassion upon him, should not
only receive him into favor again, but be at the charge of his cure, though he
knew it would come to more than his wages or service would amount to, though he
should live a hundred years; surely our infidelity must be exceeding great,
that should make us abate God so much of his praises, because we have no actual
possession, though there be but a few hours betwixt heaven and us, as the
praise that is due to him, for his pardoning mercy comes to.

CHAP. II. In our high prizings of Christ.
2. THe next thing wherein the Power of Godliness consists, is in our high
prizings of Christ; very frequently the people of God have at their first
conversion, proportionably higher thoughts of Sanctification, then of
Justification, then afterward they have, but as they grow in grace, so they
grow in their esteem of Christ, not as if at their first conversion, they had
higher thoughts of Sanctification then of Justification, nor as if the more
holy they grew, the less beauty they saw in holiness, but much more positively,
but not comparatively; if at their first Conversion, their esteem of
Justification to Sanctification, were as one hundred to ten, afterward it is
as many thousands to an hundred; if they look upon Holiness alone, it is very
beautiful, but if the righteousness of Christ stands by it, it is but as a
foil; if we should hear of the holiest man that ever lived upon the earth,
with what joy should we go to see him, to confer and have communion with him,
to hear Elias and Moses pray, to hear Apollos or Paul Preach, to see the meek
and patient carriage of Job; these were rare things. But further, suppose God
should send an Angel from heaven to live amongst us, how singular would his
discourse be of God? with what feeling and relish would he speak of the things
of heaven? but Christ was far beyond these, for he was God. We never have, nor
can in this world be sensible enough, or sufficiently prize, or know the
wisdom and holiness of the speeches and actions of our blessed Savior: If
Christ were upon earth, what would we give to be one day with him, one hour
spent in his presence and communion with him, we would account worth ten
thousand worlds? but Christians have too high an esteem of the corporal
presence of Christ, and think, that because Christ in that respect is absent
from them, that they have not as near and full a way, as if he were on earth,
then we could not discern his excellencies, but by the eye of Faith, and so we
may now.

Never did Christ give so clear and full communications, and discoveries of
himself to his Apostles while he was on earth, as after his Ascension, oh the
infinite and incomprehensible excellencies and glory of Christ; that saying of
the Apostle, Phil. 3.8. is exceedingly worthy our serious consideration; the
Apostle did account not one, but all worldly things, even his legal
righteousness as loss, etc. yet many things we have a high esteem of, before
experience of it, as generally it is in all worldly things; we overvalue them
at a distance, but find them to be but vanity, when we possess them, and have
experience of them; but the Apostle tells us, that his high prizings of the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ, was not merely speculative and notional,
but experimental, and that his esteem of it did not abate, but increase upon
his experience; for, says he, I have suffered the loss of all things, and am
still of the same judgment, nay, have higher thoughts of Christ than before;
for when he looked upon the excellencies of Christ only with the eye of Faith,
he counted all things loss, but when experience is added to his Faith, he
counts them dung.

Since I see Christ is the scope of the whole Scripture, that the very Angels
desire to look into Gospel mysteries, and that the great work of the Spirit is
to raise us to have high thoughts of Christ, John 16.14. And considering many
other things which I have made mention of elsewhere, and having had some small
experience of that peace and joy, in believing, which has followed upon the
drawing forth of mine affections to Christ: I have endeavored, and set my self
to consider, how one may be convinced of the excellency of Christ, and I find
that there is a great deal of difference betwixt a rational and speculative,
and an experimental knowledge of this matter, and those closings with Christ,
which are from love and experience, and those that are from conviction only,
are far different; and indeed one difference is this, that those sweetnesses
and relishes, that joy and delight which one finds in ones experimental
knowledge of Christ cannot be uttered, nor can one communicate them so, as to
make another that has them not to understand them; but for rational and
speculative convictions, one may communicate them, and the grounds of them; and
if they do seriously consider of those grounds, upon which we were convinced,
they may find a native energy to convince them, not as if any arguments or
grounds have such an efficacy as to convince in matters of this nature, except
the Spirit of God do give strength and efficacy to, and open the heart to
receive them. I find that this is one difference betwixt Gospel truths, and
natural truths, viz. that in natural truths, if I am fully convinced of the
premises from which the conclusion does naturally flow, we cannot but close
with the conclusion; but in Gospel truths, though the Spirit of God does
evidence the truth of the premises, yet there needs an assisting and
supervening act of the Spirit to be enabled to give our consent to the
conclusion; for as in natural actions, as in moving ones hand, walking, etc. if
we have the will, we have the deed also; but as for Spirituals, it is God that
gives both the will and the deed, of his good pleasure, not the will of his
good pleasure, and the deed of our good pleasure, or the deed of common
providence, and the will of free grace, but both of free grace, or which is all
one, of his good pleasure; and as God keeps both our will and deed in his own
hand, and dispenses them severally; so that when he has given us the will, he
keeps the deed still in his hand, that we may know that we have not a power to
do good even when we have a will; so that the good which we would, we do
not, and the evil which we would not, that we do, that free grace may have
all the glory, so as to our faith; the Spirit of God gives light and
satisfaction, as to the premises, and yet keeps our assent to the conclusion in
his own hand, as it is evident in diverse that are in desertion, though they
confess, whosoever love the brethren, are past from death to life, and that
they do love the brethren, yet cannot yield to the conclusion, viz. that they
are past from death to life: For as God did by his power cause his fire to burn
their cords, Dan. 3. and yet not to singe a hair of their head, or as he made
light in Goshen, and darkness in Egypt: So many times God gives light to
premises, and suffers his children, as in Egyptian darkness, to the conclusion,
and yet abundantly satisfied, as to the premises, but to return; because
convictions may be communicated as to the grounds of them, and those grounds
upon which one is convinced, another may be convinced also; therefore I shall
set down one of many reasons, which may convince one of the excellency of
Christ, as for experiences in many cases it is not lawful, and in none possibly
fully to be expressed; therefore thus; That Christ was God and Man, I take it for
granted; for if the devil should say it were so, and I know him to be the
Father of Lies, yet I hope I should not doubt it; and though the Socinians say
it is not so, yet I lay this as a foundation, having recourse to experience,
finding those precious joys that grow from the high prizeings of Christ, and
thus build upon it; I see, and clearly perceive, what singular beauty,
comeliness, and activity, and rare operations, the Soul, that is but a
creature, gives unto the body; so that the eye sees, and hand works, and feet
walk, the hand and tongue make rare music, and body lives and moves, and
continues in health and strength, forty, eighty years; and when I see the
self-same body dead, and observe what ghastly look, instead of beauty, and that
it neither moves hand nor foot, and how quickly it putrifies and rots when the
Soul is gone. I conclude all these excellencies that the body had when living,
were communicated to it from the Soul: For as if I should hear some rare
music, and yet when I came into the room, should see a Lute lie on the Table,
but not see any one in the room, I should conclude, that this Lute did not make
the music of it self without a hand to move it, and that the Lute did not give
skill to him that played; for let one that has no skill, have never so well a
tuned instrument, he can make no music; therefore if the Soul, that is but a
poor creature, can enable the body to do what of it self it is so unable to do,
and this by its union with the body, what must we think? what rare excellencies
must necessarily be imparted to the Humane Nature of Christ, by that union
which the Deity has with it, and doubtless as much as a living body, as to
beauty, and operations does exceed a dead; so, and much more did Christ, as man
exceed all men, being united to the Godhead, especially the union of the Deity
with the Humane Nature of Christ, being nearer than that of the Soul with the
body. I leave these things to the consideration of any spiritual understanding
Christian; but this I shall add, that one never shall be satisfied fully,
unless to that conviction which we have from arguments; we have that also
which is to be had from experience.

CHAP. III. In living contrary to Providence.
3. THe third thing, wherein the Power of godliness consists, is living
contrary to providence, I mean, not only above, but contrary to the
temptations which accompany Providence: So we read in Job, when God had taken
away from him all that he had, the temptation that was natural, considering our
corruptions, which Satan pretended, and he doubted not but would certainly
follow, upon this Providence, was, that Job would curse God, but Job did not
only not curse God, but he blessed him, which was quite contrary to Satan's
expectation, and to the temptation that was incident to that Providence: if Job
had been only patient under his affliction, it had been different, but not
contrary to that carriage, which in such a Providence, one is generally tempted
to, blessing and cursing, are the two extremes, not to murmr or repine, if
one goes no further, is not to curse, nor yet to bless, but of a middle
nature; and a Christians aims should be higher, than only not to repine and
murmr when God afflicts, or not to revenge whenmen injure or persecute us; it
is not enough not to curse, but we must bless them that curse us; it is not
enough not to despair in the time of persecution, but we must rejoice in
tribulation, and be exceeding glad, when we suffer for righteousness sake:
The Apostle bids us to add to our patience godliness, if that with which our
patience is exercised be afflictions, if injuries from men, brotherly kindness.
It was a rare carriage of a good woman, who taking up her child dead, whom she
had laid down well, instead of murmuring, fell a blessing and admiring the
goodness of God, that all her children were not so; this was quite contrary to
the carriage of carnal men in such a Providence; that was also a singular
carriage of one, who having had extraordinary joys in her sickness, finding
that she was a recovering, fell a trembling exceedingly; and being asked
whether her joys were gone, she answered no* not so much as abated, but that
she trembled to think that she should live to dishonor her God that gave them.

CHAP. IV. In mortifying Temptations.
4. THe fourth thing, wherein the Power of Godliness consists, is in this, that
we mortify temptations, if I may so call it, when few things are temptations,
not that a grown Christian has fewer temptations, yet fewer things are
temptations to him; it is one thing to conquer a temptation; so as to put it to
flight, and another thing to disarm it, and destroy it, so that it shall not be
able to fight against us any more; as for example, the sight of a beautiful
woman tempts one to uncleanness, but through the grace of God one resists and
conquers that temptation; but this is far better, that the sight of such a
beauty should not so much as tempt one: it is better not to have ones house on
fire, than quench it, a Philosopher seeing a great man, having great
attendants, and abundance of the things of this world, said, See how many
things I have no need of; so a grown Christian may say, see how many things are
no temptations to me, as thou grow'st this way, so thou grow'st in grace; those
words that formerly would have so provoked thee, that thou had much ado to
prevail with thine heart not to revenge the injury; now such words are like a
bullet shot against a rock, which neither batters, nor shakes it; consider how
many temptations thou have this way mortified; when the devil showed our
Savior the Kingdoms of the world, and all the glory thereof, that sight did
not so much as tempt our Savior: for we must not think that Christ did wrestle
with temptations as we do; the holiest man, when these sparks from hell fall
upon him, they do take more or less hold upon him, though it is not always
with him, as in some extraordinary violent temptation, when he cannot quench
that fire without as much clamor, toil, and trouble, as a house that is on
fire is quenched. Indeed very often the people of God do quench temptations as
easily, as one may put out a spark newly fallen upon Tinder, one may put it out
easier than with a wet finger; but no temptation took any hold on Christ at
all, it did not at all kindle upon him, though he was cast-into a Fiery Furnace
of temptations, heated by the wrath of God, and the malice of the powers of
darkness, sevenfold hotter than ever yet any Saint was, not so much as the
smell past upon our Savior, nor a hair of his head was singed; it is a rare
thing to have the world crucified to us, and we unto the world; a dead man is
not tempted with the greatest Beauty in the world, though she should stand
before him, nor a living man with the fairest woman in the world, that should
lie dead before him, she would rather fright, than allure him; it is a rare
temper, when generally temptations are as blasphemous thoughts are to Gods
people, which astonish and terrify, but entice them not to consent, the world
had base thoughts of Paul, and he was not behind hand with that, for he had as
base thoughts of the world, for he was crucified to the world, and the world
was crucified to him, we should use the world, as the world uses us, that
despises us, we should despise it; that wicked men can stand unshaken by all
the terrors that are thundered against them out of the Law, and unmoved by all
the sweet promises and offers of the Gospel; so let the threatenings and
allurements of the world be to us, now temptations are mortified, and cease to
be temptations. 1. When we are clearly convinced of the positive vanity of all
those pleasures, and that sin tempts us withal, this will make us not so much
as parley with sin, as we do not so much as cheapen fruit that is wholly
rotten, and worth nothing. 2. To be convinced of, and affected with the
super-excellency of those things that God has promised in the Gospel for them
that love him; for it may be we shall find it a hard matter to see the
creature to be nothing, but it will be easy to see God to be more; by our
understanding the greatness of the price that we must pay for the pleasure of
sin, it will quickly break off the bargain; for we do with as much indignation
leave him that asks us a hundred times more than the thing is worth, as we do
him that asks us a small price for that which is worth nothing. 3. Another way
to keep off most temptations from taking hold of us, is, by being convinced
that we have no need of that which sin offers us, for generally they are not
necessaries, but superfluities that tempt us. 4. We must endeavor to increase
our love to God, for then, though it were possible, that sin should offer us
something proportionable to that which God promises, yet love would turn the
scale. 5. Always to be spiritually or lawfully employed, non vacat, gives
generally a speedier and fuller denial to temptation, than non licet.

But there are some cases wherein temptations may become no temptations to us,
and yet it may not proceed from strength of grace, nor from mortifyed
corruptions: First, when tentations are so subdued by a contrary Master Sin,
that they have no power at all over us: As for example, if Covetousness be our
Master Sin, and has got full dominion over one, all tentations that are costly
take no hold of us, such a man will not be at the charge of drunkenness, of
gluttony, of vanity in apparel, etc. But this is but casting out one devil
with another, as it was with the Tribes of Ephraim and Manasses, though they
were enemies one to another, yet both were more enemies to Judah; so that those
of the Tribe of Ephraim, would rather serve under the Tribe of Manasseh, than
not fight against Judah: So Vices, though they be contrary one to another, yet
will not by their civil wars amongst themselves, weaken that opposition that
they all make against Grace.

2. The things that did formerly tempt us, may cease to be temptations, not
because our lusts are mortified, but satisfied; as when a glutton or a drunkard
has so intemperately eaten and drunken, that his stomach is overcharged, so
that he loath the Honeycomb, and the Wine that gives its color in the cup
tempts him not at that time, but it is, because he has wearied himself in his
iniquities.

3. When sickness or age has made us unable to act those sins that formerly we
have committed: What if a drunkard in a violent Fever, or an old man weakened
by age and sin, is not tempted with wine, or beauty, it is not because his
lusts, but rather his body is mortified, and he has not left sin, but sin him.

4. When by reason of ignorance and infancy we are not yet capable of being
tempted with some temptations, as children with covetousness, and lust, or
ambition: it had been little praise to Moses to have despised the Treasures and
Honors of Egypt in his infancy; therefore the Scripture, to show the power of
Grace in him, says, that when he was of full age, he was so; but certainly in
infants corruption is not mortified, but bound up in the heart of a child,
Prove. 22.15.

CHAP. V. In the manner of conquering of Temptations.
5. THe fifth thing, whereby the Power of Godliness may be discovered, is, by
the manner of conquering temptations; as the power of godliness increases, so
the conquest of temptation is: 1. More easy, when we stand wrestling and
parling with temptations, and the dispute is so hot for a long while, that none
does know which way the victory inclines, it shows grace to be weak; but when
we are spiritual Sampsons, then we break these cords with which Satan
endeavors to bind us, as a thread of tow scorched with the fire. 2. By the
fullness of our conquest over temptations, if the temptations presently rallies
its forces, and assaults us again, it often shows the resistance was but weak.
3. When we can overcome a temptation with fewest motives when we are fain to
think of the glory of heaven, the love and sufferings of Christ, and many other
like motives to overcome some trivial temptation, it shows our grace to be but
weak; but when the least spiritual truth, or temporal mercy, is like Eleazer
the Son of Dodo, able to scatter an whole Army of these spiritual Philistines;
he is one of Christ's Worthies, the more strength the motive has upon which we
resist, so it be not carnal, the stronger our grace. 4. The more spiritual
the motives are by which we overcome, the more spiritual are we, the more
pure the motives, the purer our grace, and the purer the stronger; Mercies are
purer motives then Judgments, Heaven than Hell, love than mercies, mercies
already received, than the hope of future mercies, commands than rewards.

The fifth thing, in respect of the manner of our overcoming temptations,
wherein the power of godliness appears, is, when we quickly and speedily
overcome them: To consult whether we should do that or no to which we are
tempted, argues either, that our knowledge and understanding is dark, or our
love to God is cold.

There are but two things that are to be consulted of when we are tempted,
viz. Whether it be a sin or no that we are tempted to? We knowing it to be a
sin, whether we should commit it? The first argues: 1. Imperfection, in
respect of our understanding in spiritual things, we should be filled with
the knowledge of the Will of God in all Spiritual Wisdom and understanding: So
that we should in all cases be presently able to determine what is pleasing
in his sight. The second argues, the abundant want of Grace; for when once we
know what is the Will of God, it is certainly a sin not to do it: So the
Apostle, He that knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. So
that to consult, and to deliberate, whether one should serve God, is sin; for
as long as he is consulting, he does it not. Indeed we may consult how we
may do the Will of God, with most advantage for his Glory, but not whether we
should do it or no: We should utterly dislike such a Physician, that should
consult whether he should cure us: It is Gibbeufs observation. There are two
things that are not fit to deliberate of, God and Sin; for deliberatio non est
nisi de mediis; We deliberate only of the means, not of the end: Now God being
the end of all things, is above, and sin below the nature of means: Satan's
first great policy, when he tempted Christ, was to tempt him with such a
temptation, that might not seem to be a temptation; so he did in his first and
second temptation, but when he saw that Christ was of such wonderful Wisdom,
and so sharp-sighted in the things of God, that he could not spin a temptation
of so fine a thread, but he could discern it. In the last temptation he tries
what he could do with the strength of motives, to persuade him to do that,
which he could not but know to be a sin, since he could do nothing by his
subtle contrivances to deceive him, so that he should take that for no sin,
which was one. But our Savior breaks this Spiders Web, as well as discovers
it; they are not so fine, but he discernes them, nor so strong, but he breaks
them; neither does Christ use any consideration to discover that he was
tempted to a sin, nor any consultation, whether he should do it, when he knew
it to be so, but presently answers: For to consider what advantages we may
have, by doing any thing which we know to be a sin, is a snare; therefore our
Savior answers to the Temptation, not to the Motive, Matthew. 4.10. But of this
more largely in my Observations upon Matthew, Chap. 4.5, 6, 7.

It is a question worth the determining, which is the holiest act, exceedingly
to love a thing, and yet for Gods love to leave it; or to have our heart
mortified to the love of a thing, and yet to leave it: To leave a thing we
love not, seems not to be thank-worthy, and to love the things of the world is
a sin, to love vanities is a sin, though to leave them for his sake is not. It
was a greater act of Holiness in our Savior, not to be affected with the glory
of the World, than to be affected with it, and yet to refuse it upon such
terms as it was offered; therefore to decide this question, we must
understand there are three kinds of things; some that we may neither love nor
have, as sin; others, that we may have, but not love, as riches. Other things
we may have and love, as Wife and Children; to love those things which we
ought not to love, and yet to leave them for Gods sake, is but half our duty,
for, for Gods sake we ought as well not to love them, as to leave them, since
he commands us not at all to love them: It is not enough not to have a
comparative love, but we must not have so much as a positive love to them, but
for our Wife and Children, etc. whom we ought to love; there we are, then
only not to love them, when they come in competition with God, we may leave a
positive love to many things, but comparative to none in such a case; in such a
case he that hates not Father and Mother, and House and Land, and life it self,
for my Names sake, is not worthy of me.

CHAP. VI. In inward Mortifications.
6. THe next thing, wherein the Power of Godliness consists, are Inward
Mortifications, for as for outward mortifications, they are either concomitants
or preparatories to, rather than things wherein Holiness consists, and the
cases wherein Outward Mortification are required and acceptable to God are:

1. When providence cast us upon them, as when God takes away our estates, so
that we have neither food nor raiment, nor where to lay our head, to suffer
these patiently, thankfully, and fruitfully, is more acceptable with God, then
to give all one has to the poor; and whether the patient thankful poor Saint,
that is relieved, or he that relieves him, offers the most acceptable
Sacrifice; whether to suffer out of obedience, and love to God, or to give
alms, be more pleasing to him, judge you.

2. When we fall into them by persecutions, then the outward mortifications
that we suffer, we should rejoice in.

3. When the duties of Holiness cannot be performed without them, as in cold
Weather, when one must either lose some early public Ordinance, or endure the
Winters cold, by rising betimes to enjoy it, or any other time of the day to
neglect any private or public duty, by reason of the coldness of the Weather,
if it be not prejudicial to our health, is such Epicurisme, that is unworthy of
a Christian; so then, if outward mortifications be necessary Concomitants, or
singular Preparatories to duties, or if by omission of them, we shall give
just scandal to weak brethren, in such case they become duties; but doubtless
the Power of Godliness consists not in them; many that have been much exercised
in them, have had little Religion. Theodoret tells the story of one Macedonius,
who was called (...), and Gubba, because he eat nothing but barley, pulse, and
stood in a ditch all his time; for Gubba in the Syriack, signifies a ditch.
You shall see the gross ignorance of this man for Flavianus sending for him,
and ordaining him Minister, the next Lords Day, being sent for to Church, said,
He durst not come, for fear he should be made Minister again: Doubtless inward
mortifications have great advantages above outward mortifications.

1. Inward mortifications are alvvayes lawful, and necessary, outvvard are not
so, as when they are prejudicial to ones health.

2. Outvvard mortifications are very subject to degenerate into superstition,
as evidently among the Papists, that wherein they most boast of, are things of
this nature, as the single lives of their Priests, who although they have no
Wives, yet are prodigious in their lusts, and though they boast so much of
their austerities, yet the Gymnosophys amongst the Heathen, and some Hermits
amongst the Turks, equal, if not exceed them in austerities.

3. When voluntarily, and out of choice taken upon us, they do rather puff up,
than edify, for outvvard mortifications are very glorious in the sight of the
world; and it may be that may be one reason, why our blessed Savior did not
much use them, because he would deceive humane wisdom, for even carnal
persons do honor outvvard mortifications, but inward mortifications are
invisible, and endeavor to hide themselves even from Gods people.

4. We are to begin at inward mortifications; and this was our Saviors
method, he would not put his Disciples at first upon fasting, Matthew. 9. as
John did, for John's Disciples were Saints, before they were his Disciples; but
our Savior chose such for his Disciples, as were old cloth, and old bottles,
and indeed outward mortifications without inward, are like the spreading of a
cold wet cloth upon the face of one who has the Small Pox coming out, it may
make, by driving in the corrupt humors, the face more beautiful, but it sends
the poison to the heart; therefore endeavor after inward mortifications, for
it is far better to mortify our love, and desire of riches, then to cast them
away, better to have them, and not love them, than not to have them.

CHAP. VII. In having dominion over our thoughts.
7. THe seventh thing, wherein the Power of Godliness consists, is, in having
dominion over our thoughts, when we can say to our thoughts, when we go to
pray, Stir not, before I have done my prayer: And so in other holy duties, for
outward actions, moral principles and motives are strong enough to keep them in
awe, but nothing, save grace, will fix the thoughts, and keep them unmovable,
when we are employed in the things of God; and indeed it is a very hard thing
to fix our thoughts, when we set our selves about the things of God, certainly
carnal motives and principles cannot do it; indeed many, that to carry on their
own interest and designs, are very frequent, and seem to be very fervent and
intentive upon the things of God; yet he is but like one that uses
Spectacles, he fixes not his thoughts upon those spiritual duties he makes
use of, but looks through them, and beyond them, upon the things of the world,
Religion, that seems so nigh their eye, does not terminate, but transmit their
sight; or they are like one that looks upon their own face in a Looking-glass,
they look not on the glass, but on themselves: So these men eye themselves, and
make use of Religion, but as a glass to dress themselves by, that they and
their designs may appear more beautiful, and lovely.

Hence it is that meditation is a duty of so much difficulty, since the whole
business is transacted in our thoughts; in vocal prayer the difficulty is less,
because our very speaking does help somewhat to fix our thoughts, but in
meditation, where there is altum silentium, and nothing to give bounds to our
thoughts, they are very subject to wander; and therefore this is so strong an
argument, of an excellent frame of heart, because it is scarce possible to have
our hearts fixed upon God except we attain to the love and admiration of him:
The Angels being flames of love, it makes them always look upon the face of
God, and also, because they see God with admiration; for it is said, they
behold his face, therefore they are not weary of looking on him.

CHAP. VIII. Wherein the Perfection of Holiness consists, as to several graces.
NOw I shall show you wherein the perfection of Holiness consists, as to
several graces. 1. Faith.

1. For Faith to be no more, though one has never so strong reasons for any
revealed Truth, than if one had none: It Is an hard thing, when reason proves
any divine Truth, to keep it from having dominion over our faith, and not to
make it the foundation of our assent, when the light of Faith is like that of
the Sun, and Reason like that of the Candle: For when the Sun shines very
bright, though it does not put out the candle, yet it makes its light useless;
for we are so far from seeing by the light of the candle then, that we can
scarce see the light of the candle: For faith, though it puts not out reason,
yet it sees not by its light: We must deal with reason, as Moses dealt with
the Gibeonites, he made them hewers of Wood, and drawers of Water, but we must
not make it of our counsel in the things of God; we may use it to direct us in
worldly matters, as how to build Houses, etc. but we must not let it vote with
Faith; for though reason is not to be destroyed, yet it is to be led captive, 2
Cor. 10.5. If we had a friend, whose testimony we did almost infallibly
believe, we would not stir out of our doors to satisfy our selves in any
thing that he affirmed, but if we had any thing to do upon it, we would
presently do it, without further inquiry, whether the thing was as he
affirmed; as if we were to take a journey, when such an one called upon us as
he rid by, if our friend told us, that he was come whom we expected, we
would not go to see, but put on our garments, and prepare for our journey, etc.
So those things that we know by experience, as that, things that are unisons
or diapasons, if you strike the one, the other moves; it is true, we may
enquire after the reason to satisfy our selves of the why, which Mercenius
Martinius has set down, but we do not enquire whether it be so or no; nay,
whatsoever reason contradicts the being, so we discard as spurious and false;
so we should do in Faith, whatsoever contradicts the Truths of God ought to be
suppressed or rejected, so did Abraham.

The second high Act of Faith, is, to believe truths, when carnal reason is,
and experience also seems to be against it; and it is a question, whether is
hardest, to believe the truths of God firmly, because God has said them, when
reasons are for or against them: Little question it is, but it is an easier
thing to give our assent, when reason is for them, but such assent that flows
from reason is not Faith; For it is not always a divine assent that is given
to divine truths; in this case, more blessed is he that sees not, and yet
believes, as our Savior says, as the Martyr said, I cannot dispute, but I can
die for the truth: It Is singular, when Faith can lead reason captive, and ride
in triumph: Certainly that of the Apostle is singular in this case, that we
have a sure word of Prophecy. Thus also did Abraham.

The truth is, there were two main objections that reason might bring against
Abraham's having a son, one was the weakness of his own body, the other was the
deadness of Sarahs; For Sarah was not only barren, by reason of some distemper,
but dead, by reason of age; but Abraham did not only not yield to these
objections of humane reason, but did not think them considerable, when they
spoke one thing, and Faith another; for so it is said, that Abraham did not
consider, Romans 4.19.

And as it is evident, that when the Sun shines in its brightness, the light of
a candle adds not to its light, nay, though a room had many candles in it, the
room is not sensibly the lighter, when the Sun shines full into it: So though
many reasons do give light to a revealed truth, yet when once the authority of
God gives testimony to it, the brightness and clearness of his testimony is so
great, that wheresoever it has its full efficacy, reason neither adds nor
takes from the certainty and evidence of those truths so revealed, and so
believed.

CHAP. IX. In high Acts of Hope.
FOr the high Acts of Hope may be guest at by that which has been said of
Faith; for as he whose Faith is above all but Scripture. Arguments be they
never so strong to prove the truth he believes, and victorious over all
objections are against it, and believes no more, because of those arguments,
nor less, because of those objections; so his hope anchors upon the true rock,
who trusts God no more when he has abundance, nor less, when he has no
means; nay, when all means are against that which he hopes for, it is a hard
thing to decide, whether of these two are most difficult, viz. for him to trust
that God will give him the victory, that has an Army of ten thousand, to fight
against a hundred, for him that has an army but of a hundred, and is to fight
against an army of ten thousand, there is but little question, but he that
has a vast army against a handful of men, will be more confident of getting
the victory, but not that God will give him the victory; for it is very hard to
have an arm of flesh, and not to trust in it; therefore we are not to judge of
our hope by the measure, but by the ground of our confidence, and the question
we should put to our selves, is not how much, but why we believe we should
have such a mercy; nay, the more confident we are, the less we may be said
to hope, in a Scripture sense, if our confidence be built on a carnal
foundation, the greater such our confidence is, when we have abundance of
means, as our hope is less, even then when we are most secure, so it will
appear when means fail; for as hypocrisy ends in Apostasy, so security and
presumption in despair, whosoever believes in hope, must believe against hope,
as Abraham, Romans 4.18. those things that are against carnal hope, hinders not a
Saint from true hope.

The second thing whereby we may discover the strength of our hope, is, when
we can trust God in the midst of the highest discoveries of his wrath, and
displeasure, and when we have not the least sense of his love: Our blessed
Savior, the King of Saints, not only in this respect that he governs, but
that he excels them also, as much in the Acts of Holiness, and riches of his
Grace, and treasures of his wisdom, as Solomon in all his glory, did the
meanest of his Subjects in riches and wisdom: I say, this our blessed Savior
gives us a rare example of an high act of hope, in this respect, for when he
was under the sharpest sense of the wrath of God, and of Gods forsaking him,
yet, even then he commends his spirit into the hands of God; Into thy hand, I
will commend my spirit; for so is the original, and it is, as if Christ should
say, Father, though thou seem to forsake me, and that thou will not own me,
yet I will commend my spirit. I dare, I do, I will commend my spirit into thy
hands, though thou seem to forbid me, as much as sense of wrath can do, and
though by thus forsaking of me, thou seem as though thou would not receive
my spirit, though I commend it into thy hand, yet I will commend it; this was
the highest act of hope that ever was since the world began, and fully to trust
God, when as to our sense and feeling, God rejects us, and not to cast away our
confidence, when God seems to cast away us, is an argument of an high degree of
confidence.

CHAP. X. In the love of God in, four particulars.
AS for the love of God, the high acts of that are:

1. Not much to relish the love that any bears us, except it be for Gods sake;
for we must not be content that any one should terminate his love in us, no
more than his praise; we should in this case say as the Angel did to John,
mutatis mutandis, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, love God. The
love which is borne us not for Gods sake, offends God, why should it not offend
us? For it is our duty to love God in all things, for all things, and above all
things: The truth is, we may delight in these, because it is that which God
requires of them, that they should love us: but if we know that it is no way
in reference to God, we ought also to disrelish it upon that account. Those
that preach Christ out of envy, the Apostle says, he did rejoice, and would
rejoice, but it was, that Christ was preached, not that he was preached out of
envy, that doubtless was some trouble to him; one may delight in the love of
Wife, Children, Friends, etc. but it should be a grief to us, that it should be
any way proportionable to that love which they should bear to Christ. Indeed
thus far we may rejoice in their love, viz. because by that means we have a
great advantage to make our spiritual advises, and instructions, and
discourses of the things of God more pleasant. Hence it is that the Apostle
does endeavor captare benevolentiam, to gain the hearts of those to whom he
wrote or preached; but it was, that he might gain them, not to himself, but to
Christ. From hence it is, that Ministers ought accordingly to endeavor to gain
the hearts of those over whom God has placed them, that he entering in and
having a place in their hearts himself, may have the better opportunity of
letting in Christ also.

The second high degree of love, is, rather to be acted by, then to act love;
when we have love, as we are said to have an ague, or a fever, which rather
indeed have us, than we them; and the Spouse does call it, being sick of love,
not that Love is a distemper, or a disease, but that as a disease to our hurt,
so the love of God rules us, and over-powers us for our good; so that to say
properly, Love is not so truly in us, as we in love, when love is turned into
ravishments of spirit; and therefore the third excellency of love, is, when it
constrains us, as the Apostle speaks, when we neither can, nor will stand out
against the power of Love; it is said of Christ, that he was driven into the
Wilderness by the Spirit, in one Evangelist; in another, that he was led, to
show, that he went willingly, yet with so much speed, as if he had been
driven: As long as thou can rule thy love to God, thy love as yet has not
come to that height, and paroxisme, that it ought to do; for wheresoever the
love of God is, it ought to rule the soul in which it dwells; for as before
regeneration, corruption gives laws to the whole man, and carries it whether
soever he pleases, so that he cannot so much as bridle it; so after
regeneration, love should be the chief Monarch.

The fourth excellency of Love, is, when it makes us to triumph in and over
difficulties, and dangers, and sufferings: It was an high act of Christ's love
to us, when his love made him more complain, until he suffered, than when he
suffered upon the Cross: I have a Baptism to be baptized withal, and how am
I straightened, until it be accomplished: He thought it long while he
suffered, not when he suffered: We read of those that rejoiced more in the
spoiling of their goods, than others do in great spoils: So the Apostles, that
they were thought worthy to suffer for Christ; they took an holy pride in their
shame, and pleasure in their pains: When dangers and sufferings threaten us in
the ways of God, we should do as the Saints did in the Primitive Church, when
the wild beasts were let loose upon them, they came with stretch'd-out arms
to meet, and as it were embrace them: We should be glad of having any
opportunity to express our love to God; it is a poor thing, when we serve God
only of that which cost us nothing. We read of a woman, who in the time of
persecution, came running all undrest, and they asked her, what she meant, and
she said, 'twas for fear she should come too late, to suffer Martyrdom; for
that day there were diverse that were put to death for Christ, and she came,
lest she should loose that Crown.

5. Then love is strong, when we can love God, when there is nothing else to
love but God, when he strips us of all his blessings, and let us Satan loose
upon us, as he did upon Job; nay, when he does not so much as leave us his
love to love him for, but takes away the sense of that also, shuts out our
prayers, runs on us like a Giant, as Job speaks, when we see nothing but his
frowns, his wrath, when our enjoyments are gone, our hopes gone, nothing left,
but a sad expectation, and fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery wrath of
God; for a soul in this case yet to love God, as those in desertion do, they
will not sin against God for a world; nay, that which makes Hell terrible to
them, is, that if they go thither, they shall blaspheme him there.

I have heard of one, that when God delivered her out of her desertions, she
acknowledged, that when she was in them, as she has been going along in the
street, she expected every step to sink down into hell; yet, if she had heard
but an oath sworn, she was ready to fall down dead, it was such an horror and
abomination to her to hear God dishonored. It Is reported of another, who being
asked what he would do, if God should cast him down into hell, he answered,
that he had two arms, the one of faith, the other of love, and he would
embrace him, so that he would carry him with him, and then Hell would be
Heaven.

6. Another great act of love, is, when one has all things and God, with God,
yet to love nothing but God, this is that excellent frame of spirit, that they
in heaven have, that though there be so many rare and wonderful enjoyments,
such as the least whereof would astonish and ravish us, yet they no way divert
the thoughts, or abate the love of those that are in Heaven; and indeed
therefore it is, that God has reserved those joys in abundance for that
place; for if God should vouchsafe us to see and hear those things that they
see and hear, they would be temptations to us, instead of blessings, and we
should fall in love with Heaven, more than God, or else we should be past
hope, or some other way be distempered; for so it had been with Paul, if God
had not sent him a messenger of Satan to buffet him, it had been better for him
to have wanted those revelations; but they in Heaven are able to bear that
weight of glory, which would sink us, but it is but their balast, and makes
them more steady in their joys; That wine that does but refresh a Giant, would
distemper a child, that which makes him more active, will lay a child asleep,
and wholly disable him: It seems it may be to some an harder matter to be
patient, and holy under great afflictions; but doubtless, it requires more
grace to be so in the time of prosperity.

CHAP. XI. Wherein the Power of Godliness consists, as to Knowledge, or the
high acts and effects of Knowledge.
4. COncerning our knowledge of God, the signs of its perfection are these.

1. When we are rather passive than active in our knowledge, when the thoughts
of God always end in admirings and adorings of him; and in such a case the
understanding rather suffers than acts, as it were, ceasing from its
opperations, and suffering it self to be overcome by the object: It is quasi
silentium intellectus, or admiration.

When the truths of God are to us always like a great Ocean, whereof we can
neither fathom the bottom, nor see the shore.

2. Then our knowledge is excellent, when it never comes with light alone, but
always comes with flames, when our hearts are as much ravished with the
ecstasies of love, as the understanding is filled with admiration of the truths:
Those that are in love, seldom speak or think of their beloved, without
flames; and shall we be such Tinder to the dark beauty of the world? and
shall we lie frozen in the midst of the glowing coals of his mercies, and the
flame of his love and excellency.

Then 3. The truths of God have wrought a perfect work in us, when the doors of
our hearts are not only opened by understanding of them, but are lifted off
from their Hinges, by admiration, so that they stand open now, and we neither
can, nor will think of any thing but God; so that we need not set our selves
solemnly to think of him, or else we can have no thought of him that affect
us; but our hearts are so fixed upon the thoughts of him, that nothing can
divert us, as Mary Magdalen, not the Angels of Heaven, no, nor Christ, until
he appeared to be Christ, could have any thing from her, But they have taken
away my Lord: That soul is in a good frame, that has its door shut to the
world, so that the thoughts thereof must first knock, and ask leave, before
they can enter, but open to God, so that the thoughts of him may come in when
they please.

4. Than the Knowledge of the things of God, has obtained a considerable degree
of perfection, when temptations cannot stand before it; but if in the midst of
a temptation, the thoughts of any divine truth comes in, the temptation flies
before it: The Truths of God have never yet attained to any considerable degree
of that authority they ought to have over us, when temptations, and they can
both be in the soul together, when a temptation can go on, enticing the Soul to
sin, while the truths of God look it in the very face, when a Father cannot by
his looks, or threats, or calling for, or shaking of the rod, rule his
children, unless he chastise them, it shows he has either lost, or never
had that authority over them, that he should: So when the consideration of the
truths and the mercies of God will not keep us in awe, but we go on sinning in
the presence of such truths, it shows, they have little power over us.

5. Then our Knowledge is as it should be, when the truths we know have that
weight with us, that they sink down into our hearts; nay, when we care to have
nothing to do with such truths, as have nothing to do with the heart, but are
merely speculative, and float in the understanding. Some have that vain, and
sinful art, of beating the weighty truths of God so thin and fine, that it
cannot sink down into their hearts, as one may beat lead so thin, that one may
make a boat of it, that it shall not only float it self, but shall keep other
things from sinking.

CHAP. XII. Wherein the Power of Godliness consists, as to Humility; or
wherein Christian Humility chiefly consists.
5. FOr Humility, the excellent degrees of that are these: 1. When we stand
wondering at the goodness of God, even in the least mercies, when we can admire
and bless God for having so much, which others of our degree having, murmr
against God for having no more, when we are so sensible of our own vileness,
that the least temporal blessings seem wonders of mercy to us; and when God
lays upon us never so great a weight of affliction, yet even then we can
admire his mercies, and bless him more, that we are not in a worse condition,
than murmr that we are so bad, and cry out, it is his mercy that we are not
consumed; when Gods mercies humble thee, and Gods afflictions fill thee with
his praises, when thou can see thine own vileness, in the midst of Gods
mercies, and Gods goodness in the midst of thine afflictions, and be
powerfully affected with them, then thy heart is in a right frame. A sinner
that murmures on this side of Hell, if he were truly sensible of his own
vileness, were as great a prodigy, and would argue as much impudency and
arrogance, as for a pardoned Traitor (who had deserved to be tortured to death
with the exquisitest tortours) to complain of the Kings cruelty, because he
did not feed him, and cloth him deliciously, sumptuously every day, so for a
living man to complain, etc.

2. When we are unwilling that any one should have good thoughts of us, or at
least in reference to our selves; and if it were not for the duty we owe to
truth, the glory of God, and the edification of our brethren, we would never
vindicate our selves from any slander or aspersion that is laid upon us: Many
do with so much violence and impetuousness vindicate themselves, that they do
wound their own consciences, and bring a greater scandal upon Religion, by
their unchristian carriage, in vindicating themselves, than the crime, which
was unjustly laid to their charge, would have done, had they been guilty of it;
like one, that going about to rub off a spot of dust cast on his face, should
rub off the skin also, and so leave behind a greater blemish than he removed.
We ought humbly and quietly to deny those crimes which are unjustly laid to
our charge, this duty we owe to Truth, and to Religion, which may also suffer
by our sufferings, this way; but then we must also remember to perform that
duty we owe to Humility and patience, which is quietly and willingly to be
content, that any, or all, should think as ill of us, as they please, and think
thus with our selves, that the shame that lights on us, by being supposed to
have committed the crimes we are guiltless of, is not to be compared to that
which is due to us for those sins which we are guilty of, though men know them
not.

3. Another singular Act of Humility, is, to be troubled at all unjust
praises, as much as others are at unjust slanders. Surely the one is as much
against truth, as the other; nay, though the praises be due to us, if they be
given us upon a wrong ground, or from a wrong end, we ought to reject them: So
our Savior blamed the young man for calling of him good, though he was so;
yet, because the young man not thinking of him to be God, said, he was Good.
So our Savior at another time rejected Satan's confessing of him to be the Son
of God, and the Pharisees telling of him, that he was one that accepted the
person of no man, because, though their praises were true and excellent, yet
their ends were malicious; we should be more afraid of just praises, then of
unjust reproofs, for they are more likely to do us harm; but praises and gifts
are seldom sent back from what hand soever they come, or for what end soever
they are sent.

The fourth act of humility, is, not only to do what others will have us do, if
they carry on their commands with love and meekness, but when they carry it on
with imperiousness and violence; diverse think it no crime, but gallantry of
spirit, to profess that such a one may do any thing in love, but if they go
about to force them, then they shall rather break than bend their spirits: but
to be flexible to imperious commands and violence, is a better sign of that
humility and meekness of spirit that speaks a true Christian; for we have a
Proverb, though not true literally yet proverbially is, viz. The devil is good,
if he be pleased; for though the devil is never good, and worse to those that
please him, yet there are few men that are come to that height of wickedness,
that if one uses them with abundance of love, kindness, entreaties, gifts,
praises, etc. you may much prevail with them; nay, it is not easy to persuade
diverse that this is a vice in them, viz. that they will not be ruled but by
love; but St. Peter is clear as to servants, 1 Pet. 2.18. that they ought not
only to obey Kind and loving Masters, but froward and imperious; and as for
others, our Savior speaks plain, that not only we should go a mile or two
with those that entreat us, but those that compel us to go one mile, to go
with them twain; and so also, that we should not only lend to those that do
desire to borrow our Cloak, but to give it to them that demand it, as their
own. I know there are diverse cases and exceptions wherein these rules hold not,
yet none of those exceptions are grounded upon this, that they shall not have
their will, but I will have my will; I grant, that Superiors, Masters,
Parents, etc. rather to correct, than to yield to the imperiousness of those
that are under them; but neither they, nor any other should do it upon the
account of wilfulness; therefore from all that has been said, I do account it
a greater act of humility and selfdenial, to yield to the imperious demands and
commands of others, than to their entreaties: Christians should not be like
flints, that cast out fire, as often as you strike them, to break them, and
those are generally the greatest fools in Christ's account, that use to say, you
shall not think to make a fool of me; but true Christianity is so shamefully
mangled and disfigured by those distinctions, and distorted interpretations,
that pride and passion, covetousness and ambition have made, that there is
little of its native, genuine, comeliness, and beauty remains.

The fifth high act of humility, is, when it does not hinder the edification of
others, to love our own abasement, and disreputation, that the glory of God may
be more exalted, and that our neighbor may be preferred before us; for though
in the matter of our souls we are to love our selves before any particular
person, and generally in other cases, to love our neighbor, but as our selves,
yet in the point of honor, we are to prefer them before us, Romans 12.10. for
we are not only to be content that we are valued and esteemed less than
others, but we are to take much satisfaction in it, since it is the
accomplishment of that which we do, or ought to desire, in shame, that we
suffer for righteousness sake, we ought to magnify God, that for his sake he
will account us worthy to suffer such things; for the shame that accompanies
diverse afflictions, we ought to receive it with the same patience,
satisfaction, and thanksgiving, as we do the affliction which it accompanies;
he that despises none, yet despises the world, and himself, and despises,
that he is despised, is a perfect man.

To make my meaning plain, I will give you some instances; there are several
kinds of afflictions, or troubles, some that are honorable, and some that are
dishonorable, one has a great scar in his face, by which its very much
disfigured, which was got in war, and is a testimony of his valor; another
like disfigured by the Small Pox; one is reproved, and has taunting
expressions given by his Parents, or Master, another has the like from an
equal and companion, every one accounts it no dishonor for him to bear the
former, but amongst gallants, it is accounted cowardice to bear the latter; but
it is a greater act of humility, and more acceptable to God, to bear the
latter, than the former, since in the former we bear but one affliction, viz.
the passion and anger of a Superior, but in the latter, the shame also, that
follows our bearing such expressions; surely, if Christ made himself of no
reputation, we should more than submit, when God makes us of no reputation; one
has a Boil on his arm, another, on his face, the pain is the same in both, but
that on the face much more shame; and when God sends us such an one, we should
know that God intends that we should as well welcome the shame as the pain:
there are some virtues and graces more esteemed of in the world, than others;
as for example, valor, liberality, especially to the poor, suffering
persecution for righteousness sake, are generally more esteemed of, than many
acts of humility, meekness, modesty, patience, and self-denial, for one that
is noble by birth, or of great estate, and honors, not to follow the vain
custom of the world, either in respect of richness, or fashion of her
apparel, or in curiosity in dressing her self, but to go in a mean, careless,
and not vainly fashionable, though not ridiculously: Dress is an act of
humility, because despised, and an act of obedience, because commanded, yet
this act of humility, as I have said, is despised; but if the same person
should go to the houses of poor people, and confer with them, and relieve them,
that act of humility and charity is magnified, for diverse times several acts of
the same grace, some of them more, and some less honorable: As for example,
some great person is in desertion, and several Ministers go to comfort her, and
no one wonders that such a one goes to that great person, but rather has a
greater esteem of him, that he has an interest in a person of that quality;
but if some poor women were talking of Christ in the streets, and some Minister
should join in discourse with them, as Christ did with them that were going to
Emaus, if he were an eminent Minister, they would wonder what he did speaking
with that woman, as the Disciples did with Christ's speaking with the woman of
Samaria; and if it were a Minister of small account, and estate, though of
great piety, they would look upon it as amargument and effect of his mean
condition; but wisdom is justified of her children.

Diverse times, by some inconsiderable acts of foolery or indiscretion, we
bring shame upon our selves; so that though there be no sin in the acts
themselves, yet the duty we owe to civility and wisdom, should make us
abstain from doing of them, yet when they are done, we should not at all be
troubled at the shame that follows them; nay, in those actions that are
sinful, though we ought seriously and sensibly to be affected with the guilt
of that sin, yet for the shame that comes upon us, by reason of it, we ought
willingly to accept, as part of the punishment of our sin, not that it is not
lawful, for it is our duty to seek out for remedy, for a Boil in the face, or
any other disgraceful affliction, as well as of others that are not
disgraceful; but my meaning is, that while the affliction continues, we should
not be troubled at the disgrace it brings: Our Savior did both endure the
Cross, and despise the shame, and which was hardest, it is not easily
discerned. I think it is easier to deny our profit or pleasure, than to deny
our honor; pride is the last sin we put off, for we may be proud even of
humility it self; yet though the outward acts of humility may nourish it, yet
the inward grace and acts of humility, will mortify it.

CHAP. XIII. Wherein the Power of Godliness consists, as to Patience; or
several special signs and acts of Patience.
FOr patience, the singular acts of that are:

1. As much as in us lies, neither by words, pronunciation, nor gesture, to
manifest our sufferings, except in some cases, to be telling of our pains and
sufferings to every one that comes, is generally an act of impatience or pride,
we may not deny our sufferings, for that is against truth, and we must not act
one grace so as to wrong another, and to tell of our sufferings, though
cheerfully, except, as it was said in some cases, is but changing an act of
impatience, for an act of pride; and therein we thwart the end of Gods
providence, (who intends by afflictions to humble us) if we are puffed up with,
and would have others have high thoughts of the calmness of our spirits in our
troubles.

2. The second high degree of holiness in the times of affliction, is, not only
to be patient under them, but thankful for them; for we pay a Physician for
his advice, and an Apothecaries Bill, as well for bitter Pills, as for
Cordials; we do not say, since you prescribe me bitter Pills, I will not give
you so much for your skill and advice, nor you for your drugs, as if they were
more pleasing Physic, but we pay indifferently for both: So Job, The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away; blessed be the Name of the Lord.

3. There should be an holy indifferency in us to all afflictions, whether, as
to the kinds, or continuance, or measure of them, not that one may not pray
against either, or all, since that is an act of obedience, it being one means
which we are to use, which if we do not, we are some way Agents in our own
sufferings; and we are to be patient, to take up our Cross, and follow
Christ, not to make it: And as we must not make it; so we must not choose it,
we must take the Physic God gives us; we do not use to prescribe to out
Physician, but he to us, both the Recipe and the Dose. The Patients saying is,
cure me, but tells not what he should give him to cure him; for the sick has
no more need of the Physician, than the whole, if by his own skill he knew the
method, and means of cure.

CHAP. XIV. Of projecting, and contriving, how we may glorify God most.
ANotheract of the Power of Godliness, is, to project, contrive, and plot how
we may advance the glory of God more: It is not enough for us to do the thing
that lies before us, and to go, as it were, in a road, but to consider and
enquire, if there be any way of edifying our Brethren, and glorifying God
more, than yet we have known, not that I am for waves of will worship, and
inventions of men, as for the substance of Gods Worship: Of that, farther anon;
but that which I would have, is to enquire, and consider, how we may do that
which God commands us, to the most advantage. As for example, God would have us
bring up our Children in his fear, to Catechize them, and that they should
read his Word; but we should consider how we may do this, that they may
learn sooner, and fuller, and better: And when we see any Children that are
able to give an account of their Faith, betimes, you should go to their
Parents, and ask them, what method, or Catechism, they use, that their
Children have attained to so much knowledge: And if theirs be better than
thine, do thou likewise: It may be they will tell you, that they make them
answer some Questions in the Catechism, before they have their Breakfast; or,
that they make them prove, when they teach them, every point, by some pregnant
place of Scripture: It may be, they make them answer some common objections
against Holiness, and teach them how to use the Sword of the Word against
errors: It may be they make them read the historical part of the Scripture
first, and when they have read the Chapter, to tell some of it: It may be they
use, that whenever a Chapter is read at their Table after meals, to appoint
them some one special verse, which they shall repeat the next day, before the
reading of the Chapter: It may be, when they intend to give them any play, they
make their learning some thing or other, the condition of their receiving of
it, etc.

THE SECOND PART. Wherein are set down Cautions and Discoveries OF Several
Mistakes, MOST Common to the people of God.
CHAP. I. The first Caution, viz. That we should not judge our selves by the
degrees of Grace.
NOw I shall endeavor to show you several mistakes of the people of God,
against which they ought to be cautioned and forewarned.

1. Take heed of judging thy self by the degrees, not the truth of grace, it is
a delusion of Satan to make thee stand gazing upon the rare manifestations,
comforts, and graces of others, when thereby he causes thee to dispond, and
even to give quite off, because thou think thou shall never attain that
degree of holiness. There are two base carnal ingredients that make up this
temptation.

1. Pride, Will thou not serve God, except he will put thee in that highest
office? Can thou not be content to be a doorkeeper in the House of God? It
is an holy frame of heart to mourn for the weakness of our graces, but it is a
carnal one to murmr or dispond.

2. The second carnal ingredient, is, that we distrust God, who made the
tongue; though thou art like Moses, slow of speech, yet God can make thee like
to Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee, says God to Paul; and so it is with
thee; it is a delusion, somewhat like that which Satan uses, to hinder us from
believing our justification: What art thou, says Satan, and carnal
conscience, that God should justify thee, or love thee, or give thee such
great things as thou expectest: But Faith answers, Since I come to God in
Christ's Name, it is not for me to consider in my self how he loves me, but
how he loves Christ; nor is it for me to consider, as to justification, what
I have done or suffered, or what I am, but what Christ has done; and as long
as thou look upon thy graces to justify thee, or thine own strength to
sanctify thee, it is no marvel that thou dispairest, of both, That which thou
art to do in this case is:

1. To bless God for the graces and comforts that he has given to others; it
was a spiritual frame of heart that he had, or at least a spiritual speech of
him, who when he was upon his death bed, and endeavoring to apply the
promises of the Gospel to himself, but could not, as he thought, yet he
blessed God, that he had made such precious promises for others to apply,
though he could not; so thy design, being that God should be honored, thou
should rejoice that others do it, though thou can not; spiritual envy is
the worst kind of envy.

2. Thou art to imitate them in their perfections.

3. Thou art to strengthen thy confidence and hope, for they were hewn out of
the same rock with thee, their hearts were as hard by nature as thine; it is a
comfort to one, to know that such an one, as was cured by such a Physician, had
the same disease as we have, it makes us to rejoice, to see how well he is,
and to hasten to his Physician, it does not increase our sorrows or fears of
our recovery, but our joys, to think, that if he were cured, we may.

4. Thou must desire that holiness thou can not attain to, that is not the
language of Gods people, to say, What needs so much holiness? if thou do not
hunger and thirst after righteousness, it proceeds not, because thou art full
of grace, but corruption.

5. Prize holiness, have high thoughts of it, and see beauty in it.

6. Mourn for the want of it, and then if thy judgment does prize, if thy
heart does desire, if thine eye does mourn, if thine endeavors does follow
hard after God, though thou can not attain to be so eminent a Christian as
others, be assured, that Christ will not quench such smoking flax, nor break
such a bruised reed, as thou art; and know this for thy comfort, that the
weakest faith does justify, not only as well, but as much as the strongest,
and that the weakest grace is as sure to persevere as the strongest; for it is
not by the power of our graces, but by the mighty power of God to salvation;
God keeps us not only through faith, but he keeps our faith also; he gives us
not only remission of sins, upon repentance, but he gives us repentance
also, Acts 5.31.

CHAP. II. The second Caution, That we should take heed that the works of our
General Calling, justle not out the works of our particular calling.
2. ANother thing that you are to take heed of, is, that the works of your
general, does not justle out the works of your particular calling; grace does
not hinder, but sanctifies our lawful worldly employments, it makes us perform
them upon more spiritual motives, and from other principles, and for higher
ends, but it makes us not leave them off, there is a temptation that diverse
young and unexperienced Christians are exercised withal, viz. in the midst of
the necessary works of their calling, they are pressed to leave off, and go to
prayer; indeed this is a good sign; but it is a disease, as Physicians say,
that the swelling of the legs after a great fit of sickness, is a good sign,
though such swellings are to be cured also; so it is generally a good sign to
see people forward, though somewhat unseasonably in the duties of Religion, for
few unregenerated persons are troubled with this kind of temptation; yet this
distemper is not to be cherished, nor accounted health: Therefore, since,
because many times the Spirit of God may extraordinarily stir us up to prayer:
It is worth considering, how to know, whether it is the Spirit of God, or a
delusion of Satan, when we are moved to this duty; therefore first, if thou
art moved to prayer only, when thou art employed upon the works of thy
particular calling, but never upon vacant times, it is very likely to be a
delusion of Satan, for Satan's way is not to cure idleness with duties, but to
spoil one duty with another, to put thee upon duties that are unseasonable, in
respect of thine employments, or unsuitable to thy gifts; or such an one, that
thou art not warranted to by thy calling.

2. Art thou enlarged in prayer, when thou art put thus extraordinarily upon
duties, or not? God does seldom give one a call to any employment, but he
gives one gifts suitable to it; as he does not lay any affliction on us, but
what he does enable us to bear; so he puts us not upon any employment, but he
enables us to perform it.

Indeed God sometimes may give one the will to do a duty, and not give him the
deed; but that is very rarely, and generally; to teach us that truth, that the
strength of our own resolutions is not able to carry us thorough the doing of
good, or resisting evil: Yet one thing is to be considered, that thou may
be enlarged in prayer, both by God, and Satan: But the difference is, when God
enlarges thee, it is in the fervency of thy desires, but when Satan, it is
only in the fluency of thy expressions; when God enlarges thee, thou art
humbled after thine enlargements; when Satan, thou art puffed up.

3. What power and efficacy has thy prayer upon thee? The prayer of a righteous
man is not only fervent, during the time of prayer, but effectual afterward;
and that not only by prevailing with God, but prevailing with thy self, it
makes thee more watchful, and industrious; as for example, if thou prayest that
God would enable thee to serve him, if it be a right prayer, it will make thee
more careful, more watchful over thy ways, every prayer is interpretatively a
vow, which obliges us to perform it; therefore observe what power and influence
thy prayers have upon thee.

4. How is it with thee upon the Lords Day? If the Spirit of God moves thee to
duties on the week days; thou will be much more in the Spirit on the Lords
Day.

CHAP. III. The third Caution, which is, that we should take heed of
degenerating into will worship.
TAke heed of degenerating into willworship, to study plots, and contrive how
to serve God better, is a singular duty, and act of piety, but then see the
Word of God be your rule; for else to invent ways of worship, that God has
not commanded, or warranted in his Word, though they seem never so specious,
and have never so great a show of humility, they puff thee up, and provoke God:
One has this simile, A certain great man had thirty servants, ten of them were
natural fools, and had not wisdom to judge of, or to alter their Lords
directions; the second ten had some measure of understanding, but were proud
and arrogant, so that they would oftentimes, because they saw not the reason of
their Lords directions, (for the depths of his wisdom were too great for them
to fathom) would follow their own inventions, which being but vain, they
spoiled the work which the Lord set them about, and so provoked their Lord, not
only by spoiling the business he employed them in, but much more, by their
judging his ways to be foolish; the third ten servants, were those, who had
far more wisdom than the second, but never used it to alter their Lords
directions, always judging them to be best, though they many times could see
no reason for it, nay, much against it. The high thoughts of their Lords
wisdom first caused them not to alter his instructions, and afterward, their
own frequent experience of the betterness of his ways. The first ten are
natural agents, which work, but they know not what, rather by instinct, than by
understanding; the second ten are wicked men, who judging of the ways of Gods
Worship, by natural reason, to which many of his ways seem absurd, they would
therefore alter them, and institute others, of their own invention, that carry
a fairer show to human reason, and so they mightily provoke God. For to break
Gods Law, may be an act of infirmity, but to judge his Law, is arrogance: The
last ten are the people of God, who have wisdom, and more wisdom than the
former, but they never use their wisdom in judging of Gods ways, and finding
out new ways and worship, for they know that God never gave them their reason
for that end, but only to help them to judge of the things of the world as how
to build houses, and how to find out ways for the improvement of other
manufactures, and things of that nature, that are temporal, and not spiritual.

CHAP. IV. The fourth Caution, which is, that especially new Converts take heed
of over-burdening themselves with over-difficult; or multitude of duties.
4. ANother error and mistake of new converted Christians, is, to over-burden
themselves with duties for Satan, when he sees that he cannot keep them any
longer from the ways of God, then he does endeavor to put them upon
religious duties, as they seem, but indeed are nothing but superstition, or
else upon such duties that are too hard and difficult, as fasting, which is too
strong cloth, as was touched before to be sown into an old garment, or else
be puts them upon multiplying duties, so that, though in respect of their
nature, they are neither superstitious, nor too difficult, yet in respect of
their number, are very burdensome: Satan's aim is to tire and discourage new
beginners, by putting them upon difficult, and multitude of duties, and
therefore new beginners need be very wise, not only in respect of many other
cases, and therefore, because it is a hard thing for them, wanting experience
in the things of God, to direct themselves, let them choose some experienced,
grave, sober Christian, that they may be advised by them.

Take heed of rash vows, nay, take heed of all vows, lest they be rash;
there are diverse Christians, who being unmarried, and newly converted, have
bound themselves by vows to such a number of outward performances, as to read
so many Chapters a day, to fast often every week, that afterward, when they
were married, and had many family businesses to look after, their vows have
been great snares unto them; but concerning the directions for making vows
snares, that they may not be temptations afterward, I refer you to my little
Manual Treatise of meditation.

CHAP. V. The fifth Caution, against several mistakes of the people of God, in
spiritual joys and sorrows.
5. COncerning spiritual joys, Christians are subject to several mistakes.

1. They retain all joys that seem to be spiritual, whereas they should
examine them, for an enemy may put on the color of a friend to deceive us: I
will give you a few rules to judge of your joys, whether they be spiritual or
no:

1. True spiritual joys, generally come from the application of some promise
of Scripture, Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, says the Spouse,
Cant. 1.2 Joys that come, we know not whence, are very dangerous, and by
experience all the people of God, can set their seal to this truth.

2. True spiritual joys generally, follow deep humiliation generally, one is a
child walking in darkness, before one is brought into this mavelous light,
the evening and the morning was the first day; it was the stony ground, that
the first time it received the Word, it received it with joy; but the good
ground brings forth fruit with patience: I know one, who often, as soon as he
began to confess his sins, used to have joys, but he looked upon them as
dangerous, as coming too soon, before he was in any considerable measure
humbled for his sins.

3. True joys, as they generally follow humiliation, so they do leave us more
humble, and more desirous to serve God than they found us; joys that puff up
with pride, are from Satan, those that build us up in holiness, are from God;
joys that make us wanton, and care^ess, of Gods service, are such joys that
Satan will never grudge us.

2. They judge of their graces by their comforts, whereas consolations are no
part of, but rather a reward of sanctification, the dearest of Gods people;
nay, even Christ himself was a man acquainted with sorrows; and generally
their graces are strongest, whose comforts are weakest; and your ancient
Christians, though they may have a settled serenity and peace, but have not such
ecstasies and ravishments of spirit, as new Converts have; God deals with new
Converts, as we deal with our little children, we dandle them on our knees,
we play with them, and kiss them oftne, which we do not do, when they are
grown to man's estate, their graces being weak, something must be strong;
therefore God gives them more comforts to support them; besides, the novelty of
Religion does much occasion their joys, for all things are become new, and
they are like men that come into a strange country, they are very much affected
with the strange sights they behold, therefore do not judge of thy graces by
thy comforts.

3. The next error and mistake we are subject to, is, to judge of their
duties by the relish they find in them, judging those duties not to be
wholesome, that are not sweet, and that God is not pleased with those duties
wherewith they themselves are not pleased; surely it is an easier thing for a
Saint to please God, than himself, and it were a sad thing if God should have
as hard thoughts of them, as they have of themselves; therefore to this I say,

1. That oftentimes Christ is delighted with those duties that we are ashamed
of, and mourn for; the Spouse hides her self in the clifts of the Rocks, and
under the stairs, as a shame that her person should be seen, or her voice
heard, yet even then Christ was delighted with both, Cant. 2.14.

2. Nay, there may be much more grace in such a soul that is constant in holy
duties, though he finds no joy nor relish in them. For it shows

1. More pure love to God: As for example, a friend desires two to walk, and
one of them takes no delight in walking, but in respect of some lameness, it is
a trouble to him; the other friend does very much delight in the walk it self,
both of them go with their friend, which of them, think you, yields to the
desires of his friend, out of the principles of love? when thou performest duty
without comfort, it shows, that you do love the God of consolations; more than
the consolations of God.

2. There is more pure obedience manifested in such duties: There is a story of
an excellent Musician, who when he was aged grew deaf, but retained his skill,
and his Lute being tuned by another, could play singularly well, the King would
often have him to play before him: Surely this Lutanist being deaf, could take
no delight in his own music, but what he did, he did out of obedience to the
Kings command; so, when thou find no relish nor delight in thine own duties,
thou do not do them to please thy self, but to please God.

3. There is more humility shown in such duties, it is an act of spiritual
pride, as well as of disobedience, not to serve God, unless he will be giving
of us comforts: The prodigal child thought it enough for him to be as an
hired servant, though he was not entertained with those smiles and expressions
of love that a father uses to bestow upon his sons; they think it a wonderful
mercy, that they may, as dogs, be suffered to gather the crumbs under the table,
and that they are not destroyed, as Wolves.

4. Christians do not enough improve their joys, but like some, who when they
go to feast with their friend, take more delight in the banquet, than in their
friend; therefore two ways you are especially to improve your spiritual joys.

1. Improve them, as Esther did, take this opportunity of presenting some
petition of great concernment at this banquet. It has been the custom of
Courtiers, that when the King has carried himself with most love and
familiarity to them, to take that time to present their petitions unto him,
what corruption would thou have especially subdued? Would thou have the
Church delivered? or what other petition is in thy heart to ask of this nature?
ask it, now God smiles upon thee, he will deny thee nothing.

2. Improve thy joys, as Joseph did the years of plenty, lay up against a dear
year, for thou may not expect that these days should always last,
therefore treasure up these experiences; write down what those joys were, how
it was then with thee, and how thou came by those joys; what promise was it
that the Spirit applied, and sealed to thy soul, which he made as a full breast
unto thee, and gave thee faith to draw forth the comforts of it; forget not the
songs that thou have had in the night, and the days, of the right hand of the
most High, for when afterward, when thy conscience, or Satan shall question
thy title and interest, nay, God himself may frown upon thee, and seem to be a
swift witness against thee, and call thee forth to be burnt with everlasting
fire, for thy spiritual whoredoms and adulteries, then to have these evidences
by thee, under Gods own hand and seal, will stand thee in great stead; they
say, that when honey-dews fall, Bees do not gather, and carry any to their
hives, but only feed upon it for the present, but it is that they gather from
flowers, that they lay up against Winter; if Joseph had made no other use of
the times of plenty, than to make the greater feasts, Egypt might have perished
in the seven years of dearth: take thou heed, that when these honey-dews fall
upon thee from heaven, take heed, that thou do not only delight thy self
with the enjoyments of them, but enrich thy self also with the treasuring of
them up against the days of sorrow.

Lastly, be watchful, take heed that thou art not so busy in taking the
spoil, that thine enemy rallies again, gives thee a second onset; be not
secure in the time of joys, or at least provide for a sharp encounter
afterward: Our Savior after that wonderful testimony from heaven, Mat. 3.
last, was immediately led into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil,
Mat. 4.1. and St. Paul immediately after his great revelations, Satan came and
buffeted him.

7. Concerning spiritual sorrows, the people of God are subject to many
mistakes.

1. They nourish them too much, they think if their sorrows be spiritual, in
respect of the object, there is no fear that the actings of their sorrow can
any other way be carnal, nor to be resisted, or limited; but if any of these
things shall accompany thy spiritual sorrow, so far forth, as these following
effects shall proceed from it, it is to be mortified.

1. It thy sight of, and sorrow for sin, hinders thee from believing, thou art
not to cherish, but to mortify such sorrows, for it is carnal; I do not say
totally, but so far as it hinders thee from going unto Christ; for though it
comes in the show of humility, yet it cannot be true humility. For

1. Though one vice be contrary to another, yet one grace is not contrary to
another, true humility will keep one from presuming, but it is pride that keeps
one from believing.

2. All true grace comes from Christ, from him we receive grace for grace, but
from Christ, does not come any thing to hinder us from going to Christ.

2. If the sight and sorrow for thy sins hinders thee from other duties, if thy
mournings for thy sins hinder thee from family duties, from the works of thy
particular calling, if they hinder thee from prayer, or receiving the Lords
Supper, I say, if they hinder thee either from duties or Ordinances, either by
taking up all thy time, or by pleading that thou art unworthy to come into the
presence of God, when, and upon that account, hinders thee from coming; when
he calls thee, all sorrow, as to these effects, is to be mortified.

3. If the sight and sorrow for thy sins discourage thee, and makes thee to
think, that it is in vain, thou shall never overcome such corruptions, such
sorrow is not from God: The Apostle says, that he forgot the things that were
behind, in this sense we must forget our sins, and forget our graces, that
is, we must not look upon our former sinful life, from thence to draw such sad
conclusions, that our sins are too great to be pardoned, or of too deep a dye
to be cleansed, or our corruptions too strong to be conquered; neither must
we look upon our former duties and graces, as if now we might slack our pace.

CHAP. VI. Of letting the Truths of God lie loose upon us.
THe first great impediment of holiness, is, that we let the truth of God lie
loose upon us, they are not fastened by the Master of the Assemblies, as nails
in a sure place; few there are that take up their Religion upon any other
grounds, than because their Parents, and the Nation in which they were born,
and brought up, have, and do profess it: But I shall not prosecute this any
further, since it is done in that singular book, Pinks Trial of our sincere
love to Christ, few there are that do truly and really believe what they
profess, they are rather ashamed to deny those truths, which, all amongst whom
they live, profess, than that they in their hearts do believe them to be true,
which appears partly by this, that when Sects and Heresies are multiplied, and
abundance fall off from the truth, so that the sname of holding such errors is
taken off, than they do own those errors which before they believed, but were
ashamed to profess, but especially by this, that they deny those truths by
their lives and conversation, which they profess with their tongues; it is
true, that there may be conviction without conversion, nor can the
understanding make the will love those truths as good, which it self believes
as true; yet though conviction cannot work conversion, yet doubtless, generally
it would work Reformation, the way to gain firm and strong persuasions of the
truth of God, is to build our faith upon strong and irrefragable grounds, the
chief, if not the only, is the Word of God; there are too few Christians, that
if they were asked how they could prove the fundamentals of Religion, could not
bring one Text of Scripture to prove them: Therefore I do advise all Christians
to get two or three plain and evident places of Scripture, to establish
themselves in every truth they hold; to which purpose, I cannot but commend
that singular, and invaluable, though low prized book, the Assemblies
Confession of Faith, and larger Catechism, for in the margent thereof, are set
down the choicest places of Scripture, for proof of the several truths therein
specified.

The second advice, for the getting of a firm persuasion of the truths of
Religion, is, to begin with fundamentals; it is the devils policy to set us
upon the Pinnacle truths of the Temple, at first, as some now do; as soon as
they think of Religion, they enter upon the points of Election and Reprobation,
by this means they are dazzled, and grow giddy, and fall headlong into
perdition: There are scarce any Arts, Trades, or Sciences, but there is a
method in teaching of them, the rudiments are first to be learned, and
afterward the higher truths, or practices; as whosoever intending to learn
upon the Lute, should begin with the difficult'st lesson at first, would be
discouraged and disinabled from proceeding any farther; so in the truths of
Religion, the plainest and most fundamentals are first to be learned, and then
those which are less fundamental.

The third advice, is, to venture something upon the truths you know, and would
strengthen your faith in them; nay, may I say unto you, though you do not
believe them to be true, but only think that they may be true, do as those
do, who are desirous to know the mysteries of nature, if the experiment will
cost them but little, and be of great concernment to him, he will make
experiment of it: So in the mysteries of Religion, would you know whether the
Doctrine of the Gospel be true or no? our Savior tells how you may make the
experiment, keep the Commandments of God, it will cost you but little so to do,
and then you shall know; etc. John 7.17. So if you will know whether that
saying be true, Mark 10.30. make a trial of it, leave something for Christ, if
ever occasion be, leave lands, houses, etc. but though extraordinary times of
persecutions fall not in thy days, so that thou shall have no opportunity to
make such an experiment, yet leave thy lusts, and unlawful games and pleasure,
the esteem of the world, when the truths of the Gospel require it of thee, and
try whether it shall not be an hundred fold advantage to thee, even in this
World; it is true, it may be God will pay thee in Diamonds, which thou layest
out in farthings, in peace of conscience, in spiritual graces, or comforts;
whereas that which thou did part with for his sake, was, it may be, some
worldly profit, pleasure, or credit, or that which is much worse, some filthy
lust. But concerning further directions, for the begetting and strengthening of
our faith, and to preserve us from errors, I refer the Reader to the Preface
of my Annotations upon the 4, 5, 6, 7 Chapters of Matthew.

CHAP. VII. The next Impediment, is, want of consideration.
THe second great Impediment of Holiness, is, want of consideration: There are
many truths, not only such glorious truths as the Gospel, but even such truths,
that even the very Heathen themselves did, and do believe; the bare knowledge
whereof, though it has little excellency in it self, yet if they were truly
considered and improved, would be of singular use and advantage to us, who is
there amongst us, that knows not that he must die; yet how few do consider and
improve this plain truth? we let the truths of God lie by us, and store them
up, as diverse Ladies do their rarities and curiosities in their closets, only
to show them to those that come to see us; so we make use of the truths of
God, to discourse of them, and rather as matters of ostentation to boast of,
and pride our selves in, than as things, by the improvement whereof, we may
gain everlasting life; or as great persons do of their gardens, sometimes to
walk in them, and enjoy the pleasure of the beauty, and sent of the flowers
that grow there, than as the Be does, to draw honey from them. There was a
certain Kingdom that revolted from their Prince, and stood in open defiance
against him, the Prince out of his great clemency, sent a Proclamation, wherein
he signified his free pardon of all those that would return, and own, and obey
him as their Sovereign; diverse did magnify the rareness of the hand, and the
sublimity and graciousness of the expressions of this writing, many took Copies
of it, and published it, and expounded it to others, but returned not, but
continued, and perished in their rebellions. It is not having Bibles in our
houses, or the bare believing of the truths in them, no, nor the publishing or
explaining of them in our Pulpits, without the practicing of them in our lives
and conversations, can save us: we must consider how far these truths concern
us, God has not given us those glorious truths to gaze on, but to practice; O
that they were wise, says God, and that they would consider their latter end.
Who is there that know not they must die? but who is there that considers it,
and the great concernment of it to themselves and lives accordingly? this is
the singular benefit of meditation, which not only strengthens our faith in
the truths we consider, but shows us how much they concern us; and apply them
to our own behoof, as is further expressed and explained, in that small
Treatise of Meditation, which by the assistance of God I have published, to
which I refer the Reader.

CHAP. VIII. The next impediment, is, putting off God with solemn duties.
ANother great impediment, is, that we put off God with solemn duties, as if
we set a part so much time to spend every day in meditations and prayer, etc.
many think, if they do not neglect them, but are constant to their times and
set duties, all the rest of the day is their own, to do as they please; whereas
the truth is, our morning, and other solemn duties, the chief end of them is to
set our hearts in tune, that all our words, and thoughts, may be such as may
make sweet music in the ears of God; and we must not think, that as soon as
we have tuned our Harps we may hang them upon the Willowes: It is true, as I
have elsewhere said, solemn duties are acts of communion with God for the
present, but especially helps for the communion with God for the future, as
when we are at a feast, we find relish and delight in the very act of
eating, but the main end of our eating is growth and strength, one speaking of
the solemn duties of morning prayer, and of keeping communion with God by
ejaculatory prayers, all the rest of the day, well observes, that the want of
the solemn morning prayer (in case that some necessary work of charity do
hinder us) may be supplied by some frequent ejaculatory prayers, and frequent
inward spiritual admirings and adorings of God, but the want of these cannot be
supplied by the other.

CHAP. IX. The next impediment is, carnally to think, that God will be
contented with any thing.
TO think that God will be contented with any thing and be grudging every
minute that we spend in his service, this proceeds from an erroneous
judgment, and from a base heart. Suppose it were so, that God would be
content with any thing; suppose God should not be angry, though thou should
not pray to him, or hear a Sermon, or read a Chapter in the Bible, any more
than once a year, but he should withal give thee leave to spend as much time
in these duties as thou would, I say, if God would be content, would
thou be content? Do thou do so in any other thing? A friend, in whose power
it is to do thee a courtesy, do thou satisfy thy self in this, that he
will not be angry, though thou do not ask it of him? If a great Monarch
should bid you ask what you would of him, would you therefore ask nothing,
because you were assured he would not be angry, though you asked nothing?
Does this make thee not to add to thy estate, when thou have got enough to live
competently and comfortably, because that God does not command thee so to do;
but thou may justly think, that he is rather angry with thee for joining
house to house, and being insatiable in thy desires. Suppose God should give
the spirits of just men made perfect, leave to dwell on earth again, and to
give over their songs of joy and praise, which they give unto him, would they
account it a privilege? would they not rather account it an argument of the
abatement of Gods love, and their happiness: Suppose a Law should be made,
that whosoever should kill their children should not be punished, would any
loving Mother think that such a Law could bring any advantage unto her? Nay,
suppose a Law should be made for the rewarding of those Mothers that were
careful for the good of their children, would the reward promised in that Law,
heighten her love and care to her little ones? So neither does the promise of
Gods pardoning of sin encourage the people of God to sin against him, but they
rather fear God, and his goodness; it argues neither love to God, nor to thy
self, to put God off with any thing, though he would be content with it; it
is a base slavish question, to say, what must I do and put the Emphasis in
must, a son and a friend say, What may I do to please my father or my friend?
to cure this base distemper, you must understand the excellency of the duties
you perform, do you know what it is to have communion with God? to praise,
admire, and adore him, is the happiness of heaven.

2. You must know the greatness of the rewards that God gives to them that
serve him, and that not one minute spent in his service, nor one thought of
love shall be forgotten; he that numbers the hairs of thy head, does also
keep an account of the smallest and slenderest performances in his service, and
will certainly reward them.

3. Above all, get the love of God, for love thinks nothing enough; our
Saviors body was imbalmed with an hundred pound of spices and odours, yet Mary
Magdalen thinks he had not enough, she brings hers also; it is a question
that love never puts, What need I do so much? but her saying is always, How
may I do more? If you should ask me, how you may get the love of God. I
answer, that if it were not for our base corruptions, I might rather ask you,
how you can choose but love him? Sometimes of a sudden it has come into my
mind, that if one could but speak with the devil, one might persuade him not
to go about doing mischief, damning souls as he does. I know it is a vain
thought, for the Angel himself that disputed with him about the body of Moses,
was fain to refer him to the Lord to rebuke him; and if the Angel could not
persuade him to leave off his idolatrous attempt, much less can we: It is
true, if men were not spiritually dead or mad, it were impossible but that such
infinite excellencies, such incomprehensible love, such continual mercies,
should prevail with our hearts; and these are the three special things to
procure love, therefore think of these, kindle thy love at Gods love, see if
the love of Christ will not constrain thee to love him; but this is our
misery, that our hearts stand out against our understandings in spiritual
things; convictions, be they never so strong, except God pleases to keep open
the passage betwixt the head and the heart, truths float and lodge in the
understanding, and sink not down to the heart; if the heart loves the lust,
though the truths of God take the outworks of the understanding, and convince
that, yet the heart keeps its Castle, and will not yield; like a learned
Papist, who being evidently convinced, and confessing, that he could not tell
what to answer, said, notwithstanding, that his love to the Church of Rome was
so great, that he would not leave it.

5. To think God a hard Master, to have hard thoughts of him, as if he would
take all advantages against us, and that he delighted in our sufferings; such
are Papists, that think God is pleased with outward mortifications, as
fastings, scourgings, going barefoot, wearing haircloth, etc. as if God
delighted in our misery, and were pleased with these things, ex opere operato,
to think, that God will be content with nothing, or that he will be content
with any thing, are two extremes, the one a blasphemy, unworthy of his
greatness and Majesty, and the other of his goodness, and bowels of
compassion. This was that wretched principle upon which that servant built,
that hid his Talent in a Napkin, Mat. 25. he made, as if though he did what
he would, or could, God would never be content, and that he was all for
reaping, nothing for sowing, but God is no hard Master.

1. For if he gives work, he gives hands too; if he lays on a burden, he
gives shoulders to bear it, and if thou art weak, he helps thy infirmities,
and if thou art sick of them, he cures thy infi^mities, and if thou art
willing, he pardons thy infirmities; and is he an hard Master?

2. Consider what the rewards are, how infinitely above all that thy works are
worth; nay, that is nothing, not only above thy works, but above thy desires;
if thou shall employ any one in thy service, let the journey or business be
never so difficult, if it be in his power; give him but what he asks he will
do it, though a Porter groan under his burden, he would carry it, and if thou
give him an hundred pound to carry it cross the street, he will not complain
of thee for an hard Master, nor of the weight of the burden, but would be
glad of such an other employment; and is God an hard Master, who gives such
unproportionable rewards, for services that have so little trouble in them; nay,

3. For services, were there no other rewards, are rewards in themselves: What
is it that God requires at thy hands, but that thou should love the Lord
with all thy strength, with all thy soul, etc. Deuteronomy. 6. and is he a hard
Master, that bestows such magnificent gifts and then desires nothing for them
all, but that thou should love him? surely he is neither hard, nor may be
properly accounted a Master in that sense, but rather a tender father, or an
indulgent husband: A master requires service, and does not so much enquire with
what mind it be done, but whether his business be done, but to require love,
and not service, as he requires mercy, and not sacrifice, is not like a
Master, but like a Father; and what is the service that God requires at thy
hands, but such as is the happiness of Angels? Do but love, fear, admire, and
adore him, and thou can not but please him; and is he a hard Master, who
would have thee live in heaven, while thou art on earth? How sweet are the
commands of God? He bids thee rejoice always, and take care for nothing,
Philip. 4.4.

4. Suppose one should take an Apprentice, and for his faithful service, should
not only give him the stock with which he traded, but all the gains; and
besides, should not think that enough neither, but highly reward him for his
industry, though he knew that all he got should be his own, were this an
hard Master? Thus God deals with us, he gives us talents, and for our
improving of them, not only gives us them, and whatsoever improvement we have
made of them, but highly rewards us besides, this is full, clearly set down,
Mat. 25. in the parable of the talents: So God bids us pray, and does not only
promise to give us what we ask, but rewards us also for asking, Mat. 6.6. We
have not only promises to this purpose, but a rare example; Solomon asks
wisdom, God not only gives him what he asks, but gives him riches, honors,
above all Princes, because he asked so great a thing as wisdom.

5. God accepts of any thing, If we do it with a sincere heart, if we truly
love and believe, though we have many failings, he accepts of our persons,
and our services; indeed if we hate him, there is nothing that we can do can
please him, though we should do all that were in his heart, as Jehu did; but
this is not to be a hard Master, for there is none of us but would do so, and
justify themselves in their so doing; the injuries, that a friend does
imprudently or unwillingly, do not displease us so much, as the flatteries of
an enemy; besides, if there be any thing good in any action, God does not
suffer it to pass without notice and reward, if one does that which is
materially and outwardly good, though it has nothing that is formally good in
it, yet God will not suffer it to go unrewarded: A Heathen King does what God
would have him to do, though it were to carry on his own ambitious designs,
yet God would not let him go unrewarded, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19. and for his own
people, though there be but an atome of gold in an heap of dross, he casts
not away the gold for the dross sake; if Sarah calls her husband Lord, though
the rest of her speech was an heap of infidelity, yet the Spirit of God takes
notice of that one word; if Isaac blesses Jacob, at first by mistake, intending
nothing less than to bless Jacob, yet because he confirmed it afterward, his
first mistake is taken no notice of, but it is said, Hebrews 11. that by faith
Isaac blessed Jacob.

CHAP. X. How not watching over our thoughts, is a great hinderance to the
power of Godliness.
ANother great hinderance, is, not to watch over our thoughts: I confess it is
the hardest, but the profitablest work a Christian has to do, the reason of
the difficulty, is, because the same faculty is to watch, and to be watched;
when one faculty watches another, it is much easier, as it is easier to watch
ones words, than ones thoughts, because they are different operations of the
soul, as it is easier to watch, and take such order, that another shall not
make away themselves, than for one to watch himself from making away himself,
quis custodiet, ipsus custodes. Another thing that makes it very difficult, is,
because the thoughts are more unruly, and more subject to wander, and being of
a spiritual nature, it is a hard thing to keep them within compass, as it is a
hard thing to keep the wind or the light out of a room, because they are so
subtle, and thin, that they enter in at every chink; it is far easier to keep
out thieves, because the noise of breaking open doors gives an alarm and
notice to the whole family, but light enters in, sine strepitu: So for words
and actions, it is much easier to restrain them, for whatsoever they do, we
can more easier take notice of, they are not so swift, nor so inperceptible in
their operations, yet the watching of our thoughts is very profitable, because
sin is stopped in its fountain; but the truth of it is, if we can, it is better
to fix the thoughts, than to watch them, as it is far easier to imprison a man,
and so keep him; than to watch his motions, and it is far less trouble, if one
can, to make a woman chaste, than otherwise to keep her from adultery: but the
fixing of our thoughts is not to be done, but by inward mortisications;
without mortifying our love of the world, it is impossible to keep our hearts
from thinking of it; and therefore if you would fix your thoughts on things
that are spiritual, there is no other way, than by enamoring your hearts with
spiritual things; you must see the excellency of them, you must account them
your treasure, and then you will be always thinking of them; for so our
Savior, Mat. 6.21. and though Christ had not said it, experience teaches us,
that where our treasure is, there will our hearts be also.

CHAP. XI. The next great impediment, is, endeavoring impossibilities.
ANother great hinderance, is, that we undertake impossibilities, viz. to enjoy
God and the world together; the Apostle plainly tells us, That whosoever loves
the world, and the things of the world, the love of the Father is not in him, 1
John 2.15. We are not enough sensible of the irreconcilable enmity, and the
mischief that the world does us, the desire of the praise of the world cannot
stand with faith, John 5.44. and for the cares of the world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, they choke the Word, Mat. 13. and pleasures are no
less bewitching, nor less dangerous; but these things must be left, yet not
the things themselves, but the love of them, one may have riches, so one does
not love them; it is not a sin to be praised, so one does not love to be
called Rabbi; one may eat dainties, and one may use recreations, but if one
loves pleasures, and loves wine and oil, one shall be as poor in spirituals,
as in temporals: One that spoke high things concerning his enjoyments that he
had of God, one asked him, how he came to find God; he answered, when he
left all things, and himself, he found God; and certainly it is impossible for
one to serve two Masters, it is as impossible, that there should be two
Omega's, as that there should be two Alpha's, that there should be two last
ends, as that there should be two first beginnings; and whatsoever we make
our last end, and place our happiness in, is our Master, it commands all that
we have, and are, besides the impossibility, it makes our lives very
uncomfortable, while there are two Twins thus struggling in us, of such
different and contrary qualities, it must needs be very painful; it may
therefore be called halting betwixt two opinions, for one that is lain, and
halts, goes with far more difficulty and trouble; and while one is divided
between the world and God, one enjoyes neither; one that takes his swinge, and
wallowes in the pleasures of the world, without ever looking after Religion,
has some, though base delights; he that wholly gives himself up to enjoy God,
has ten thousand times more, and better; but he that strives to enjoy both,
can have none.

CHAP. XII. The next impediment of Holiness, is, our not taking heed of
occasions, temptations, and beginnings of sin.
ANother great impediment is, not to take heed of the occasions, temptations,
and beginnings of sin, he that avoids not these, it is almost impossible for
him to avoid the sin it self; nay, indeed, to go into these, is to sin, though
one goes no further; for though to be tempted, is no sin, yet to go into
temptation is, for it is living contrary to our prayers, though one does resist
and overcome the temptations, and so one is free a tante, if not a toto; one
sins not so much if one overcome, yet it is a sin to be tempted, when it comes
by our negligence and carelessness; if we blame our servants for setting fire
amongst combustible matter, though it may be by reason of our extraordinary
providence, we discover it before it sets the house on fire; and if so be our
graces, and our resolutions, be not strong enough to keep us from the
beginnings, occasions, and temptations of sin, how vain is it to think, that
when we have given Satan these advantages, that then we shall overcome them?
but I have written somewhat more fully elsewhere of this matter.

CHAP. XIII. The next impediment is, to neglect the smaller acts, either of
Holiness, or sin.
ANother impediment is, to despise the day of small things, whether it be
smaller acts of devotion, or lesser acts of sin.

1. The one may be easily avoided, and the other easilier performed: What pain
or trouble is it to praise, and bless, and adore God in thine heart, many
times a day? though I am loath to set down these as lesser acts of Holiness. And
what great matter of difficulty is there, when thou art about to speak some
vain or idle word to forbear it, in obedience to God it is easier to forbear a
sin, than to answer for it at the day of Judgment.

2. Smaller acts of sin, or of holiness, may more frequently be performed, and
the occasions of doing them do ofner occur, to suffer literally martyrdom for
Christ's sake. Blessed be God, in our days, there has been none, or rare
occasions for it; but to be scorned, reproached, and reviled. Whosoever will
duly observe the rules of Christianity, in carrying himself with that
meekness, poverty of spirit, that conscience and zeal in reproving of sin, that
Christianity requires, shall have daily occasion, or most, to suffer solemn
duties and Ordinances, partly, because they take up so much time, and partly,
because they require a total sequestration from worldly businesses, whereas
ejaculatory prayers, occasional meditations, and such inward short retirings of
the soul, take up so little time, and may be mingled with worldly employments,
that they may be almost innumerable every day, and what they want in their
magnitude, they may have in number; an Hair is but a small thing, yet because
of their multitudes, they keep us very warm: Misers feasts, they say, use to
be very great, but very seldom, but in his daily constant expenses, he is
very frugal, and omits not the smallest gain, and it is not such seldom
extravigances that impoverish.

3. Smaller duties, and smaller sins, do make way for greater, as the point of
the needle does for the rest of it, nemo repent fit turpissimus; generally we
begin with lesser sins, as omissions of duties, as friends first begin to be
estranged, and then they may easily become enemies; for frequent committing of
lesser sins, harden the heart so, that that sin, which if it had been
propounded at first, would have startled one, yet the heart being prepared by
the omissions of duties, and running into the occasions and temptations of the
sin, they come at last from being so far from abhorring of it, that they commit
it: David's murder of his friend began with his neglect to fight against his
enemies; and his adultery, began with idleness, with sleeping and gazing, so
you shall see by what degrees he came to commit murder.

1. He neglects the duty incumbent upon him, at that season, and so having
little to do, he did nothing, went to sleep, when he should have been
meditating, Genesis 24.63. his unseasonable sleep made him unfit for any thing
that was good, but fit for any thing that was evil; one act of idleness puts
him upon another, and both of them fits him for adultery, and that ingages him
to murder; to satisfy his lusts he commits adultery, to conceal his lusts
he commits murder. Sin is modest at first; Solomon would not build his Wives
house near the Temple, afterward built an Altar for an Idol, Eccles. 10.13.

4. If the sin be so little, or the duties so small, is it not the greater sin
for thee to offend God for such trifles? If the love of God be not strong
enough to persuade them to do, or abstain from that which is small, how weak is
thy heart toward God.

5. Is it not a great sin in thee, to offend God in small things? It is a great
sin for thee to stand out against God in small matters.

CHAP. XIV. The next impediment is, our ignorance and senselessness of the sins
of Omission.
THe next great impediment is, the not considering the sinfulness, and the
mischief that sins of omission do us; few there are but make conscience of
slandering their neighbor, but make not conscience enough of preserving his
good name, more make conscience of sinful words, than of sinful silence, more
make conscience of doing evil, than of doing nothing; therefore that you may
be more sensible of the sinfulness and sins of omission, consider,

1. That the greatest sins in the world, except the sin against the Holy Ghost,
are sins of omission, viz. ignorance, infidelity, impenitency.

2. That at the day of Judgment, the sins that Christ shall condemn wicked men
for, are sins of omission.

3. Thy sins of omission are far more than thy sins of commission, for every
sin of commission includes in it sins of omission, not e contra. Consider how
mamany precious thoughts of God thou might have had the last hour, which
thou had not, and so many thoughts not had, so many sins of omission; nay,
every holy duty, has more sins of omission, than it has goodness of
performance, for there are three kinds of sins of omission, one in omitting
the duty it self, the other in omitting debitas circumstantias, and the third,
in omitting debitos gradus: So that though you do perform the duty, either you
omit doing it for that end, etc. and so want sincerity, or else do it not with
such a high degree of love, etc.

CHAP. XV. The next impediment, is, not to come fully off for God.
THe eleventh great impediment, is, that we do not come off fully and wholly
for God, we would fain have both the World and God, which will never be; it
is impossible to have ones treasures in heaven, and in earth too: This halting
betwixt two opinions, betwixt God and Baal, and serving two Masters, God and
Mammon, is that which hinders us from doing either effectually; for while we
are thinking, and endeavoring to enjoy the world, the thoughts of heaven make
us, that we cannot freely enjoy that; and when we are about to serve God, the
thoughts of the world take us off from him; great mischiefs come by our thus
having an heart for God, and an heart for the world; and the truth of it is;

1. It is impossible, as it is impossible for any body to have two centers,
either of magnitude or weight; so it is for the soul to have two centers, God
and the world; for as the first cause of all things can be but one, so the
last end of all our desires and endeavors, can be but one subordinate end,
we may have many, but not coordinate.

2. Hence comes all our mischiefs, all our troubles and distractions come from
hence: For as it is in a Kingdom, when it is divided, and there are two which
would strive for sovereignty, there must needs be continually civil wars; so
that soul can have no peace, but must be in continual war and disquiet, when
the world and God strive who shall rule. From whence come wars and fightings
within you? Come they not hence, of your lusts that war in your members? it is
our lustings after the world, that make all our inward perturbations in our
services of God.

3. This makes us, that we cannot run the Race that is set before us, as not
with joy, as already has been said, so not with speed; just as one that halts,
runs neither with that speed, nor ease, nor comeliness: So he that halts
betwixt God, and any thing else, goes but slowly on in the waves of God;
therefore if God be God, follow him, if the world be God, follow that: He
that is going from Sodom, and looks back, must needs make many a stop in his
journey.

4. Take heed, for thy hearkening after the world though for the present, it
may be, they only hinder thee in Gods service, yet it will come to pass at
last, that they will hinder thee from Gods service, thy sinning and praying
will not last long, for either thy sin will make thee leave off praying, or thy
praying will make thee leave off sinning: So thy love of the world will either
make thee leave off loving of God, or the loving of God will make thee leave
off loving the world; For God will so order it by his providence that thou
shall be forced to choose one; as it befell the young man, that would needs
know what he must do to be saved, he thought he might love riches, and
follow Christ, but it would not be.

5. Thou must never think to have any great measure of communion with God, as
long as thou stand in this uncertainty and irresoluteness; As a woman, as
long as she is courted by two, and will not give an absolute denial to one of
them, cannot enjoy either as an husband, etc. and so wants that communion that
she might have with the one, so that indeed both visit her, but she dwells
with neither: So while thou art thus doubting and wavering, thou may have
many visits and motions of the Spirit of God, but the Spirit of God does not
dwell in thee; thou loosest those unspeakable advantages, both of grace and
joy, which come by the co-habitation of the Spirit; therefore make Religion thy
business, and follow God fully, as Joshuah did, and follow hard after God, as
David did, and press forward to the mark, as Paul did, and strive to enter in
at the strait gate, as our Savior commands.

CHAP. XVI. The next great impediment, is, worldly company.
THe twelfth great impediment, is, worldly company, such as have no
acquaintance with God, but talk of such things, as Turks and Heathens do talk
of as well as they: When a Saint has been in private ravished with the love of
God, and the joys of heaven, and meets with company which speaks not one word
of such matters, nor can, what a damp is it, and quenching, as it were, of the
spirit of God in us? How sapless, juiceless, and without relish are such
discourses? And the people of God do generally loose more by worldly men, that
in respect of their conversation are somewhat blameless, than they loose by
wicked and profane men, for their company they utterly avoid, but the other,
they conversing withal, they suffer much from. It is generally in every ones
mouth, that we have three grand enemies the World, the Flesh, and the Devil,
but few there are that deal with the flesh, or with the world, as enemies, but
they endeavor too much to please both, which they do not use to do to enemies;
nay, we suffer very much many ways, merely* because we would not displease
the men of the world. I knew an excellent Christian, a woman of Quality, who
spent most of her time in private and secret duties, a woman of the greatest
eminency, for that, as I knew: She, when persons of great Quality came to see
her, would not omit her set times, but would, as they called rudely, take her
leave of them, rather than omit her communion with God. Alas, What good can
conferences with the people of the world do us? though they talk of the things
of God, their discourses are unprofitable and unsavory; for one may see, that
they speak of things they understand not, and have no experience of; they
speak, as if one should speak of the West Indies, that was never there. Alas,
they are neither able to comfort one, nor to advise one, concerning spiritual
matters, the less we have to do with them, the better.

CHAP. XVII. The next impediment, is, abundance of worldly employment.
The next impediment, is, abundance of worldly employments and businesses. Many
there are, that never think they can exceed this way, and they put it all under
the notion of their particular calling, and grasp so much business, that they
can have no leisure or communion with God; nay, that time which they do spend
in private, their heads and hearts are so distracted with the thoughts of their
employments, that God has little of them, but their bodily presence, and
lip-labor; for what with the business they were involved in before duty, and
that which they are to be employed in as soon as ever they have done, there is
such a throng of worldly thoughts in their heads, and hearts, that they do
find it an hard matter to get their hearts so much as in tune, the time is so
little they can spare for such matters; then all must be excused, they must
provide for their families, or else they are worse than Infidels; whereas they
should withal, think of providing for their own souls, and for the souls of
their families; and their prayers with them, for them, and instructions of
them; they do not consider enough, how that Christ blames Martha for being
busied about many things, though they were not only domestical employments,
but such as belonged to her, and were undertaken for the immediate service and
entertainment of Christ; and if Christ blamed the multitude of her employments
thus qualified, how much more will he blame theirs? They should also consider,
that those children thrive best, for the most part, both in the matters of the
world, and especially in the matters of God, who have so much left them, as
they may, with their own reasonable endeavors and industry, live well, else
not. And these men, if they can but find a place of Scripture or two, which
injoynes them to take up some calling or other, they rejoice, and quiet
themselves, as if their greedy and covetous desires were justified by it. Why
do they not also consider, how earnest the Scripture is in setting down the
danger, and deceitfulness, and uncertainty of riches, insomuch, we scarce read
of any rich man that was holy, except he were holy first? And those that we
read of that were holy, they got their riches not by such worldly employments
as now adays are used, but such, wherein they had abundance of leisure to
serve God, for they were generally Shepherds, and their riches consisted in
cattle. So Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, David, they should also think with
themselves, how much the Scripture presses us to have our conversation in
heaven, and there to lay up our treasures, and that we should be frequent in
prayer, meditation, and closet duties, for without frequency in them, it is
impossible to be heavenly minded in earthly employments: He needs frequently
to take Antidotes, that converses, nay, lives with those that have the plague.
Why do not men put bounds to their desires of growing rich? they put bounds to
their charity, and to their times for solemn duties, and why not to the things
of the world?

CHAP. XVIII. The next great impediment, is, to have a carnal opinion, that it
is easy to be religious.
ANother great impediment, is, to think it is an easy thing to be religious,
and that one need take no pains, but that we may go to heaven upon a bed of
roses; or at least, now and then to pray, and to read some good books, to hear
Sermons, and repeat them, and other such outward works of Religion, are
abundantly enough. Alas, Alas, the work of Religion is within, it is neither the
ear that hears, nor the tongue that prays, but the heart does both: It is
true, the body by consent and sympathy may suffer somewhat, insomuch, that it
is a hard thing to pray as we ought, upon a full stomach, without being sick:
And if one has something that we must obtain of God, and intend to wrestle
with him for it, we shall find that our very bodies will receive alterations
in the combat: If so be Religion be such an easy thing, as some lazy
persons will make it, let them answer me these few Queries.

1. Why does the Scripture speak otherwise of it? Why does Christ say, Strive
to enter in at the strait gate, for many shall seek to enter in, but they shall
not be able? if we may be lazy in this work, Why are we commanded to stir
up the grace of God that is in us, 2 Timothy 1.6. Why does God by his Prophet
complain, that no man stirs himself up? Isai. 64.7. Why does the Scripture
speak of following hard after God, and of our life, as a continual war-fare?

2. How comes it to pass, that most eminent Saints have found so much ado? Do
we not read how Jacob wrastled all night with tears and supplications? Hosea
12.4. How did that blessed Apostle Paul fight? not as one beating the air. How
did he press forwards toward the mark, forgetting the things that were
behind, and beat down, and keep in subjection his body? How he was in
fastings often in perils by Sea, etc. passed thorough good report, and ill
report; and how comes it to pass that thou thwarting one corruption, or denying
thy self in any thing, thou give thy flesh what ease, what diet, what
pleasure soever it desires? If it be but a little cold, rather than thou will
endure it, thou will leave Ordinances, duties, as much Religion as may stand
with the praise of men, the ease of thy body, the saving, nay, the increasing
of thine estate, if that will save thy soul. O how far art thou from leaving,
hating Father, and Mother, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, thine own life, for
his sake. Flatter not thy self, if thou will not cross a lust, nor leave a sin
in the time of peace, thou will not leave thy life in time of persecution, for
his Namessake.

3. Why does the Scripture say, that the righteous shall scarcely be saved?
And be thou sure, that if ever thou come to heaven, thou shall wonder how it
was possible, but that then thou shall see the infinite wisdom and power of
God ordering things, how it was possible that thou should escape such
imminent dangers: Thou will see that thousands of times in thy life (what with
thy backslidings, thy gross carelessness of duties, and in duties, by the
victories that temptations have gotten of thee) that thou have been at the very
brink of the pit of hell, and that there has been but an hairs breadth betwixt
thee and destruction: Alas, the senslesnesse of thy dangers, temptations,
corruptions, makes thee so careless, and so little to wonder at thy safety:
like him, that in a dark night rid over a very narrow long plank, that was laid
over a great bridge that was repairing, when they who knew the danger, asked
him, how he came into the City that way? He said, why, what should ail him,
he came, and rid over the bridge? But the next day, when he saw the danger
he had escaped, the apprehensions of the danger, though past, made him fall
down for dead. Surely if thou come to heaven with lazy wishes, and
performances, it must be by some other way than ever the Word of God has
spoken of? it must be by some Gospel that Paul never preached; nay, such an
one, that if he, or an Angel from heaven should preach, they should be
accursed.

4. Go and enquire of all the Saints of God, of the most experienced
Christians, and ask them that have twenty, thirty, sixty years experience of
the ways of God, and power of godliness, and they will tell thee, that though
Religion, and keeping of strict communion with God, has more delight in it than
the world can know, and such, that if they had ten thousand worlds, they would
give all to enjoy him whom their soul loves? yet they will tell you also, that
it has cost them many a fervent prayer, many a strong cry, many a doubtful
conflict, many tears, sighs, and groans; nay, they will tell you, that they
have so strange and strong temptations still to grapple withal, and that not
any corruption is so fully vanquished, but that it sometimes troubles still;
and that as long as they have an heart so full of corruptions, and live in a
world so full of temptations; and Satan is so full of malice, they do not, nor
can expect to put off their armor, and think to sleep upon a bed of Roses:
generally, it is peoples ignorance, and want of experience, that makes them have
such light, and slight thoughts of the great business of Religion. Indeed, if
they think it easy, from their sense and conference, in the power of God,
that is something: Men generally in the matters of Religion, do as presumptuous
persons do in their confidence of the pardon of their sins; they think sin
displeases God no more than themselves; and from their senslesnesse of the
sinfulness, greatness, and number of their sins, proceeds their easiness of
their carnal belief of the pardon of them: So from their senssesnesse and
ignorance of the greatness of the work, and labor of love, and the number and
impetuousnesse of their own corruptions, and Satan's temptations, proceeds their
carnal confidence of their easiness to be saved. Is it so then, that the
established Decrees of God, and the experience of all Saints shows, that the
way to heaven is up hill, it is not to be attained without fightings without,
and fightings within; and must thou have a private way made for thee only to go
to heaven in? must the Rock of God his Decrees be removed, and the experience
of all the Saints on the earth be altered for thee? Job 18.4. May we not say
in this case, as it is in the matter of poverty, that which makes one live
contentedly, is, that ones mind, and ones estate agree? We generally desire
that God would bring our estates to our minds, and God requires of us, that
we should bring our minds to our estates, as to our content, it is all one
which of these two are done; and is it not much more reason, that we should
yield to the desires of God, than that he should yield to ours? So in this
case: Is it not much more reason that we should make the work of Religion
easier and easier, by multiplying holy duties, (for the more we pray, the
easier and the better we pray) than that God should make it easier, by abating
our work? For as in the other instance, if God should give us according to our
desires in earthly things, there would be no end, for that which we desire to
day, would as little satisfy us to morrow, as that which we desired
yesterday, does satisfy us to day; so if that our duty should be abated,
there would be no end, unless God would be satisfied that we should do
nothing at all in his service; for he that is unwilling to pray thrice a day,
will be more unwilling to pray twice within a little while, and after that
once. But you will say, it may be, we would not have our work abated, but our
strength increased.

Ans. Art thou indeed in carnest? Do thou not desire strength, as Pilate
asked, what was truth, and do neither care, nor stay for an answer? Then, I
say, who hinders thee? I am sure, God hinders thee not, nay, be commands thee
to ask grace, and strength of him, and has promised to give it: If any man
lack wisdom, let him ask it from above, Jam. 1.5. Ask, and you shall have,
Mat. 7 7. therefore take heed of this great error, to think, that Ordinances
carelessly enjoyed, duties lazily performed, corruptions unmortified,
temptations unrefisted, a mouth full of formal prayers, and a heart full of
cold desires, will bring thee to heaven: If once thou come to have a carnal
thought of the easiness of the ways of God, and think that a little is too
much, thou will quickly come to think, that nothing at all is enough.

Object. But you will say, Does not Christ himself say, that his yoke is easy,
and his burden light? Why do you then make it such a difficult thing to be
religious for that is as great a hinderance and discouragement, and enough to
fright any one from Religion?

I answer, therefore, in several propositions:

1. That though the service of God be difficult, yet it is not impossible, for
(de facto) many have served God, so as he has accepted and rewarded them.

2. It is not only possible, but certain, that we shall serve God acceptably,
if it be not our own faults, if we are not wanting to God, and to our selves,
we cannot miscarry; every servant that shall be condemned for sin, shall be
condemned for slothfulness, Mat. 25.26.

3. It is impossible for him that will continue fighting, to be overcome; if
we will not put off our armor, and cast away our weapons, let the days be
never so evil, we shall stand, and when all is done that our enemies can do,
we shall stand, Ephesians. 6.13.

4. The promises are not made to those that attain to perfection, but that aim
at perfection; for the Apostle himself had not attained perfection, but
followed after it, Phil. 3.12. So the promise is not made to him that has
overcome, but that does overcome, or is overcoming. Revel. 3.17. and it is not
said perfect love has cast out fear, it is not (...), but (...).

5. How difficult soever Religion is, in this respect, it is easy, that it is
above the strength of none of Gods people. In this case it is as it was with
Manna, he that has much, has nothing over, he that has little, has no
want; in temporals, that burden that requires the strength of a Giant, cannot
be carried by an Infant; but the service of God, though it cannot be
performed acceptably, unless he does (...), use his utmost strength; yet a new
born babe may do it, for he requires but thy (all) let that all be never so
little, Rev. 3.8. for if thy strength be little, God will keep thee from
temptations, as he promises, ver. 10.

6. How difficult and uneasy soever the yoke of Christ is, it is easier than
the law, for that requires not only endeavors, but performance, not that the
Copy that we are to write by, is less exact, than that of the Law, for the
Law it self remains in its perfection as a rule; but now, though we write
with blots, mistakes, and not exactly to the Copy, it is accepted, and sincere
endeavors, and not exact performance, is required.

7. As the yoke and burden of Christ is easier than that of the Law, so it is
easier than that of sin, for it is a recreation to that; for Christ says, he
will refresh us, by changing the yoke of sin for that of the Gospel; so that
you must not think to mend your selves, by casting off Religion, for that of
sin is far heavier, as in many instances will evidently appear, what burdens
do sinful pleasures bring along with them? drunkenness, gluttony, lust; how
many diseases do they bring upon us? How is head, and heart, and purse, and all
employed in revenge, but it is neither labor nor cost to forgive injuries, so
to cark and care, what distractions it brings upon one, but if we do cast our
care upon God, making our wants known by prayer and supplication, then the
Peace of God, which passes all understanding, will keep our hearts and minds.

8. How hard soever the service of God is, how heavy soever his burden, and
though your whole strength be required, yet you shall never be weary in his
service, if you will but set to your strength; indeed if you do not put to your
strength, then you may be weary, but else, instead of loosing, you shall
increase your strength, Isa. 40.31. if you will run, you shall fly; if you will
run, you shall not be weary; if you cannot run, if you will walk as fast as
you can, you shall not faint.

9. Though the service of God be difficult, and impossible to corrupt nature,
yet it is not only possible, but delightful to the regenerate man, Romans 7.22.
Psalm 1.2. So that though as music it may be hard to be practiced, yet it is
very delightful.

10. Though the business of Religion be a thing impossible to us, if we look
upon our own strength only, nay, though we are regenerate, though we have the
will, yet we cannot have the deed, without further assistance and influence,
Phil. 2.13. nay, though we delight in the ways of God, yet we cannot walk in
them, without his inabling of us, Psalm 119.35. yet considering the abundance
of means, and helps, that we have from Christ, the burden is light, and the
yoke casie; that which the strength of no man can move, a child may move with
an engine.

CHAP. XIX. The next great impediment, is, not to do what we can, because we
cannot do what we would, or should.
ONe great impediment, whereby we are hindered in the ways of God, is this,
because we cannot do so much as we should and would, therefore we do not
what we can, whereas we should do to the uttermost of our power, though we
cannot do so much as we desire to do; I shall instance in the matter of
Thanksgiving, and Praise, as thus, when we consider with our selves what
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ, God has blested us withal,
and we cannot find any evidences of our justification, vocation, or election:
When we can find no clear evidence of any grace in us, we hang our harps
upon the willowes, and let the duty of our praise and thanksgiving alone, until
we can find such spiritual things to bless God for. Now I shall set down what
we ought to do in such a case, as to the matter of praise and thanksgiving.

1 In case thou can not find spiritual mercies to bless God for, bless him
for temporals, thine health, thine estare, that thy body is not full of boiles,
that thy house was not on fire about thee in the night, that it falls not upon
thee and thy children in the day; do thou not know, that this is from the
good providence of God? do thou not know that Satan is a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour? Do you think the devil is so kind to thee, or
any one, that he spares thee out of love? or do you think that he wants power
to cast down thy house, or smite thee with boils, or bring down fire from
heaven? he did these things to Job, and who is that that restrains him? Have
thou any iron chains that can hold this roaring Lion? What weapons offensive or
defensive against this enemy? Well, then bless God for those temporal blessings
which thou have, for it is evident, that it is not thou that make an hedge
about thy self, and all that thou have, but God.

2. If thou can find no positive spiritual mercies to bless God for, then
bless him for those that are privative or negative; as for example, Can thou
not see any evident cause to bless God, for giving thee grace, yet bless God
for keeping thee from such and such sins, in this sense thou may humbly
bless God, that thou art no adulterer, no murderer, no blasphemer, as to the
outward acts of them; let not God loose the praise that is due to him, for his
preserving of thee from such abominations, and let thy heart be much affected,
and highly prize these spiritual preservations.

3. If thou can not find any distinguishing spiritual mercies, then bless him
for common spiritual mercies: If thou can not find any such mercies, that
distinguishes thee from Reprobates, bless God for those that distinguish thee
from Turks, Jews, Heathens, viz. that thou have been born and brought up where
the Gospel is professed, purely, spiritually, frequently preached.

4. If you can find no grace in your self, yet bless God for the graces of
others: Do you not find your heart sometimes enlarged with joy and
thankfulness, when you hear of such or such an eminent Christian, for the grace
that God has given them? And if you can find your hearts affected with Gods
preserving of you from sin, and with the light of the Gospel, and with the
graces of others, be of good comfort, it is a singular sign of grace in thy
self: For I may say, as Epictetus did in somewhat the like case, Others are
sick, so am I, others are poor, so am I, but I willingly: His sickness, nor
poverty, did not distinguish him from others, but his willing submission did:
So others that are wicked men, God preserves them from many sins, gives them to
live in the light of his Gospel, and they see and know others that are holy,
but they do not bless God for these things, nor prize them above all other
temporal blessings.

5. In case you should not find any thing, or not be affected with any thing
that he has done for you, as in some sad times of desertion it may come to
pass, partly from their great undervaluing of all things that are nor
distinguishing mercies, as also from their ignorance, that any such mercies
belong to them; yet in such cases we must remember, that we must give the Lord
that glory that is due to his name, Psalm 29.2. and 96.8. If thou can find
nothing to bless God for, wherein he has been good to thee, bless him for his
own Excellencies, for that goodness which he has, and is in himself: If thou
can not bless him for the new name that he has given to thee: If thou can
not bless him for thy name, yet give him the glory due to his name: If thou
can not bless him for his promises, because thou think they do not belong
to thee, yet bless him for his Attributes and Excellencies, and give him that
glory that thou know belongs to him; for by thy admiring and adoring God for
his own Excellencies, thy heart will be brought in frame, and disposed for the
manifestations of his love to thee. Now I will help you a little in this
matter, showing you how you may act the admirings and adorings of God, in those
Attributes of Eternity, Power, Wisdom, Goodness; for as for his truth, as long
as thou can not perceive thy interest in any promise (the faithfulness of God
being a mere relative Attribute) it will little affect thee.

1. Think with thy self, and say, from everlasting to everlasting, thou art
God; think of his eternity, and thou shall quickly find that it is such an
Ocean, that thou can neither fathom, or see the shore of it, for the thoughts
of Eternity are overwhelming thoughts; and when thou find that thy thoughts
are at a loss, and that God dwells in thick darkness, then cry out, and say,
Lord manifest thy self unto us; for as long as thy thoughts are able to master
their work, when their object is God, they are neither worthy of him, nor able
to affect thee, until they come to be lost in admiration, in admirings, and
adorings of God, they are little better than Idolatry; for thou think of
God, as of a creature.

2. For the power of God, consider that standing miracle, in setting the Sands
as bounds to the Sea, that though the waters thereof lie on heaps, and
notwithstanding all those tempests and storms that make the Sea rage, yet the
Sand is a rope which can bind it; nothing sets bounds to the Sea further: If
you consider how that the devils, notwithstanding their number, and their
strength, cannot do any thing without his leave, their malice, certainly,
against God is so great, that they would not do any thing that God would have
them to do, if they could tell how to help it. Further, if we consider how
that all things were made by God of nothing, without the least labor, or help,
or instruments, to think that all that God did to create light, was his saying,
Let there be light; that all things should obey him, is not comparably so
wonderful, as that nothing it self should obey him, and that he should call
and command those things that are not, as if they were, Romans 4.17. Well might
the Heathens say, That all the praise and high expressions that all the Poets
used in the praise of their gods, came not near that one expression of Moses,
when he said, Let there be light, and there was light.

3. For the Wisdom of God, consider how infinite it was, by these particulars.

1. That God should make this world consisting of such innumerable variety of
creatures, and they of so many parts; as for example, man's body, of how many
parts, bones, veins, nerves, sinews, arteries, etc. so we may say of all
birds, fishes, beasts, trees, etc. Now for God to make all these without any
pattern at first, without consulting, as we consult; for the first thoughts
that ever God had for contriving the world, were his last; for God did not at
first think of creating the world so and so, and afterward, upon second
thoughts, found out a better way. I say, for God to make all these things so
exact, that the wisdom of the creature cannot bring the works of God to
perfection, nor the wisdom of God himself mend any thing that he has done,
for it cannot find out any defect in the works of Creation, no, not in the
least circumstantial, these things are incomprehensible.

2. To consider the infinite wisdom that God shows, as in the Creation, so in
the government of the world. Now to consider that all things go, as it were,
through the hand of God, not the least thing, nor greatest, nor those things
that seem most casual, or arbitrary, nor those things that seem most contrary
to providence, nor those things that seem to proceed from mere natural causes,
for to take notice of, to order, and dispose, to rule, and overrule all these
things, for him to number the stars, and call them all by their names; nay, the
very hairs of his peoples heads; that a Sparrow should not light upon the
ground, that the Sun should not rise, nor the Rain fall, nor a sprig of grass
grow, but by his Power and Wisdom, and not at all to be distracted and
troubled with ordering such innumerable things, nor in the least to be
hindered in his everlasting enjoyments of himself: This is incomprehensible.

3. To consider at the day of Judgment, how innumerable the persons will be
that shall be judged, how innumerable the actions, words, and thoughts, and
circumstantials of these, of every man, how exactly, speedily, and with what
infinite wisdom, all these things shall be determined, as in a moment; if the
wisdom of Solomon was so great, and so much admired, for the deciding of one
controversy between two Harlots, oh how infinite must his wisdom be, who
shall show more wisdom in judging every action of every man, than Solomon did
in that his sentence?

4. Concerning the mercy, patience, and long-suffering, etc. of God. What can
be spoken or thought worthy of them? It is true, that the Attributes of God in
him, or although the Attributes of God in themselves, are infinite, yet as to
their manifestations to us, the mercies of God are above all his works: This is
that Attribute that makes all the rest of his Attributes amiable, takes off the
terror of his justice, the carnal dread of his Majesty, insomuch, that the
very consideration of his goodness, if we would be but spiritually, clearly,
and fully satisfied of it, would make us go with more humble confidence to God,
in every of our streights, than we do to the nearest, dearest friend that we
had in the world, of whose love we have had the most constant, familiar,
longest experience: We dishonor God, to go before him with carnal trembling:
The Emperor was angry with him that gave him a petition with a trembling hand:
What do you give me a Petition, says he, as if you were to give meat to an
Elephant? if any thing under heaven will make a friend forsake one, it is ones
hard and mistrustful thoughts of him: Do not think of God, as of a Lion, that
will tear you in pieces, no, not though thou art a grievous sinner; for if thou will not fly from him, nor come against him, but come unto him; if thou come
weary, though as yet thou art heavy laden with thy sins, though thou art not
yet rid of them, yet if they are thy burden, that thou desire God would take
off from thee, he will not refuse thee, he has invited thee, and doubtless
thou shall be welcome if thou come: Can thou plead no interest in Gods
promises? Can thou not plead his Attributes? Thou art not so qualified, as
thou think, as to challenge God upon his promises; yet, if with reverence it
may be spoken, God is qualified with so much sweetness, mercy, and
long-suffering, etc. that he will in no wise refuse thee, if thou come to
him; nay, the truth of it is, he is engaged by promise, and by oath, John
6.37. Hebrews 6.17.

Now in these meditations, concerning the Attributes of God, if in your
meditation, you do not attain to any clear and affecting apprehensions of him,
say unto him, Lord manifest thy self unto me, the vail it is rent, and I
cannot see within the vail: And if thou have clear and affecting apprehensions
of him, than neglect not to beg of him clearer manifestations and discoveries
of himself: For when thou can look upon him that is invisible with the eye of
Faith, and speak to him, as a friend speaks to a friend, thy prayers will be
very effectual; and know this, that the knowledge of God is the primum
necessarium.

Now concerning the giving of God the glory of his Name, and praising of him
for his own Excellencies, I shall give you three examples, Joh. 1.21. it is, as
if you should say, Let God do what he pleases with me, though he should strip
me as naked as ever I was born, or as I shall be when I die, though I had not
one mercy left to praise him for, yet I have his Excellencies left to praise
him for; so it is with those that are in desertion, though they neither have,
as they think, any mercies, but such as are snares, and they shall pay dearly
for; and though they look upon God as an enemy, yet they are loath he should
be dishonored, they would have him have the glory of his Name.

2. Nehem. 9.5. When they were in great distress, upon a day of Humiliation,
they think it fit to begin with giving God the praise due to his Name, and
would not have him stay for that, till he bestowed new mercies upon them.

3. Revelations 4.11. This is the very practice of those in heaven, and it is
an heavenly practice to bless God more for his own Excellencies, and to praise
him more, that he has created all things for himself, than for us: And herein
appears their excellency of their love to God, that though they enjoy such
wonderful and incomprehensible blessings from him, yet they are more affected
with, and bless God for the glory he has, than the happiness that they have
from them. We read but of one example to this, and that is of our blessed
Savior, who gave God the glory of his love, even in the midst of his agony:
Father, if it be possible, he gave him the glory and title of a Father, even
then, when he was using him as an enemy; and it is a higher act of Holiness,
to give God the glory of his Love, while he is scourging of thee with
Scorpions, than to give God the honor of his Excellencies, when he is
crowning us with glory. There are two kinds of Attributes that the people of
God do use, when they pray to God, either such Attributes, as are most for the
strengthening of their Faith, for the obtaining of that which they pray for, or
such, as may, as it were, vindicate God from those aspersions, that his
providence seem to cast upon them: Sometimes they serve for both, as
Revelations 6.10. The Holiness, and the truth of God, serve to strengthen their
Faith, in believing that God would deliver his people from their persecution;
for he was engaged, in point of Holiness, not to prosper the wicked against
the Saints; and in point of truth, to perform his threatenings against the
wicked; therefore if thou can not, because thou want the sense of it,
praise God for his love, yet praise him for his loveliness: Suppose he should
do nothing for thee, must not he have the praise that is due to his Name?
Suppose some learned, wise, holy man, should, seeing a Toad crawling in his
bedchamber, cause it to be put out of doors, but would not have it killed?
should he loose the glory of all his wisdom, and the love and praise due to
his holiness, because he would not suffer the Toad to continue still in his
Chamber? nay, rather, was not his meekness to be wondered at, that he should
forbid the destruction of such a creature, or have any regard what became of
it? So, though God should never suffer thee to see his face, that art more
odious, in respect of sin, to God. than a Toad can be to us, shall God
therefore want the glory of his Excellencies, because he takes no more care of
such an inconsiderable thing as thou art. With this saying I shall conclude,
That the very damned, in the midst of their torments, though God be pouring
forth the vials of his wrath upon them, yet they ought to give God the glory of
his Excellencies, and they do ill to blaspheme him.

So it is also in the matter of repentance, though thou can not find thy
heart affected with the sinfulness of sin, therefore thou think vain for
thee to confess thy sins; but it is not vain, for thou must confess thy
sins, that thou may be sensible of them; and though thou can not
confess with sense of sin, confess without it: But this caution is to be
observed, lest I be mistaken; When I wish thee to confess sin, though thou
have no sense of sin, I wish thee to use such confession, as a means not to
rest there, and this is not to do as wicked men do, for they do outward actions
and duties, not as a means and a help to do more, for they do not desire to do
more; but whosoever uses this as a means to attain to higher performances, do
certainly that which God requires, and accepts; for he that says, Lord, here
are my two mites, though I owe ten thousand talents, and though this be far
from being all that I owe, yet it is all that I have, and God will accept,
according to what we have, and not according to what we have not.

CHAP. XX. The next impediment is, that we are not convinced of, and affected
with the vanity of the things of the world.
ANother impediment is, that we are not convinced of, and affected with the
vanities of the world: Of things that are seen, God has done abundantly enough
to satisfy us. There are two things, of which it has pleased the Spirit of
God to write two whole books, that we might be satisfied; viz. the vanity of
the creature, and the love of Christ; And what Argument almost can be greater,
to convince of the difficulty and necessity of believing these truths, than
this, that the Spirit of God has been so industrious, if I may so say, in
clearing these two truths? Surely all the ways whereby any thing can be made
manifest to us, these truths are made out, all things subject to the trial of
the senses, we evidently discern the vanity of them, for the eye is not
satisfied with seeing; and for the other senses, it is evident, their delights
are more brutish, but not more satisfactory; and 2. reason does abundantly
convince us, that riches, which is the golden Image that Satan has set up, and
all Tongues, Languages, and Nations, fall down, and worship. I say, as for the
insufficiency of riches, the very Philosophers, as Epictetus, Seneca,
Aristotle, etc. have seen by the light of reason.

3. As for experience, as far as ever our own went, we cannot but set our seal
to it, whether it be pleasure, profit, or honor, we must needs set our seal
to it, that all is vanity and vexation of spirit: How often do we nauseate
those things, when we have them, which we impetuously desired, until we had
them: And 4. for the experience of others, since the beginning of the world, to
this day, it has not been heard of any, whose desires have been satisfied with
the creature; and 5. as for the Word of God, that is so clear, that they that
run may read it. But is not this wonderful, that notwithstanding sense, reason,
experience, faith show us so clearly the truth of it, yet not one of an hundred
of those that call themselves Christians, live as men convinced of this truth,
but their whole love, joy, delight, endeavors, are placed upon, and run out
after these things; and yet whenever they read in any book, or hear in any
Sermon, a discourse concerning this matter, they think it to be a moral
discourse, much below them; but they should know, that whatsoever truth they
have not practiced, is rather above them. Let no man, nor your own heart
deceive you with vain words, it is as much sense to say, there goes a godly
Drunkard, there goes a godly Harlot, as to say, there goes a godly covetous
man: And be not deceived, one may as truly say, such a man drinks every day,
while his tongue faulters, his feet reel, etc. but he is no drunkard; such a
man never speaks as he thinks, nor does as he speaks, and yet he is a true
Nathanael, an Israelite, in whom there is no guile; as truly you may say all
this, as to say, such a man has a great estate, and yet is as earnest to get
more, as if he had not to buy bread, gives not the fortieth part of his
incomes to the poor, nor of his time to God; such a man will ride many score of
miles to a Fair, but will not go cross the street to a Sermon; he will talk
with a great deal of understanding of the things of the world, but either is
silent, or speaks ignorantly of the things of God, but yet he is not covetous.

Though the substance of this Chapter been near of Kin to something that has
been spoken before, yet the love of the world is such an Epidemical evil, that
though it be some labor, yet, I hope, it will not be lost, I think fit to
inculcate the same again, and again.

And so I shall now come to the means and helps of a godly life; but as it is
in recovering of health, food nourishes not, unless the peccant humors be
removed by Physic; so unless these impediments be taken away, the following
means will not profit; if we love the impediments more than the things they
keep us from, as if we love a multitude of worldly employments, more than
grace: How justly may God give us up to our own hearts desires? And it were
better for us be given up to Satan, by way of excommunication, for that is but
for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day of
the Lord: But whosoever is given up to his own hearts desires, is given up to
them both, for the destruction both of body and soul.

THE THIRD PART: Wherein are set down Several means and helps For attaining
The Power of Godliness.
CHAP. I. The first thing that is necessary for a godly life, is faith.
THE first thing that is necessary to an holy life, is Faith; for without that,
it is impossible to please God; it is the foundation of things hoped for, and the
foundation of our love. I have many times seriously thought, what is the true
reason why so few believe the Scripture, assuring my self, that if they did
firmly believe, it were impossible that their lives should be so contrary to
it: For although, as I have said, conviction does not necessarily work
conversion, yet it would work reformation, or at least, it would not suffer
them to go on, with so little fear and dread upon their spirits, as they do.
Now, though diverse pretend, that it is, because diverse speculative truths, that
are set down in the Scripture, are so contrary to, or at least above their
reason, that they cannot assent to them; yet I am very confident, that it is
the practical truths of the Scripture that they stop at, which they being loath
to obey, they are fain to pretend, or by the just judgment of God, they are
dis-inabled to believe those truths that are more speculative; that this is the
reason, seems to me evident, because that they cannot but confess, if not all,
most of the practicals of the Scripture, not to be against, nor above reason;
but such as whosoever shall obey, and live according to them, that their very
enemies cannot but approve of their lives: And this was it that made the
Christians, both in respect of their charity, and love one among another, and
to their enemies, to be admired and commended, even by their persecutors,
amongst whom they lived: The very Heathen could see a beauty in Holiness;
therefore, since the glorious light and luster of the holiness of the commands
of God in Scripture, is so clear, that men cannot but be convinced, and yet
will not obey, no marvel that those saving truths of the Gospel, which cannot
be seen by the light of nature, I say, it is no marvel, that God does not give
them of that light which is supernatural, since they resist, and make no better
use of their natural light, living quite contrary to those things that teaches
them: And it is observed, that one reason, why God has not made all his truths
so clear and demonstrative, as mathematical natural truths are, is, that he
would order matters, so that those that were of corrupt minds, might find
some pretenses for not believing of them; for to such people God may justly
send strong delusions; and it may be, it is much better, even for the people
of God, that all wicked men are not fully convinced of divine truths, for that
would make them much more outrageous, and malicious; for those whom the truths
of God convince, but not convert, they do inrage, as they do Satan, who
believes; and as it does those who commit the sin against the Holy Ghost, who
hating the truth, they know, are the greatest and most malicious persecutors;
nay, and indeed it is a mercy in some kind, even to the wicked also; for it is
better that they should not know the truths of God, since if they did know
them, they would not obey them; therefore if thou will believe, obey, that is,
if thou will believe the mysterious truths of the Gospel, obey the holy
commands of the Gospel, do what thou know, and thou shall know what as yet
thou art ignorant of. I have also considered with my self, what truth is the
most difficult to believe, and to me it seems, that to believe that God has
given his only beloved Son to die for sinners, is that truth which we hardliest
yield to. For first, our pride is utterly against it, for by nature we love to
go to heaven by our own merits, and to be justified wholly from another, and
for our own works, not so much as to be one ingredient in our justification,
and our own free will to have no hand in our regeneration, and our own good
works in our glorification, by way of merit, the pride of man will not stoop to.

And then secondly, it is utterly against humane reason, partly, because we
think with our selves, that God might have forgiven us our sins, without so
much ado, as to have his own son suffer so much for us, but we little consider
that we many times do many things our selves with a great deal of trouble, out
of love, which may be done as well without us; so the mother nurseth her own
child, and dresseth it, and does many other things which she might have done
by others as effectually, though she were only a Spectator. And further, we
must understand, that there are two special reasons why God gave his Son, and
Christ gave himself to die for us, chiefly to satisfy his justice, as also to
satisfy us of his love, and it is not easy to say, which are hardest to be
satisfied; for it is true, that he that injures, forgives not; we therefore
having so much offended God, can hardly forgive him, that is, believe that he
will forgive us; he therefore to satisfy and cure our infidelity, gives us
his only son to die for us, to give us an infallible testimony of his love, the
sufferings of Christ did satisfy the Justice of God, by way of merit, and our
infidelity, by way of motive; the sufferings of Christ did reconcile God to us,
and the Spirit of Christ does reconcile us to God: It was necessary, that he
that satisfied Gods Justice, should be God, and it is as necessary, that he
that satisfies us of Gods love, should be God also. Another thing that hinders
our belief of this mystery, is, because the goodness and love of God is so
exceeding great, that we cannot believe it, for we are subject to judge of
God by our selves; and therefore, because we should never suffer our only
beloved child to die a miserable shameful death, to save an enemy, therefore
we judge that God cannot do so neither: Hence it is, that the more patient,
meek, long-suffering we grow by the grace and Spirit of God, the more easily
do we believe his love to us; but if we truly consider that which makes this
mystery of love incredible, should make us believe it, viz. the greatness of
it, for since God has said in his Word, that herein he has commended and
glorified his goodness and love to us, John 3.16. therefore it is certain, that
this act of love and goodness, must as far exceed the acts of our love and
goodness, as the highest acts of his power and wisdom, do exceed the acts of
our power and wisdom, and we may come as near to imitate God in Creation, as
in this act of his love; therefore the Prophet Isaiah says, Isaiah 55.8. and
Psa. 103.11. Therefore the very incredibility of this work makes it credible;
for if God will magnify his goodness, that work which he does, etc. The truth
of it is, it is as hard for us to believe and understand the highest acts of
Gods goodness, and love, as of his power and wisdom, for God is equally
incomprehensible in all his Attributes; and we may as well find out the
depths, and heights, and extent of his power and wisdom, as the heights, and
depths, and extent of his love, Phil. 3.18, 19. And it is as great a sin for us
to say, this is too good for God to do, as to say, this is too hard for God to
do. The Papists vainly bring this as an argument for Transubstantiation, in
saying, that the incredibility of the work makes it credible, unless God had
said, that he did intend to magnify his power, by turning the bread into
Christ's body; therefore we must mortify first our pride, and submit to the
righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. The greatest act of humility in the world is
so to do, to be willing to be saved by God through Christ, and to take heaven
as an alms, and not as wages.

2. We must mortify humane reason, and bring in subjection those syllogismes
that exalts it self above the knowledge of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

3. Mortify carnal experiences in thy self, or others, do not say, because
greater love no man has shown then this, to lay down his life for his friend;
that therefore Christ would not lay down his life for his enemies; do not say,
because it is the manner of men, wheresoever they find their enemy to slay
him, or at least, not to pardon him, unless he submits, that therefore God
will not give his Son for his enemies, before they are reconciled, that they
may be reconciled: give God leave, if I may so say, to have more goodness,
patience, mercy, and loving kindness, than thou have, and bless him that he
has more, as well as thou believe, he has more power, and wisdom, and
holiness, than thou have.

4. You must mortify the lusts of the flesh, with the desires thereof, for
before we are willing to part with our sins, we shall never be either able,
or willing, to accept of Christ, for our sins do make us strangers and enemies
to God, Col. 1.21. and the reason why Christ is a stumbling stone, is, by
reason of our disobedience, 1 Pet. 2.8. This was Achitophels subtilty, in
advising Absalon to lie with his Fathers Concubines, for it heightened his
enmity to David, because it was such an act, that he could hardly believe
David could forget, since he seemed to be engaged, not only in point of
honor, not to pardon it; therefore, that though it be true, that through the
Almighty power, wisdom, and goodness of God, he so orders it, that when sin
abounds, grace does much more abound; and Harlots and Publicans are rather
brought home than Pharisees, yet they were first wrought by the Spirit of God
to leave their sins, that is, to accept of Christ as a King, as well as a
Savior, before they were reconciled to God.

5. We must mortify carnal confidence, as long as we think that we can do
any thing to our own justification, we shall never rely on Christ, to be
wholly justified by him, for we do not use to trust any other, for that which
we have in our own power: Hence it is, that it is easier for a Camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man that trusts in his riches; for
so the Evangelists, compared together, signify two ways, men think to be
justified, one is, by their not doings, and the other by their doings: I am no
murderer, nor adulterer, nor profane person, says the Pharisee; and they
being innocent of these sins, as they think, they hope to escape hell; then, I
give tithes of all I possess, fast twice a week, etc. and so they think by
their good works to purchase heaven, and then, because they cannot but be
sensible of many failings, both in respect of their omitting many good works
which they should do, and in committing many sins which they are forbidden, so
that their innocence is not pure, nor their holiness perfect; therefore they
think to make up that breach by their sorrow for their sins, and their shedding
of tears, serves them instead of Christ's shedding of his blood; therefore I
shall speak to these three things.

1. As for their pretended innocence, because they have not committed such and
such things, they are exceedingly mistaken in that matter, for they are not
innocent of these sins which they do not commit, since the grounds and ends for
which they did not commit them, were carnal; for did they abstain from those
sins out of love and obedience to God, they would abstain as well from other
sins, as from them, as for neglect of, and formality in, the performances of
holy duties, from secret sins, and spiritual sins, and their good works, it is
most certain, that the iniquity of our holiest performances is very great, and
our best righteousness is not only ragged, but filthy too; in our writing
after the copies of the Law, we do not only do as one that writes with a pen,
that writes ragged, or diverse times casts no ink, but with a pen that blots,
for there are not only carelesnes, diverse times, of our lives, wherein we do
nothing that is good, but scarce a word that we write, but one letter or other
is blotted; so not one action, though never so holy, but is blurred and
defiled. And lastly, as for our repentance and our sorrow for sin, if we think
thereby to be justified, we shall be condemned, for it being so little,
instead of appeasing, provokes Gods wrath. For suppose a woman that had defiled
her husbands bed, and contrived, and endeavored to murder him, I say,
suppose, when she pretending that she was sorry for it, should use no higher
an expression than this, that she was as sorry that she had done so, that
she had rather have lost a farthing, if she had been to chufe, would such an
expression appease, or incense? So all the sorrow that an unregenerate, nay, or
a regenerate man has for his sins, does not hold such a proportion to that
which he should have, as the loss of a farthing does to the murder of an
husband.

The sixth cause of infidelity, is a carnal knowledge of Gods Attributes, and
then our apprehensions of Gods Attributes were carnal, when our high thoughts
of one of his Attributes, make us abate our esteem of another; when you cannot
think one Attribute to be infinite, but another Attribute to be finite, as I
shall presently show; and there are three Attributes, by carnal apprehensions,
hinder us from believing, viz. the Majesty, Holiness, and Justice of God.

1. For the Majesty of God, his goodness makes it more amiable, but does not
abate it; and his Majesty makes his goodness more wonderful, but does not
diminish it: The Majesty of God should not dazzle our eyes so, as not to behold
his goodness: As a great Monarch, should he marry never so poor a beggar, his
love that made him marry her, will keep him from contemning of her: So if
Christ marries a poor soul, that love which made him marry her, will keep him
from despising of her; and his Majesty that could not keep him from loving her,
it will never prevail against his love, to make him despise her, for his
Majesty does not become greater, nor his love less, Christ has not less
love, nor a sinner less loveliness, after regeneration; nay, one reason why
Christ rejoices in his own glory, is, in reference to his Church; a loving
husband, rejoices in his own preferments upon this very account, that his Wife
shall be made partaker with him.

2. The Holiness of God and Christ does not hinder from loving and dying for
such miserable sinners: For as we think it strange, that God, who is so great,
should look after such poor creatures as we are; we do not use to look after
worms, which way they craul, for fear any hurt should come to them, much less
after vipers, unless it be to pursue them, and destroy them. But the Word of
God is plain, that neither his Majesty, nor holiness, hinders him from
dwelling and remaining with a poor contrite spirit: For thus says the high and
lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy, etc. Esaias 57.45. The
holiness of God is exceedingly magnified upon Christ, in several accounts, more
than by the praises and holiness of those that are in heaven, for the holiness
of God is not so great in Angels, as it was in Christ; for one that is in the
midst of the greatest tortures upon earth, and has not one smile from heaven,
and willingly to submit, and to lie groaning and roaring, but not murmuring,
argues a great strength of grace; but if those in hell should trust in God,
notwithstanding he chastises them with Scorpions, this requires more
strength, more grace; but for Christ so fully to submit, as he did, in his
agony, and to trust in God, notwithstanding he had forsaken him, as to say,
Father, into thine hands I will commend my spirit; for so the original is, as
if he should say, I dare, I will trust thee, though thou will not own me, as
I have already hinted: And further, it argues more holiness in converting
Publicanes and sinners, than the Pharisees in avoiding of them.

The Justice of God is more glorified to punish a thousand subjects for
breaking the Law, it may seem to be revenge, but nothing besides the love of
Justice appears in punishing his son for the same fault; so that the Justice of
God appears more in justifying sinners through Christ, than in condemning of
them, Romans 3.25, 26. for Justice is always satisfying in hell, but shall never
actually be satisfied; those in heaven do actively glorify the Justice of
God, and those in hell passively, but Christ did both.

CHAP. II. The second means to a godly life, is, to discover and mortify our
Master corruption, or sin.
THe next great help to attain the perfection of holiness, is, to take special
care for the subduing of our master sin, that is the Goliath, which if it be
slain, the whole Army, and the Philistines will fly; therefore there are three
things I shall do in this.

1. To show you the difference between a Master sin, and a reigning sin, that
you may not fight against Jehosaphat, instead of Ahab, who, though he were
slain; the battle would continue; but if Ahab be slain, a retreat is founded.
Thirdly, set down rules and means how to conquer it.

Differences.

1. A Master sin only rules over our sins, but not our graces: The weakest
grace will conquer it, but any other corruption, be it never so strong, is
subdued by it, but a reigning sin has none above it, no, not grace it self;
nay, indeed there can be no grace in that soul, where sin reigns; and as the
Prince of Devils has a certain government and rule over the rest of the evil
spirits; but God rules over all, and binds the strong man, and spoils his
goods: So though our Master sin has a kind of dominion over other sins, and
is not in subjection to them, yet all are brought into subjection to the Spirit
of God, and the grace of God that is in his Saints.

Secondly, when sin reigns, we give our bodies weapons of unrighteousness
unto sin, our head plots, and our tongue pleads for sin, such an one cannot
endure to hear sin reproved, or spoken against; but if ones sin be only a
master sin, and not a reigning sin, though it may be found to steal away the
spear and cruse while we sleep; or through violence, sometimes we acting by
our own strength, and not Gods, wrest our sword out of our hands, if we do not
bring in our arms, nor lay them down, we do not become Soldiers of sin, we
may become captives, Romans 7.23. and Romans 6. Thirdly, Reigning sin has its
Throne and Imperial City in the heart of his Kingdom, but forreiners make
their incursions and inrodes into the Land, but scarce have any certain abode,
or at least not in the heart of the Kingdom: So a Master sin in the
Regenerate, has its Imperial Throne in the heart, and in the inward man, so
that its dominion is over the mind, and the affections, they love the sins
that they commit; but a Master sin in the Regenerate only, prevails sometimes
over, and makes incursions and inrodes in the outward man, and makes him commit
sin, but can never make him love sin, but with his mind he delights in, and
serves the Law of God.

4. If sin reign, we have no good thoughts of the Word, we neither see the
Holiness of its commands, nor the justness of its punishments, nor the
goodness, nor the excellencies of the reward; we shall account its holiness,
preciseness, its punishments cruelty, and its reward, vanity: St. Paul was of
another temper, Romans 7.12.

5. The difference betwixt whoredom and rapes, so is the difference betwixt
the Master sin, and the reigning sin; he that ravisheth has his will upon the
poor afflicted woman, but cannot get her consent, but a harlot sells her self
to work wickedness; Paul was sold under sin by Adam, for the forbidden fruit,
but Ahab sells himself to it.

6. If sin reign, all Sermons that throw down sin, and spoil its dominions, are
counted Treason: It is treason to speak against a reigning sin, and powerful
Preachers are used by such persons as Traitors, or enemies; but in the
Regenerate, though there be a Master sin, all powerful, searching Sermons, are
accounted Friends, and sin is accounted the Rebel.

7. If sin reigns, whatsoever sins are subdued by it, are restrained, but not
mortified; for sin does not mortify sin, but only imprisons it, and confines
it, insomuch, that when we refrain from one sin, out of a greater love, we
have to another, we are not innocent of the sin we commit not; nay, sometime
the ground upon which we abstain from a sin, has so much evil in it, that it
makes one more guilty, upon abstaining upon that ground, than if we should
have committed the sin we abstained from; but grace mortifies sin.

Means to find out a master sin.

1. From our enemies; for an enemy is like an Eagle, sharp-sighted, to cry out,
and open-mouthed, to tell of our faults.

There are two things that keep our friends from telling us them.

1. Unwillingness to displease, makes our false friends unwilling to tell us
our faults, but our enemies care not; nay, rather study to displease us.

2. Love makes our true friends unable to discern our faults, for love covers a
multitude of sins, self-love makes one not to see his own failings, and a
friend being alter idem, his love does not only cover and conceal from others
his friends sins and failings, but from himself also. This was the way by which
Monacha came to know that she was sometimes guilty of intemperance, which one
of her companions falling out with her, told her of, upon which she left it:
He is in a good condition, that sees more evil in himself, than his enemies
can. It was a good answer for a Philosopher to give, when one told him of such
and such things one spoke of him to his disgrace: Ah, says he, it seems he
does not know me, for if he had, he would have spoken far worse. And indeed
we have great cause to love our enemies, for many great advantages we receive
from them; more comfort we may receive from our friends, but more profit, it
may be, from our enemies.

1. We have thereby an advantage to do higher acts of Religion; for thine
enemies do thee injuries, and thou may forgive them, and love them, thy
friends do thee courtesies, and thou may requite them; and it is an higher
act of Religion to forgive an injury (...)an to requite a benefit; and so the
^^st a richer jewel from the heads of th^^^ ^oads.

2. Thy enemies make thee live more circumspect and wary, it will teach thee
how to watch over thy self; one shall hardly be wise, before one has lived
amongst enemies.

3. Thine enemies will tell thee those faults thou would never find out thy
self, nor thy friends for thee, they look upon thy faults with a multiplying
glass, which not only does magnify and aggravate thy sins, that thy self or
others see, but discovers those that none else perceives; as a
Multiplying-glass, does not only make a grain of wheat which we see without
it, bigger than a large beam, but discovers a Down upon each grain, which
without that glass we perceive not.

2. The second thing to discover our Master sin, is, by the company we keep;
for socii aut inveniunt, aut facient similem; One had two daughters, Julia and
Livia, and at a public meeting he observed who courted them, and he found
that grave Senators did court the one, and light Gallants the other, whereby
he plainly ^^^^^d, that the one was more stayed, (...)e other more loose.

3. The third rule to know thy Master sin, is, by considering what vice thou
most hate, the contrary vice to that, is the vice to which thou art most
inclined, as if thou hate prodigality most, it is likely thou art given to
covetousness; if thou abhorrest idols, take heed thou do not commit
sacrilege.

4 The fourth rule is, to consider what sins thou art free from, and then
consider what sin it is that will lnot stand and agree with those sins thou art
free from, and thou will find that to be thy Master sin: As for example,
Do thou not revenge? Art thou not guilty of gluttony, drunkenness,
whoredom? but art guilty of swearing, extortion, etc. then it is very
probable, that covetousness is thy reigning sin, for covetousness will free
one from all chargeable sins: So if thou will know whether pride be thy Master
sin, consider what sins pride frees one from, and that frees one generally from
all scandalous sins, and rather from those that the world most speaks against,
than those that are of greatest guilt in themselves, it will rather free thee
from drunkenness and whoredom, than from blasphemy, for sin may free one from
sin, as well as grace; but herein lies the differences:

First, When grace frees one from sin, it frees from all sin, it cleanses one
from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit; but when sin frees one from sin
whilst it frees one from one sin, it inclines one to another; as covetousness,
though it may free one from drunkenness and prodigality, yet it inclines one to
extortion, and oppression.

Secondly, When fin frees one from sin, it frees one not at all times; as pride
will not free one from any sin, if one can but keep it secret, nor covetousness
from revenge, gluttony, or drunkenness, when one may have them of free cost;
but grace frees one from secret sins.

Thirdly, sin may free one from the outward act of sin, but not from the inward
affection to sin; covetousness may keep us from the outward act of revenge,
when it is chargeable, but not from the inward love and desire of it.

The fifth rule to know our Master sin, is, to consider what sins you are most
subject to; as suppose to revenge, censuring of others, anger, envy, then you
are to consider from what root these spring, for that is not always thy Master
sin, which does most appear, but rather the root whence that does spring: So
that if thou art very passionate, passion is not properly thy Master sin, but
pride, from whence that springs, for from pride comes contention; therefore it
is good to know from what root springs those several sins we are guilty of;
from pride comes (as before we have said) anger, revenge, envy, ambition,
censuring others; thou will be more ready to forgive a debt, than an injury,
and more ready to bear a loss, than an ill word; from covetousness proceed
enlarged desires of earthly things, continual cares and fears, discontent with
ones condition, neglect of the works of charity, etc. from voluptuousness comes
idleness, adultery, gluttony, drunkenness, etc. for the works of the flesh are
so manifest, that they need not, and so filthy, that they should not be named
amongst Christians.

The sixth rule is, to consider what places of Scripture that concern
practicals, do most affect, and most afflict thee, what places they are that
thou have most ado to expound, so as to quiet thy conscience; and then mark
what sin those places speak against, or condemn, or what duty they commend, and
by that you may discover what sin it is that lies in your bosom, what
Treatises they are that you like not to read, that are practical, or what
Sermons they are that startle you; and as before, consider what sins they are
those Sermons reprove.

7. Consider what sin it is that thou always speak against, with
limitations, cautions, and distinctions; but against the contrary sin thou do
speak without limitations, but absolutely with freedom, both of speech and
spirit: As when a covetous man speaks against covetousness, he speaks as
David did to his Army, when they went out against Absolon, Deal kindly with the
young man Absolo^, said David; as if he had said, it is true, he lay with my
Concubines, but he is a young man; and as he, so they do endeavor to take
off the bitterness of our spirits against the sin they seem to speak against;
but when a covetous man speaks against prodigality, then vox non faucibus
haeret: But he speaks with that freedom, and with that earnestness, that it is
evident, that he accounts it an enemy that he deals withal.

8. Another rule is this, when thou always speak against such a sin, when
its contrary, is spoken against, but not e contra. As for example, when one
speaks against covetousness, a covetous man will always speak against
prodigality: I but, says he, he is worse than an Infidel that provides not
for his family; and will tell you of the example of the Pismires, and many
other places of Scripture, against those that are prodigal in expending, or not
diligent in getting riches; but if he speak against prodigality, you shall not
have him speak a word against covetousness; there is altum silentium. Concerning

The ninth rule to know thy Master sins, what they are, Are thine afflictions
painful, or shameful, or such as take away thy profit, as poverty; generally
God does strike us in the master vein: Those that belong unto him, if pride be
their master sin, he sends them an affliction that brings shame upon them, if
covetousness, he sends losses, if voluptuousness, such afflictions as are
painful. Now in wicked men he does clean contrary, generally gives them their
hearts desire; so that if they be proud and ambitious, he lets them have
honors, and the praise of men, if they love riches, they are generally rich,
for God generally gives them their portion in this world; as it was said to the
rich man; Son, remember thou receivedst thy good things in this life. Though
this rule holds not always, neither the rules formerly nameed, if one takes
them singlely they will not be sufficiently discovered; but when many of these
meet together, they give very great light, for the understanding and finding
out of our Master sin. There are other rules also from our age, our callings,
or from the places and times wherein we live; but I hasten to the cures of
this our Master sin.

The first cure is, to read the Scripture, and gather together all those places
that speak any thing concerning that sin, or the contrary grace, or concerning
the acts of either of them; as if Pride were the sin thou would especially
cure, write down all those places that speak either of pride, or of humility,
or of the acts of either as of censuring, of a high look, or a scornful eye, or
of anger, etc. So shall thou see what the judgment of the Spirit of God is of
that sin, and so thou shall know its sinfulness, and the judgments of God
against that sin; and so thou shall know its mischiefs; thou shall find also
the promises that God makes to the contrary grace, and the acts thereof; thou
shall also find several cures and remedies set down by the Spirit of God,
which are always the safest and best. For though many times humane reason
judges others to be more effectual, yet he that will be wiser than God,
shall find himself a fool.

2. Improve Ordinances and duties against thy sin; as when thou go to
receive the Lords Supper, let one end and aim of thy receiving of it, be to
mortify that sin: For though the Lords Supper be a spiritual medicine and
antidote against all sin, yet it works especially upon that, for the remedy
whereof it is especially taken: Be sure in all thy solemn and ejaculatory
prayers, especially to pray against this sin, let it have no quiet possession.
Read also those Treatises, especially that write against the sin, or of the
contrary grace.

3. Improve thine acquaintance against this sin; if thy sin be anger, acquaint
thy self with meek persons; for as he that keeps company with angry persons,
will learn their ways: So if thy sin bec pride, be acquainted with those that
are humble, and be often in their company; three great advantages come by it.

1. It will hinder thee from many acts of that sin; for even as profane
persons do very much abstain from all sin, when they are in the company of
Saints; so will thou also be ashamed to commitacts of pride, in the company of
one that is eminent for humility.

2. Such an one will be more able to discern, even the most minute and
smallest acts of pride in thee; and if it be thy Christian friend, for, for
that end I would have thee choose him, he will reprove thee, not only for gross
acts of pride, but for the appearances thereof: As he that is acquainted with a
Critic in Latin, should not only be admonished of him of incongruous Latin,
but also of un-elegant.

3. The constant examples of humility, and so of other graces, will, as it
were, transform thee into that image.

The fourth remedy is, to resist the beginnings of sin, and that advice is
threefold.

1. There is principium respectu affectus, and per modum causae.

2. Respectu gradus.

3. Respectu consuetudinis,

1. Therefore the first advice is cure the cause of your sin, if you will cure
your sin; as he that would cure heat in the face, the way is, not by
application of outward medicines only, but cure the cause of it, the
indisposition of the liver from whence the blood comes to be vitiated; so to
cure anger, the best way is, by curing the cause and root from whence it
springs, pride; for generally, if not always, it comes from pride, the
irregularity of anger, I mean, for to cut off the branches only, keeps the tree
from bearing fruit for a while, but pull it up by the root, and it is cured for
ever: So I would have you find out the root, and cause of the sin you find
your self addicted to, if it have a root, and apply your remedies to the root.

2. Principium respectu graduum. Then the advice is, before the sin gets
strength, and comes to an height, to its Paroxisme; for every thing is weak,
and easily overcome at the beginning, which afterward grows invincible: As when
one first begins to be angry, one may easily refrain, but after it becomes
outrageous, and will neither follow, nor hear any counsel, nay, advice in the
height of fury, is as Physic in the Paroxism of a discase, dangerous.

The third advice is, in principio, respectu consuetudinis, before thy sin
grows customary; for when once thou art accustomed to do evil, then the
Blackmoor may as soon change his skin, and the Leopard his spots, as thou thy
sin, says the Prophet. So then there are three ways, in respect of the
beginnings of sin, to conquer it.

1. In respect of the root and spring from whence it arises, and then, as has
been said, your main application must be to the root, not to the branches; for
many times that which seems to be the Master sin, is not, but is rather like
Joseph, who acted all, but he did it by the authority of Pharaoh, who though
he appeared not, yet Joseph could do nothing, but by commission and power
derived from him: So Anger, that makes the great noise, and seems to be the
Master sin in those that are passionate; but the spring of it is pride, which
though it appears not yet by its power and influence, anger does what it does;
therefore thou art to seek out the root of that which seems to be the Master
sin: And there are three grand sins, from which generally all others do
proceed, Pride, Covetousness, Voluptuousness, though indeed all these come
from one, which is self-love; therefore do but learn that singular lesson which
Christ gives, and thou shall destroy both root and branch of sin, viz. He that
will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, says Christ: Self is the great
enemy that every man has.

2. As for the beginning of sin, in respect of his degree, watchfulness is the
singular remedy: For if we have a continual watch over our words and actions,
nay, even our thoughts, we shall see sin in its beginnings; nay, even in its
first motions, and occasions, and temptations; and so we may either prevent,
or at least take it, before it comes to its Paroxisme: And the beginnings of
sin, as of all other things, are weak, and easily subdued.

3. And as for the preventing of sin, that it comes not to be customary, the
remedy for that is, frequent examination; for by often examining our selves,
we shall discover our sins, as soon almost as we commit them, and so they
will be kept from being habitual and customary; therefore let the examination
of thy self be at least Diurnal, so that no sin can be above a day old, before
thou perceivest it; and so if thou can not strangle it in its birth, thou
may in its cradle. I suppose one need not be a Giant to encounter with a
Lion, as soon as it is whelpt, or to pull up an Oak, when the Acorn first
sprouts forth.

5. The fifth advice is, concerning temptations; and three advices there are
concerning temptations.

1. Concerning the foreseeing of temptations, it is good in every action, to
consider what temptations we are like to be encountered withal in that action;
as when you go to hear the Word, consider what temptations are incident to
that. And so in all holy duties. Ordinances, and worldly employments: For if a
temptation takes us unawares, a weak temptation will prevail more, than a
strong foreseen.

2. The second advice concerning temptations, is, to prepare and provide for
them; as one advises, that if you know you are to speak with a passionate man,
you are not only to foresee, that you are likely to provoke him, and he you to
passion, but you are to provide remedies against both, either by preparing
mollifying words, or taking with you some person, whose presence may awe, or
such like.

3. But you are to avoid all the temptations that you can, so that you do not
neglect a duty, to avoid a temptation; for it is presumption to run into
unnecessary temptations, and it is spiritual cowardice to neglect our just
employments, because a Lion is in the street: And as I have elsewhere said,
when one has once found ones self overcome with such a temptation frequently,
then it is a sin to go into that temptation, though one be not overcome by it.

And it is a great fault in parents, when they dispose of their children, not
to consider what callings have the most temptations accompanying them; and they
should consider of what callings there are few that are religious in, and
utterly avoid disposing of their children to such a calling; for if the calling
be not in it self unlawful, yet it shows the temptations that accompany it,
are so many, that it is almost impossible to avoid and overcome them.

6. The next adivce is, concerning thy speech: As often as occasion is given,
speak against the vice thou would overcome, and three advantages you shall
receive from it.

1. By often speaking against it, thy heart will be brought into some measure
of hatred of it; for as by evil communication, good manners are corrupted, so
by good communication, thy heart will be inclined to the best things.

2. It will keep thee from many a temptation; for when thou shall be known to
speak against such a sin, people will more hardly entice thee to commit it, or
commit it themselves in thy presence: As it is reported of one, that she was
so great an enemy to censuring, and speaking ill of others, that it came to a
Proverb, that if such an one was present, they were sure that they were not
standered at that time.

3. It does strongly engage thee, not to commit that sin which thou so
frequently condemnest;

7. Another advice is, to divert thy thoughts and speech to some other thing;
and this advice takes place in lusts, censuring or speaking ill of others, and
blasphemous thoughts; for the Apostle bids us not so much to resist, as to fly
fleshly lusts: Other sins we are to resist, these to fly from; for a chaste
Matron rather avoids the room, when a lewd man solicites her to uncleanness,
than stands long to dispute the question. So Joseph flies from his Mistress:
And so also in blasphemous thoughts, they are to be abhorred, not to be
disputed withal, they are not to be thought over again, for the benefit in
abhorring of it, will hardly recompense the horror that such thoughts bring
with them.

8. The next advice is, concerning vows and resolutions, concerning which,
since in that which I have already published, concerning vows, in my Treatise
of my Meditations, I have given rules, I refer to them.

CHAP. III The next help for the attainment of the Power of Godliness, are
Ejaculatory prayers.
THe next thing that I shall speak to, which is of unspeakable spiritual
advantage, are Ejaculatory prayers, which do first honor God much in his
Attributes.

1. In his Omnisciency, I mean mental ejaculatory prayers, for generally all
mental prayers are ejaculatory, and by this we profess, that God is Omniscient,
that he knows our thoughts.

2. It honors Gods mercy abundantly; for we suppose that God is so ready to
hear, and waits to show mercy, Isa. 30.18. that the swiftest, shortest prayer,
cannot escape him.

3. It is a distinguishing note between regenerate, and unregenerate persons,
for solemn prayer, public family, closet prayer, an hypocrite may perform
them, but not frequent, mental, ejaculatory prayer.

4. By this means the soul must needs be perfumed, and inflamed, and
established; as he that is often in a Perfumers Shop, and at the fire, must
needs retain much of the heat of the one, and the sweet sents of the other.

5. These ejaculatory prayers keep us in a perpetual fitness for solemn prayer;
instruments of music, that are seldom played on, though they be left never so
well in tune, yet if hung by for any considerable time, will grow out of tune,
and unfit to play on, without retuning of them: So our hearts, except
continually exercised by ejaculatory prayer, will loose that sweet harmony they
had, nor will be fit for solemn duties, without further preparation; but one
that continually multiplies ejaculatory prayers, is always in such a frame of
heart, as is fit for solemn prayer.

6. This is the way to keep God always with us in a friendly presence; for if
so be ones friend, comes to see one, if ones business be of that nature, that
one cannot speak with him from morning to night; or if it be not of that
nature, as diverse kinds of employments are, if one would not so much as mind
him, he leaves us; but if we will converse with him, though we be doing
something else, he stays with us: So if thy heart be continually speaking to
God by ejaculatory prayers, he will not forsake thee; but if you will not by
ejaculatory prayers speak one word to God, when thy solemn prayer is ended,
thou may not expect the presence of God at other times, nay, nor then
neither.

7. Thou will miss of abundance of blessings and mercies, if thou neglectest
ejaculatory prayers; for diverse times thou will find, while thou art in
conference with the people of God, or reading some good book, etc. that thine
heart will be sometimes inflamed with the love of God, and desires after
enjoyments of him, thou will be brought to the sight and sense of thine own
unworthiness and spiritual wants, so that thou will find many things that thou
stand in need of, for which it is very fit that thou should put up thy
prayers to God, and while the sense of these things do affect thee, thou will
pray with more zeal and fervency; but if thou will refer all to thy solemn
prayers, and say to thy self, As soon as the company is gone, and I have an
opportunity for solemn prayer, then I will pour out my soul before God: But by
this means two great mischiefs will befall thee.

1. It may be that frame of heart may cease, and thou not striking while the
iron is hot, ten times more strength and time will not serve.

2. Thou can not keep in mind all those things which thou wast moved to pray
or praise God for, for in an hour or two, especially if we are in conference
with the people of God, a multitude of occasions, of ejaculatory prayers, will
occur, which it is almost impossible for thee to remember, if thou neglectest
them, when they offer themselves unto thee; and if thou can remember them,
when thou come to thy solemn prayers, thy former ejaculatory prayers will not
hinder, but further thee in the duty.

8. This is the way to spiritualize all our worldly employments, this is our
having our conversation in heaven. I have heard it reported of one, that he
kept a stricter communion with God, whilst he was walking in the streets, than
ordinarily Christians did on their knees: By this means worldly objects, that
take up the thoughts of wicked men in their worldly employments, and also in
holy duties: I say, those worldly objects that distract others, will serve to
imminde thee of, and give thee matter of more frequent ejaculations unto God.

9. The want of ejaculatory prayers, cannot be any way supplied, not by solemn
duties; and if the case were so, that we must omit one of them, it were better
to omit our solemn prayer in the morning, and to have our heart sending up
continually ejaculatory prayers, and breathings after God, than to spend an
hour in the morning in solemn prayer, and meditation, and all the rest of the
day not to have so much as one thought of God. One that were to write or read
all day in exceeding cold weather, which of these two do you think he would
choose? either to be an hour at a good fire in the morning, but not to come
near it all the rest of the day, or an hundred times a day, if he so pleased,
to go and stay a while, and warm himself, and return again to his employment;
though both were best, yet the last, if they must be severed, were to be
chosen, as to warmth. By our ejaculatory prayers we do frequently warm our
souls, and keep the heat of the love of God from going out in us.

10. These are the first and last prayers of every Saint; as soon as he is new
born, he cries Abba, Father; or with Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? and it is the last thing that a Saint does when he comes to die: An
ejaculatory, fervent, inflamed prayer, is the fiery Chariot, which carries the
soul of every Saint to heaven: So our blessed Savior, Father, into thine hands
I commend my spirit; when he dies, and takes his leave of praying, it is by an
ejaculatory prayer; and so it is the first and last of all solemn duties, it
prevents, and prepares us for them: When a man is converted, as he is hearing
the Word, he cannot stay while he comes home to solemn prayer, but is sending
up sparks, and ejaculatory prayers, from the time that he is wrought upon by
God, it is the (Amen) which closes up all our prayers, for Amen is but an
ejaculation, great fires begin and end in a spark: So David ends his Psalm with
an ejaculatory prayer, Psalm 19.14. As in a bell, when it ringeth out, if you
let it go, it will not cease of a sudden, but will strike many a Toll before it
quite cease; so the Soul, after solemn duties, has some motions, and
returns, and callings upon God. Mark those solemn duties, which you have begun
without ejaculatory prayers, by way of preparation, and have ended without any
consequent breathings after God, you shall find such duties much less
effectual.

11. This is the way to weary out Satan, as a City is wearied out by continual
Assaults and Alarums, for every ejaculatory prayer gives Satan a fresh Alarm;
so that by this means thou do never let Satan alone. Solomon compares a
contentious Wife to a continual droping, Prove. 19.13. one that rides in a
great shoure, if the rest of the day be hot and fair, his clothes will be
dried again; but one that rides in continual dropping weather, cannot be dry;
so a contentious Wife never suffers her husband to have a quiet hour: A solemn
fervent prayer, is like a great shoure in a journey, very disturbing to Satan,
but he will recover himself; but continual ejaculatory prayers (like a
contentious woman) will never let Satan have a quarter of an hours rest; so it
also will eat out our corruptions, Gutta cavat lapidem non vi^, sed sepe
cadendo; a continual dropping upon a stone wears it: So thou will find that
thy stony heart will be wrought upon more, by continual ejaculatory prayers,
than by solemn duties only.

12. Ejaculatory prayers are the freest from distraction, whether it is,
because they generally arise from the heart, except in profane persons, who
have their accustomary O Lords, and Lord have mercy upon me, without thinking
of God whom they name, who are near of Kin to common swearers; or whether they
being so short, sudden, and mental, they do not awaken Satan to tempt us, until
they be over; and then, though they awaken him, yet they weaken him also: As
for solemn prayers, our preparations to them, if only by the alteration of our
gestures, gives notice to Satan what we are about to do; but in ejaculatory
prayers, we have done, as soon as Satan perceives what we are a doing; he
cannot shoot any of his darts, that are set on fire of hell, so soon against
us; but our darts, that is, an ejaculatory prayer, set on fire with the love of
God, will be in heaven before.

13. These kind of prayers are very powerful, one of the strangest Providence
that we read of in Scripture, viz. that a Heathen King that had led the Jews
captive, should be so active in building, and re-building the Temple. I say,
that was attained by a mental ejaculatory prayer, Neh. 2.4. and a vocal
ejaculatory prayer, obtained a vocal answer from heaven, John 12.28. By Christ's
ejaculatory Prayer on the Cross, Father, forgive them, they know not what they
do, thousands were converted, Acts 2. So the conversion of S. Paul, was
procured by the ejaculatory prayer of Stephen.

14. In these kind of prayers especially God deals familiarly with man, and
does, as it were, put off the robes of his Majesty; or rather, God suffers man
to deal familiarly with him; for in our solemn prayers we do, as those that
with a great deal of ceremony and distance, and abundance of outward reverence,
delivers a Petition to a great Monarch, who does not hereby abate any thing of
his Majesty, nor does the delivering of a Petition so, argue any familiarity or
acquaintance; but if one shall see one speaking two or three words to the King,
and as often as he pleased to speak so to the King, we should argue, that he
had the Kings ear, and that the King dealt after a familiar way with him: So
our solemn duties do not argue our acquaintance with God so much, as these
ejaculatory prayers: A stranger may deliver a Petition in a solemn way, we
give God the glory of his Majesty more in our solemn prayers, but God does more
glorify his goodness and condescension, in giving us leave to use frequent
ejaculatory prayers.

15. They may be most frequent; so that what they want in magnitude, may be
supplied by their number: It Is a Proverb among some, that light gains make a
heavy purse; so those spiritual gains, by ejaculatory prayers, though it seems
to be small and light, yet will much increase the weight, both of grace and
glory: Solemn duties can be but seldom, since they require retirement, and
more time, than this kind of prayer does, though we read but of three times
of solemn prayer that Daniel used, and seven times that David used it, yet it
may justly be thought, that ejaculatory prayers were, or might be without
number.

16. These kind of prayers, if we use not, there is no excuse, for 1. They
hinder nothing, they hinder not customers from coming to your Shop, nor them
that come from buying, they disturb no business, but they are like Varnish,
that puts a luster on all colors, but changes them not; it makes a vermilion
color, not less red, but orient; like the Be that gathers honey from every
flower, but leaves it as fragrant and beautiful as she found it.

17. As they hinder no business, so no business hinders them, riding, selling,
walking; nay, nor sleeping hinders these prayers, although thou sleep, thy
heart may wake; those that keep thee from solemn prayer, cannot keep thee from
these, thy person may be imprisoned, but not thy prayers; though they should
cut out thy tongue, as they did Policarpus his, and so keep thee from vocal,
yet they cannot hinder thee from mental prayer; wicked persecutors may hinder
solemn, but nothing but a wicked heart can hinder from ejaculatorie prayers.

18. It shows, that thou art but an hypocrite, that is, a Stage Player, for so
the word properly signifies, for thou do carry thy self just as they do; for
the Church is but a stage for hipocrites to act their parts in: For as those
that act upon a Stage, their fear, joy, sorrow, though they are acted to the
life, yet as soon as the Play is done, there remains not any impression of
these affections; if he was sad before, though he acted a Part, of joy,
returns to his former sadness; and if he acted the Part of sorrow, yet he
remains not sad when the Play is done, for that matter which he pretended to
be so much grieved for on the Stage, but for that for which he was affected
before; nay, while he acted his Part of sorrow, it was not that which he
pretended to be sorry for, but his former cause of grief has made him act so
to the life: So when Hipocrites confess their sins, as soon as ever their
prayer is ended, and their confession is ended, they return to their
employments, there remains nothing of their acted sorrows; nay, many times
when an hypocrite seems to weep for his sins, while he is confessing of them,
his tears flow from another fountain, viz. from the sense of some affliction
that lies heavy on him. Now, if when thy prayer is done, thy joys, forrowes,
desires, breathings after God, all expire with the last word of thy solemn
prayer, it shows, that thou have been but acting of a part; for sorrows that
are rooted and fixed in us, do not fall from their paroxisme quite to cease,
but by degrees: When did you ever see a tender mother, that was weeping, like
Rachel for her children, to fall from the height of her sorrows, to mirth and
laughter, such a carriage is rather fit for those that were hired to mourn at
Funerals amongst the Jews, than for those that imploid them.

19. No temporal or spiritual employment can be rightly managed without it;
while thou art selling thy wares, thou will danger to sell thy soul also; while
thou art walking in the street this way, thou may be journeying toward
heaven: But I shall rather endeavor to show it in holy duties, it is an
excellent practice to use these ejaculatory prayers, while we are hearing the
Word, I mean mental ejaculatorie prayers, for vocal may disturb others, and
especially savor too much of hypocrisy; yet I will not judge those that use
it, for I do not find our Savior does blame them that used vocal ejaculatorie
prayer, while he was preaching, Joh. 6.34. And though the Apostles would not
interrupt our Savior with any question, whilst he was Preaching, but stayed
while be came into the house privatelie, Mark 7.17. Yet while he was
preaching, they sent an ejaculatory prayer, Luke 17.5. and were blameless. When
thou hear any grace commended, how can thou abstain (as suppose Faith)
Lord increase my faith: So if any sin reproved, and thou find thy self
guilty of it, thou may, and should in the secret of thy soul say, Lord,
lay not this sin to my charge. If a Sermon preached of the Excellency of
Christ, that Bread that came down from heaven, why may thou not say as they
did, John 6.34. Lord, evermore give us of this bread; nay, we read that our
blessed Savior, while he was preaching, in the midst of his Sermon, breaks
forth into a vocal ejaculatory prayer, Ma. 11.25. And surely, while Ministers
are preaching, they may find sometimes, I wish it were not often, that their
hearts are cold in the service, either not actuallie, or not so ferventlie
desiring the glory of God, and edification of his people; then by an
ejaculatory filent prayer to fetch strength from heaven, is of great advantage;
nay, even in solemn prayer, these ejaculatory prayers are to be mixed: For when
one finds ones heart dead and cold, then to call down fire from heaven to
inflame us, is of great and frequent use; and indeed the benefit of ejaculatory
prayers is not to be known, but by experience; and therefore I shall commend
it as one of the greatest helps that I know.

Object. But if you shall object and say, I have abundance of worldly
employments, and I must follow my particular calling, as for family prayer,
morning and evening, and for Closet prayer sometimes, I think them fit, and am
content to do them; but to tell me, that I must be frequent in these
ejaculatory prayers in my Shop, as I am selling, or buying, etc. is a thing I
cannot do, for I must mind my business I am about.

I answer. 1. Speak out, and mince not the matter, but let thy heart speak out,
for God very well sees the thoughts of it; and give me leave to speak what
thy heart thinks: My Shop, and my particular calling, and to get riches, is my
great business; for matters of Religion, and in particular for prayer, in the
morning before my customers come, or at night when they are gone, I am content
to use them, since it is a general custom so to do; but for the rest of the
day, I desire to be free, and that God would not trouble me with the motions of
his Spirit, the rest of the day: For though he desires but a word or two, by
way of answer, in ejaculatory prayers, yet that is a disturbance, though when by
his Spirit he speaks to my heart, Seek thou my face, for me to answer, thy
face, Lord, will I seek, were enough, and he will accept of it; yet this is an
interruption. Let me tell thee, thou that can not tell how to keep communion
with God in worldly employments, and do not prize communion with him above
all worldly employments, art not worthy of him; thou may be a Professor,
but thou art no Saint.

2. I must ask thee, whether thou art as much against this, that worldly
thoughts should mingle themselves with thy solemn prayers, as that holy
thoughts should be mingled with thy worldly business; and this shows the
rottenness of thy heart, that thou will admit the world to come and speak with
thee in the midst of thy solemn duties, or converse with God, but wilt not
afford God a word, or a look, while thou art conversing with the world.

3. These ejaculatorie prayers will not hinder, but sanctify thine
employments; the having thy thoughts frequentlie upon God and heaven, will keep
thee from all unlawful gains, from grinding the face of the poor, in buying,
and making advantage of the ignorance of the buyer in selling; and this indeed
is the reason why thou love not to have thoughts of God at such times, for
they awaken thy conscience, so that thou can not sin so securely, and
without disturbance.

4. Thy not having frequent thoughts of God, in the midst of thy worldly
employments, shows, that thou do not follow thy particular calling out of
obedience to God, but out of love to riches, so that thou have given the world
thy heart: It is a better frame of heart, to be willing to obey God, when he
bids us buy and sell, etc. but to rejoice to obey him, when he bids us pray:
When the duties of Gods immediate service serve as recreations, to sweeten and
lighten the burden of thy particular calling, and not the works of thy
particular calling; as things that sweeten duties of Religion, when thou
call the Sabbath a delight, and say, when will the Sabbath come, and not,
when will it be done: This is that frame of heart, from which ejaculatorie
prayers proceed. But you will say, how shall I gain this heavenly art, to be
frequent in ejaculatorie prayers? I shall add therefore to what I have said
some directions.

1. Get thy heart inflamed with the love of God, and of spiritual things, and
then thou need scarce any other means or helps; for it is impossible to give
ones love to God, and keep ones thoughts from God; then these holy sparks will
not be like those that are struck out of a flint, procured by violence and
force, but like sparks, coming from the fire of their own accord; and as the
sparks, so forced from a flint, fall downward, but sparks from the fire, fly
upward; so those thoughts of God, and those ejaculatorie prayers that proceed
not from the flames of love, but from a flinty stony heart, are earthie, and to
earth they return.

2. Be frequent in reading the Psalms of David and the Song of Solomon, for
they are the breathings of an inflamed, lovesick soul; and thou shall find
store of these ejaculatorie prayers and praises; as, Bless the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name, Whom have I in heaven
but thee? and what is there on earth that I desire, in comparison of thee? and
so in a multitude of Psalms; as Psalm 145.148, 150. etc. for indeed it is a
Storehouse of these kind of prayers, in all occasions, whether of spiritual
joy, sorrow, love desire, etc.

3. Observe providence, and all occurrences, for there is nothing almost, that
thou see or hear, but thou may easily spiritualize. It is stored of M.
Dod, who intending to marry, but being troubled with fears and cares, how he
should be able to live in that condition, since his incomes were but small,
and but enough to maintain him in an unmarried condition; looking out of the
Window, and seeing a Hen scraping for food for her numerous brood about her,
thought thus with himself: This Hen did but live before it had these Chickens,
and now she lives with all her little ones; upon which he added this thought
also, I see the Fowls of the Air neither sow nor reap, nor gather into barnes,
and yet my heavenly Father feeds them: And if thou gettest that spiritual Art,
like the Be, to draw sweetness from every flower; and if thou can turn
every thing thou hear, and see, into holy meditations, these ejaculatorie
prayers will come of themselves; for holy thoughts of God, end in holy prayers
to God.

4. Get a sense of thy own vileness, and inabilitie of doing any thing that is
good, or resisting any thing that is evil, and that will make thee cry to God
upon all occasions, whether of duty or temptation.

5. Hinder not the motions and breathings of the Spirit upon thee, quench not
the Spirit, and the Spirit of God will inflame thee; for when the fire of his
love is kindled in thy heart, what would he, but that it should burn? nay, we
must not only not hinder, but earnestly desire these breathings of the Spirit,
Cant. 4. and ult. Awake, O North wind, and blow, O South wind, upon my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow forth; for if the fire be blown, the
sparks will arise.

6. Much frequent the company of Gods people, for their company will much
inflame; green wood will burn, when it is mixed with that which is very dry;
and if thou can get thy heart inflamed, love will dictate and furnish thee
with thoughts enough; but I must give some few cautions.

1. By this expression of ejaculatorie prayers, I mean all manner of holy
thoughts, whether they are praises of God, or prayers to God; whether they be
any admirings; as, Lord, what is man that thou regardest him? or any abasing
thoughts of our selves, Psalm 73.22. how foolish was I, and ignorant, etc. or
whether by enquiries after God; as, when shall I come and appear before God?
Psalm 42.2. or with our own soul, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? Psalm
42.5, 6. so that I use the word (Ejaculatorie prayers) very comprehensively.

2. Let thy ejaculatorie prayers be frequent, but not customary; for as I have
already said, such kind of customarie ejaculations, whosoever uses them, is
near of kin to a common swearer.

3. Though they be short, let them be fervent.

4. Let them generally be mental, except thou art alone, and if they be
vocal, be rather passive than active in them: As David held his tongue, until
the fire burnt, and he could hold in no longer, but burst out in this
expression, Lord, let me know my end, and the measure of my days.

5. You must not leave off solemn duties, and think to supply the want thereof
by ejaculatory prayers, for they are not to justle out, but help one another:
This is, as if the Priests should content themselves with keeping the fire
burning always on the Altar, and neglect their morning and evening Sacrifice:
And as when Solomon first offered Sacrifice at the Dedication of the Temple,
there came down fire from heaven to consume it; but afterward, they were to
keep in the fire day and night, by continual supplies of fewer: So that if they
let the fire go out, they were not to expect that God should by fire from
heaven consume their Sacrifices, as often as they were to offer them: So it is
with every soul that belongs to God, at first God does inflame the soul with
fire from heaven, but when once God has kindled that fire, we are to keep it
in by continual ejaculatorie prayers, for else how can we expect that God will
always kindle it anew, when we go to our solemn duties?

CHAP. IV. The next great help and direction for attaining of Holiness, is,
reading of holy books.
THe next direction and advice, is, to read holy books the chief and fountain
of all the rest is the Scripture, which is able to make us wise unto Salvation.
I confess it does amaze me, to think, that any one that dare own the name of a
Christian, should forbid the people of God to read the Bible; but when I
consider that Popery is upheld by cruelty, and policy, and that it is
unpossible but that their errors should be detected; if their ignorance were
dispelled, then no marvel they should forbid the reading of the Scripture; but
because there is so much fear, that their errors will be spread, I shall
speak a word or two to this point.

1. What reason imaginable is it, that they to whom the Scripture is commanded
to be read, should be forbidden to read the Scripture; but the Scripture is
commanded to be read, even to men, women, and children, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12.

2. How senseless is it to say, I write, and send a letter to such a man, but I
intend not that he should read it? Now it is plain, that generally the
Epistles of Saint Paul, and others, were writ to all the Saints in that City,
to which the respective Epistles are directed, as appears by the titles of the
several Epistles: And for any one to say, that Paul, etc. did not intend that
they should read them, notwithstanding they sent them to them, is so senseless,
that the very naming of it is sufficient confutation: But if any one desires
further satisfaction in a thing so evident, let them read the strict command of
the Apostle, that they should read it, 1 These. 5.27. I charge you by the Lord,
that this Epistle he read unto all the holy brethren: And in his Epistle to
the Colosians, he commands them, not only to read the Epistles writ unto them,
but the Epistle writ to Laodicea also, and that those of Laodicea should read
the Epistle writ to Coloss, Colosians 4.16.

3. Those that have been frequent in searching the Scripture, and thereby to
judge of the Doctrine that was delivered to them, by St. Paul were commended,
then it is a commendable thing to read the Scripture, except one can search the
Scripture, without reading of it: Now it is plain the Bereans were highly
commended for this very thing, Acts 17.11.

4. Our Savior does command the Jews to search the Scriptures, John 5.39.
Paul commends Timothy for learning the Scriptures, from a child, 2 Timothy 3. and
15. and he is blessed, that reads, and that meditates in it, day and night,
Rev. 1.3. Psalm 1.2.

Object. But they say, Alas! how can poor simple people understand the
Scriptures?

I answer. 1. Ask God that question, who commands them to read the Scriptures,
as has been shown already.

2. One main end of writing the Scripture, is, for their sakes that are simple,
Prove. 1.4. Psalm 19.7. Psalm 119.130.

3. The way that they would have simple people take, is far more intricate, for
they would have them believe the Church, but the marks whereby the Church is to
be known, as Antiquity, visibility, etc. one cannot know, except one reads
over the Fathers, Centuries, etc. which requires more time and learning a
thousand-fold, than that which they pretend is too difficult for them, viz.
reading the Scriptures.

They take away the Scriptures, which is the Word of Truth, and give them
images, which they call Laymens books, which God himself faith, are Teachers
of lies; and for their saying, that hence all our errors and heresies come,
that every one is suffered to read the Scripture, they speak contrary to that
of Christ, Mat. 22.29. And for this reason, learned men should rather be
forbidden to read the Scripture, than others, since generally all Heretics
have been learned men; dare they blaspheme God, and say, (as they must, if this
were true) Lord, thou have commanded us to read the Scriptures; and have said,
that they are able to make us wise to Salvation; and that the cause of error,
is the ignorance of the Scripture, yet we find, that it is the cause of all
errors and heresies; and therefore, though thou have strictly commanded it,
we do as strictly forbid it. But I must crave pardon that I mix any thing of
controversy, in a Treatise that I intended to be purely devotionary;
therefore I must crave pardon also, that I have handled this controversy,
rather in a popular, than Scholastical way, since my main end of publishing
this Treatise, is, not for the wise and prudent, but for babes, in our Saviors
sense, Mat. 11.25. therefore I shall now return to my former way of more
practical matter, and shall set down some spiritual directions for reading the
Word of God with profit.

Directions how to read the Scripture.

1. REad it as the word of God, there is abundance in this very direction; for
if we consider the incomprehensible Attributes of God, they would all inflame
us with fervent desires to read it, and infallible demonstrations to believe
it, and strong endeavors to obey it; and indeed would enable us in all other
respects, to read it, as we ought to read it; for did we believe it to be the
Word of God, as John his Revelation, or Daniel his, we should doubtless read
it according to these several following directions: For though it is true,
Daniel, and other of the Prophets and Apostles; were more sure, that their
Revelations were the Word of God, than we are, that the Scripture is, yet not
then they were, that the Scripture was, and is, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18. and indeed we
ought to take heed, that is, read, mark, and consider it, until the Spirit of
Christ shall arise in our hearts, and make us as certain of the divine truth of
it, as they were; therefore the first great thing is, to confirm our selves of
this truth, that the Scripture is the Word of God: But this caution I must
give, that we must take heed to go about this work, merely by the strength of
humane reason, without craving the assistance and light of the Spirit of God,
not but that there are such invincible arguments and demonstrations, that
except one be resolved to find out cavils, we cannot but yield to this
truth; yet God is such an enemy to the pride of humane reason, that God does
hide his truths from those that come to discover them with a carnal eye, Mat.
11.25.

Therefore the second direction is, to read the Word of God prayingly, and thou
art to pray, not only that God would convince thee, that this is his Word, but
that thou may read it with these several following qualifications.

3. Thou art to read it reverently, not as other books, not as books of
Philosophy and History, etc. but there ought to be upon thy Spirit, the awe
and fear of God; I do not mean, that this reverence that I speak of, should be
shown to the paper on which the Word of God is printed, though these also, as
the dead bodies of Saints, are not to be used with dishonor and despite; but
this reverence is to be shown to the truths, promises, and commands, etc. the
sense of the Scripture; do not account them as light and trivial things, but
read them with fear and trembling, as both the matter and author of the
Scripture require.

4. Read the Scriptures attentively, exceedingly, observing and marking what is
writ in them; as a man that is tried for his life, diligently observes the
witnesses, and sentence of the Judge, because his life lies at stake; so do
thou mark and observe the Word of God, for it is thy life, Deuteronomy. 32.47.

5. Read the Word of God understandingly; for to read, and not to understand,
is like looking on a sealed book; therefore when thou read mark those places
and verses, of whose truth or meaning thou doubtest, and enquire the next
opportunity thou have of some faithful Minister, and enquire the meaning of
them; what passages thou do not understand at the first reading, upon further
examination or enquiry, thou may understand it: The Virgin Mary, what she
did not understand, but wonder at, when she first heard, she laid up, and
pondered in her heart, that she might afterward understand: So the vision that
was shown to Peter, Acts 10. though he understood not what it meant at the
present, yet he did seriously consider what God meant by it. It were an
excellent work, if there were a clear Comment upon the Bible, that might only
fill up an ordinary margent, and yet explain the Text so fully, that we might
have a competent understanding of it: I commend the Annotations, commonly
called, The Assemblies Annotations on the Bible. Dixon, and Hutcheson, what
they have done this way, and those that shall think it too great a labor, to
read the Scripture over with these Comments, may make use of them only, for the
understanding of those places that are difficult to them; but it is a great
pity, and shame, that several of the Gentry spend their time, either in vain
and sinful recreations, or in such studies, as Histories, Mathematics, etc.
and let the Bible lie by, as a book not worthy to be understood by them,
especially since they profess themselves to be Christians, and confess, that
it is the Word of God: As if a Lawyer by profession, should spend his whole
time in other studies, and understand nothing, or very little of the Laws of
the Land: People generally think, that it belongs only to a Minister, as a
Minister, to study and understand the Scripture; but it generally proceeds from
their undervaluing of the mysteries, and their distasting the holiness of its
commands.

6. You are to read it believingly; for when once you understand it, the next
thing is to believe, which is not so in any other writing in the world; for
what book soever you read, or Minister you hear, when you do understand what
they mean, you are to examine whether it be a truth or no which they teach; but
as for the Scripture, you are not to say, How can this be? but whether this be
the meaning of the words, for the sense of the Scripture, when once known, is
not to be examined any further, since there is no truth more evident, by which
the Scripture, it being taken for the Word of God, can be tried; for since it
is Gods Word, it is as true as that God is true, for since truth is essential
unto God; it is all one to deny that God is true, as to deny that God is; as
since roundness is essential to a circle, it is all one to say, it is not
round, as to say, it is not a circle.

7. We are to read it applyingly: Indeed diverse commands were personal, diverse
are in respect of their Office, as to Ministers, Magistrates, diverse were
typical, those that were personal, as the command to Abraham to offer his Son,
so, is not to be applied to any other, save only to the equivalency of it,
viz. that nothing should be so dear unto us; but though in case God do require
it, we should be willing to part with it: As for those commands that are
typical, they are ceased; those that belong to any one, as having such an
Office, are not to be applied to any, but of that office; but as for the
promises, we must not think, that they were made to those to whom they were
made, because they were such or such, but because they were so qualified, viz.
the promises were not made to Abraham, as Abraham, but to Abraham, as believing
Abraham; and that promise which was made personally to him, and confirmed with
an oath, was not made, or confirmed by an oath, that Abraham should have strong
consolation only, but that all the heirs of promise should have strong
consolation also, Heb. 6.14, 17. compared together.

8. Thou must read it frequently: But because I have spoken more largely in
that little Treatise, viz. Directions to Christian Perfection. I shall proceed
to nominate, what other books I would advise you to read.

CHAP. V. Wherein is set down a Catalogue of several books, for the ignorant
and poorer sort, who, in respect of their poverty cannot buy, and of their
ignorance, cannot understand books of greater value and depth.
AFter my commending of the constant, daily, serious understanding, reverent
applying, believing, and conscionable reading of the holy Scriptures to all
persons whatsoever.

1. Be they never so learned, since the very Angels themselves desire to look
into those mysteries, though they despise the learned book that ever were
writ by men, as wonderfully below them.

2. Though they be the holiest, knowingest, and most experienced Saints, since
the Prophets and Apostles, who themselves were penmen of Scripture, did read,
and meditate on, and admire, and study the Word of God, as David, Daniel,
Peter, etc. and did account it not less sure, than the Revelations that God
gave them; We have a surer word of Prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.19. and the more
experience we have of Gods goodness, should not make us abate at all of our
earnest desires of the Word of God; for if we have tasted how good the Lord
is, we should still as much desire the sincere milk of the Word, that we may
grow thereby, delighting, and being affected with it, as we were with that
Sermon, or that truth of Gods Word, by which we were converted, as we were
the first day that we were born of God, 1 Peter 2.2.

3. I say, after such reading of the Scripture, that the truths therein
contained, may be better understood, and the commands thereof better practiced,
to those specified in the title of this Chapter, I commend these books
following.

1. The Plain-mans Pathway to heaven; a book, which partly because it goes by
way of Dialogue, as also, because it answers the common objections of simple
people against Religion; as also, because it writes very plain, and stoops to
the capacity of the meanest, I do highly commend it to such people to read.
The next is, The Practice of Piety: These two books, I think, next to the
Scripture, have done as much good as any two books in the Christian world. The
next book I shall commend, is Mr. Balls Catechism, a book of great use, and
much solidity. The next, which is of super-eminency in its kind, is The
Confession of Faith, the larger and shorter Catechismes of the Assembly of
Divines. Another book, of small price and bulk, which after you are well
grounded in the principles of Religion, set down in the former, is a book
called. The fiery Pillar, which has very much in a little: You may add to
these, for the better stirring you up to holiness, and discovering of your
spiritual condition, Mr. Wheatleys New birth, and his Sermon of the Redemption
of time, and Fenner of final impenitence; and Mr. Shepherds sincere convert,
and sound believer: Mr. Scudders daily walk, is also a solid, and very useful
book: Mr. Perkins his six principles, and Mr. Dod upon the Commandments, I am
not willing to omit.

For those that are of a troubled conscience, Doctor Sibbs his Bruised Reed,
and Souls Conflict: As also Simmons his Deserted Souls case and cure, are very
good, of which, the two former are the plainest: Mr. Baxter of the same subject.

2. For those, who in respect of their estates and capacities, are able to buy
books of greater price, and understand books of higher knowledge.

FOr those that desire to increase further in knowledge, let them read Amesius
his Medulla, and Cases of Conscience, and Calvin's Institutions, which are all
translated into English, for those that have large families, especially of
children, I shall commend B^ards Theater of Gods Judgments, as also Clerks
Martyrology, not but these two last books, as well as the rest, are fit for men
of riper Judgments to read; but because they are most fit for children, and
others of weak capacity, for examples are easily remembered, and understood, and
take deeper impression generally, than precepts: The Theater of Gods
Judgments, sets down the Judgments of God upon blasphemers, murderers,
swearers, drunkards, Sabbath Breakers, disobedient children, and therest of the
sins against the ten Commandments, and the Martyrology, setting down the
innocence, holiness, constancy of the Martyrs; as also the mighty supports,
comforts, that God gave unto them in their sufferings, it will exceedingly
provoke them up to an holy resolution, to suffer for his sake, who never leaves
his comfortless, nor forsaken; and that which I very much intend in the reading
of Martyrology, is, that they may be brought to an utter hatred, and
detestation of Popery, for they shall find, that there have been more
massacred, and butchered, and greater cruelties, and breaches of oaths, vows,
covenants, by the Papists, than ever were used since the world began, by all
the enemies of God; and for a further detestation of Popery, against which we
need now especially, more than ever, to arm our selves: You may read Mr.
Squires Lectures, or Sermons, upon the 2. of These. 2. I shall also commend to
those, who have a larger purse, Mr. Hildersham upon the 51. Psalm, and fourth
of John, books that are written, as the oracles of God, who is the fullest of
Scripture, and the best Text-man that ever I read, or as I think is extant, in
the world, and is so singularly eminent a book, so plain, and so profitable,
that it may be understood by the lowest capacities, and admired by the
greatest Divines, that was famous through the Christian world for learning, and
for piety and humility of those that were acquainted with him: The Arch Bishop
of Armaugh did exceedingly prize Hildersham; Doctor Prestons works are
singularly good, the best of them is his Tract of Gods Attributes; Mr. Baxters
Saints everlasting rest, is a book for piety, and working upon the affections,
so eminent, that I do not know any beyond it. I must not forget to commend that
solid Orthodox spiritual book, Anthony Burgess his spiritual Refines. There is
also a small, rational, spiritual, searching, and very eminent book, called,
Pinks Trial of our sincere love to Christ: Memorandum, that through ignorance,
not knowing the books, or through inanimadvertency, or for want of judgment, or
because I would not multiply Authors; it may be, I have not named many Authors
which are better than those which are here nominated, but these are very good,
and the best that I think I know in their kind, and for those persons, and
that end, for which I have given these directions.

CHAP. VI. The next great help for the attaining of holiness, is, communion
with Saints; and first of solemn conferences, and how to manage them.
THere are many rare spiritual advantages that are to be gained by our
communion with Saints, by conferences and combinations with them, by their
example, gifts, graces, etc. of which I shall speak in order.

Now conferences are either occasional, or solemn: As for occasional
conferences, I shall say little, only I shall advise, that you should improve
your acquaintance with every Saint, according to your intimacy with them, mark
what grace they are most eminent in; as suppose it be humility, observe their
carriage especially as to that grace, for their example will be much more
eminent in that, than in other graces; so that from their carriage, you will
understand that which I have spoke of in the beginning of this Treatise,
wherein the power of Godliness consists, as to humility: If their eminency lies
in their ability to confute errors, then enquire of them what are the best
arguments against such and such an error, if they are most able for the
resolving of spiritual doubts, or cases of conscience, direct your discourse
that way; as Scholars use to discourse with other Scholars of that wherein they
are most eminent. But I shall especially treat, concerning solemn and set
conferences, and those may be managed several ways to much advantage, some
of them I shall mention.

The first way is, for a number of understanding and experienced Saints to meet
1. at a prefixed hour, for else it will occasion the loss of much time, if that
be not observed.

2. Let the question they intend to speak to, be given the week or meeting
before, for their discourses will be much more mature, solid, and deliberate.

3. Let every one speak to the question succinctly, pertinently, orderly, and
when all the rest have spoken, let the Minister (for I judge it convenient he
should be one) give his judgment and resolution of the point: This has been
one way that I have known of mannaging Christian conferences; another has been
this, some select, experienced, prudent Saints, of a long standing met
together, they begin with a short, but fervent prayer, for a blessing upon
their conference; the subject of their conferences was only spiritual
experiences, viz. every one told the manner and method of their conversion,
which took up several meetings, they communicated their answers of prayers,
those that have been in desertions, if they remember how they fell into them,
what their doubts were, and how resolved, and how afterward they were
delivered; at other times to communicate their experiences, as to joys, and as
to the manifestations, and discoveries that God made of himself unto them, what
promise, or other place of Scripture, was the golden pipe, that conveyed these
cordials to them, for the Spouse desires to be kissed with the kisses of his
mouth, for joys that spring not from the Word of God, are to be suspected.
They told also, what were the effects of those joys.

Another subject of their discourse was, to tell what they knew of other
Saints, and their experiences concerning the former matters. Another was, to
tell what their life and conversation was, and the rules they walked by, as to
eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. At another time they have brought forth the
chief places of Scripture, which they have written down, wherein they have
found most relish, most support, best directions in matters concerning their
conversation, or those that they accounted most eminent upon any spiritual
account, especially in those cases for which it is hard to find out places of
Scripture to direct us in: As for example, What example? what place of
Scripture have you to prove, that the thoughts that Christ had of his own
excellency, makes him more ready to give an example of love and humility to
his people, methinks that is a singular place, John 13.3, 4. that Jesus knowing
that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from
God, and went to God; he rises from Supper, etc. What place does set forth
the superexcellencie of God most, Nehemiah 9.5. Blessed be thy glorious Name,
that is exalted above all blessing, and above all praise: And so Exodus 15.11.
Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like thee, glorious in
holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?

And when all was done, one repeated the substance of what was spoke; and this
they did, one by one, in their course, one, one day, and another the next.
Another way was this, diverse Christians being met together, and the subject
being proposed the meeting before, every one brought their answers in writing,
confining themselves to half a quarter of a sheet of paper, which papers (that
no one might know whose papers they were that were to be read) were put into a
book by them that writ them that whatsoever was amiss in any paper, they that
owned it, might not have the shame of their error or ignorance, it not being
known whose it was, then all the papers being read, what was amiss, was
corrected, and what was wanting, was added, what was doubted of, was resolved
by the Ministers that were present; when all was done, the papers were
committed to one, who wrote all of them into a book, where they did not speak
the same thing, which was read the next meeting, before the question that was
then to be discust, was spoke to. The questions were all practical and
devotionary, controversies being forbidden, as being more subject to engender
strife, such as these: what are to be accounted vain thoughts? how to be
suppressed? what are to be accounted idle words? and what means we must use to
avoid them? how far, and in what case conscience is to guide us, and when not?
how we are to conceive of God in our prayers? whether we are in every
particular action, actually to mind and intend the glory of God? what it is to
live by Faith? etc.

Another way is this, some select Christians agree to read such a Chapter
against the next meeting, and give an account of what things they take special
notice of in it: At another time they propose, that each of them shall read
some small part of a several devotionary book, and give an account of the most
remarkable things in it: Another time they were enjoined, that every one of
them should before the next meeting, choose out some of their acquaintance that
were wicked, and should set to the work with all their might, by prayer and
conference with him, with all meekness, and long-suffering to convert him, and
to give an account how far they had proceeded, and to receive instructions how
to proceed further; but the names of the persons with whom they thus dealt,
were to be concealed.

Thus I have given you several instances, but have omitted many
circumstantials, which are to be left to, and varied by Christian prudence: I
have been willing to particularize that (if it might be). I may be helpful to
those that shall be willing to use this excellent help of Christian set
conferences, and I doubt not but God will assist those that shall desire to
improve them, with abundance of other subjects for their discourse; for if we
will pour out, God will pour in.

One way to furnish them with profitable questions, is, that the question to
be di^cussed, should not be left to one to propose, but all should be
desired, to bring in writing those things that they desire satisfaction in, and
if they observe their readings, occasional conferences and meditations they
will meet with many practical devotionary subjects, which will afford
profitable matter for these solemn conferences; and I suppose you do easily
discern, that there is a greater or less latitude, as to the prudence and
piety of the persons that meet, according as the conference is managed.

CHAP. VII. Of the second great advantage that we may gain from our converse
with the people of God, in reference to temptations.
THe next great advantage that we get from our acquaintance with Christians
(though we cannot enjoy these solemn conferences with them) is, in reference
to temptations, and four advantages we may gain, as to them.

1. We may know how to judge of our selves under temptations.

2. We may learn the cure of temptations.

3. How to improve them.

4. How to discover diverse things to be temptations, which otherwise we
should take to be motions of the holy Spirit.

1. For the judging of our condition under temptations, for weak Christians
that are not acquainted with the Wiles of Satan, nor know how active and
fruitful their own hearts are in evil, think, that if they are much tempted,
they are none of Gods children; nay, if they are much afflicted, they have no
interest in God, and that they have no faith, if troubled with doubtings. There
are very few, but (when they were first troubled with blasphemous thoughts)
have been filled with such horror, that they have judged themselves
Reprobates, because these thoughts have been injected by Satan, for they have
laid them wholly to their own charge, and so have even sunk under the burden
and guilt of them; but when once they come to be acquainted with the Saints,
they will find that it is the spot of Gods people: And in many other kinds of
temptations, they will find, that as face answers face in a glass, so heart
answers heart.

2. For the cure of temptations: As for example, these blasphemous thoughts,
they will tell them what they do in this case, viz. that these temptations have
more horror in them than guilt, and it is Satan's sin, and not theirs, since
they abhor such thoughts, as they do he^l; as a chaste woman that is ravished, it
is looked upon as her affliction, and not her crime, and that they use (when
blasphemous thoughts assault them) to do as a chaste matron does, when a base
wretch speaks filthy things to her, she will take no notice of his words, as
near as she can, and get her out of his company; so divert thy thoughts, and
think not over those thoughts again, though to abhor them; and many other such
directions they will give thee from their own experience; that poor soul is in
a sad condition, that has no Christian acquaintance to communicate its doubts
and temptations to, but those that have Christian friends to communicate with,
as those that have cheerful company and discourse in their journey, that know
the way, their journey to heaven will be with far fewer mistakes, fears, and
far more delightful.

3. By our Christian acquaintance, we shall learn how to improve temptations,
and how to be gainers by them. As for example, we may be gainers by
blasphemous thoughts, for one way of cure is, the way to get advantage by them,
viz. when Satan casts in these blasphemous thoughts into thee, do as they did,
Acts 19.34. when they thought that Alexander would speak against Diana, they
cried out for the space of two hours, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; so when
Satan blasphemes God, by casting in these blasphemous thoughts (for it is Satan
that blasphemes God, and not thou) break forth in the praises of God, and read,
or sing; Psalm 103.116, 14^, 148. or some other Psalm that is filled with the
praises of God; and as if Alexander had spoken against Diana, that general
outcry would have kept him from being heard, so shall thou by this means
drowned the noise of these temptations, and be a gainer by them, since thy
praises of God shall be far more than those blasphemous thoughts amount to,
and have more holiness in them, than they have guilt, as to thee, and when
Satan sees, he is a loser by his temptations, he will be weary of tempting
of thee. I remember there is a story of one that made an advantage of a
temptation that assaulted him, a poor man asked an alms of him, and he gave
him something, but his heart grudging that he had given so much, he called
the poor man, and gave him as much more: I will teach thee, says he to his
heart, to be so wicked, and he took an holy revenge of himself and Satan.

4. By our acquaintance with Gods people, we shall be able to discover diverse
things to be temptations, which otherwise we should have thought to be the
motions of Gods Spirit: As for example, as I have written in another Treatise,
the making of perpetual vows and resolutions, for abstaining from things
indifferent in themselves, though at that time, when they made those vows,
they were snares to them; and so there are some that are put upon prayer, and
hearing Sermons so often, that they neglect their particular calling; so diverse
in desertion, think that they ought not to go to the Ordinances, nor perform
holy duties, nor that any one should pray with them, for they say, it does but
increase their guilt, and that they have mercies enough already to answer for:
Diverse things wherein some place Religion, are but superstition, so that many
things be discovered to be sins by our acquaintance with the people of God,
which we should have thought to be duties.

CHAP. VIII. Another great advantage that we receive from our acquaintance
with the people of God, is, in reference to their prayers.
THe next great advantage which we receive from our communion with Saints, is,
in respect of prayer, and that several ways.

1. In respect of their gift of Prayer, it is a good advice to those that come
complaining to one, that they cannot pray, they will tell you, when they go to
pray; they have no faith, no words, they cannot speak, but when they look upon
God and their sins, they are overwhelmed with sorrow, they cannot mourn for
their sins, nor praise God for his mercies, nor love him for his goodness, I
say, it is a good advice to bid them go and make the same complaints, in the
same words to God, as they do to man, and it is a prayer, and it is a good and
true comfort to tell them, that sighs and groans without words, is better than
words without them; and that God hears the desires of the poor, before they
speak them; nay, though they cannot utter them, yet notwithstanding it is a
great advantage to join in prayer with those, that have not only the Grace and
Spirit, but the gift of supplication, for from their several confessions thou will know more sins, and be made more sensible of those thou knew, than
thou wast before, by their several petitions and supplications, thy desires
will be drawn forth after many spiritual things, which otherwise thou would
not have thought of to have asked of God, and as from their full and clear
expressions, thy desires will be enlarged, so from their graces thou will have
great advantage, for doubtless it is much better to join with one that has the
gift and grace of praver, than with him that has the gift only: I am ready to
think, that as if the same Sermon were preached by two, of which one were truly
holy, and the other unregenerate, though seemingly as holy as the other, the
Sermon delivered by him that was a true Saint, would be much more efficacious,
for conversion and edification; so the prayer of a righteous man, does not only
avail much for the persons for whom, but on the persons with whom he prays;
and the sweet savor of their precious ointments, their graces, which are
poured out in prayer, does fill the room where they are, and work upon the
hearts of them that hear them.

It is reported of that precious man Mr. Welsh, who lying at an Inn, and his
supper coming to more than he expected, his money falling short, he had
nothing to pay the Hostler, who railing at him, the good man went up to his
Chamber, and shut his door, and without the Hostler stood railing, but he went
to prayer, and prayed so holily, so fervently, that the Hostler hearing of him,
was converted, and would neither then, nor ever after, take any thing of him
when he came that way: Surely the very pronunciation and gesture, the very
countenance of a holy man, have so much holiness, reverence, humility etc. that
they will strike an awe upon those that hear and see them; their looks, tears,
pronunciation, and gestures, pray and move, even almost as much as their words:
When a Saint has his heart full of love, joy, and admirings of God, while he
is sending up the praises of God to heaven, his countenance is like Stephens,
like the face of an Angel.

The next advantage from the prayer of Gods people, is, by our being the
subject of their prayers, for all Gods people have an interest in the prayers
of Gods people, so that their great comfort is, that there is no minute, either
of night or day, but there is many of Gods people praying in some part or other
of the world, so that there is a stock of prayers going for us always in one
place or other; yet one great advantage that we gain by the people of God, is,
by a strict combination and engagement to pray one for another, which may be
managed thus; choose out of the holiest, humblest, praying'st Christians you
are acquainted withal, and if they be acquainted also one with another, to
enter into a mutual Covenant to pray one for another particularly in their
closet once a day, and each is to give to other a note of what particulars they
most desire to be prayed for, but it is convenient that they should be
confined to five or six particulars, and no more, for if the particulars should
be too many, it would take up too much time of that which we set apart for
closet duties; and therefore five or six is as great a number as well can enter
into this engagement, and it is not convenient the engagement should be
perpetual, for perpetual engagements of this nature generally prove snares,
therefore it is good that the engagement be but for a month, and then to
cease, or be renewed, as you shall find convenient; and the advantages of
this combination are very great; for doubtless when we remember personally the
prayers of Gods people that know and love us, their prayers are more effectual
than they would be, than if we were only included in their prayers under the
general notion of Gods people; and it seems very probable to me, that many
mercies that we receive, (if I may so say, we know not how) may come to us
this way. To make my meaning more plain, take it thus, sometimes the people of
God find great enlargement in prayer, unexpected comforts, which come as it
were of a sudden, though they cannot find that they have either taken more
care for the preparing themselves for the duty at that time, or that their
prayers have been more fervent than at other times; I know this may be from
free grace, without the intervening of thine own or others prayers; so also
many times we have strange deliverances from imminent dangers, and yet it may
be that day we had begged preservation with less servency and faith, than at
other times; this is that I mean, I suppose if it could be known, some of Gods
people, or other, were at that time praying for us, so that as it was with that
Noble man, John 4.52, 53. his servants met him, and told him, that his son was
recovered; and when he had strictly enquired what time he recovered, he
found it was the same hour when Jesus said, thy son lives; so if we could by
enquiring search it out, we should find that our inlargements, comforts,
deliverances, were at the same time, when such and such a Saint was praying for
us.

Another great advantage that we have from the prayers of Gods people, is, to
know those signal answers that God has given to their prayers; for though the
answers that God gives to our own prayers, take the greatest impression, and do
most strengthen our faith, and are the strongest motives for the enlarging of
our love and prayers, as the Psalmist says, Psalm 116.1, 2. I love the Lord,
because he has heard my voice, and my supplication, because he has inclined
his ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live; yet the
answers that God gives to the prayers of others, is of very great advantage,
and it may be greater than the answers of our own, considering that they are
much more numerous: I grant, that the promises of God made to prayer, is the
rock and the strong foundation upon which our hope is built, but when we find
that God has performed and made good his promises by so many instances and
experiences of our own and others, it does very much strengthen our Faith;
therefore so many experiences of the people of God in reference to the answer
of their Prayers, are mentioned in Scripture, as Abraham's, and Eliasers, Genesis
24. and Isaac, Genesis 25.21. and Jacob, Genesis 32. what need I tell you the
answers, given to the prayers of Moses, Hannah, Solomon, etc. I suppose there
is scarce any blessing a Saint prays for but he has, or has, but he prays
for; David has recorded many experiences of others, as you may see Ps. 34.6.
and Ps. 22.5. and 107.6. and 13, etc. and for his own experiences, they are too
many to set down; But I shall take leave to communicate some eminent answers of
Prayers, which I have had from persons of great piety and prudence.

The Lady Herrick, whose acquaintance I do justly account as a great mercy of
God, for she was a Lady of eminent holiness, and one that spent so much time
(I think) in closet and other duties, that there are few if any Christians go
beyond her, among other conferences with her, she told me two singular
answers of Prayer, which she received from God, one was this; In the time of
these late wars, a neighbor Christian friend sent her word, that the Kings
party had resolved to come speedily to take her Prisoner, she went up to
prayer, and finding her faith strong, and her hope not at all failing, she
thanks the messenger, and cold him that she did not think as yet to remove;
There came a second messenger from another friend, with the same message, she
retired her self again into her Closet to prayer, and finding her confidence
continue, she resolved to continue also in her house, for she had formerly
desired of God, that he would not keep up her confidence of being preserved,
when she was in real and eminent danger: The third Messenger came from Justice
Babington, with a new alarm of approaching danger, she went to prayer again,
and her confidence began to abate, and the more she prayed, the more it
abated: and she taking this as a sign, that God would have her depart, hasted
out of her house, and immediately came the soldiers and searched for her with
Candles and Lanthorns in every place, in and about her house. Another time she
told me a Friend of hers came, and desired her to seek God in reference to
marriage which he then intended, that God would be pleased to further it, if it
would prove a blessing, otherwise to hinder it: she promised him (as her manner
was) that as God should immind and enable her, she should do, for she was
very wary in her promising, to pray for any, her friend came twice to know what
answer she had from God of her prayer, and what she would advise him to do,
she answered him both times, that she much feared that the match would prove
very unhappy; whether she judged that it would prove so, because she found
her heart without life, and enlargement when she came to pray as to that
particular, or what other way she judged of Gods manifesting his mind as to
that, I remember not whether I asked her or no: but she not positively
forbidding him to go on, it seems she having no very clear warrant so to do,
he proceeded, desiring her still to continue her prayers, and it was so, that
as they were going to Church to be married, he was fully and clearly informed
of her very unchaste conversation, and so was delivered out of this snare.

I am willing also to relate a story that much affected me when I heard it,
and it is of a singal manifestation that God gave of himself to a little Child,
which I set down amongst Gods answers of prayers, because this child was so
eminent that way, and it was thus;

A Child of a Christian Gentlewoman, was so given to prayer from its infancy,
that before it could well speak, it would use to get alone and go to prayer,
and as it grew, it was more frequent in prayer, and retiring of it self from
company, and would ask of his Mother very strange questions; far above the
capacity of one of his years, in so much that the mother thought that the child
had heard those questions spoke of by others, and much liked it that the child
should take notice of such things, and be able to understand them so far as
to remember them, but at last when the child was but five years old, and
whipping of his top, of a sudden he flung away his scourge stick and top, and
ran to his mother, and with great joy, said unto her, mother, I must go to
God, will you go with me? she answered my dear Child, how do thou know thou
shall go to God? he answered, God has told me so, for I love God, and God
loves me; Mother, will you go with me? She answered, Dear Child, I must go
when God pleases, but why wilt not thou stay with me? The Child Answered, I
will not stay, I must go to God; and the Child did live about a month after,
but never cared for play more, and then fell sick, always speaking, that he
must go to God; and dyed of that sickness: Blessed be God, that out of the
mouths of babes, and sucklings, he has perfected praise, Mat. 21.16.

One who had a brother, that spent his time in Hawking, and given to drinking
and swearing, going one Saturday out of Town to a Hawking match, his brother
being much afflicted to see his carriage, and how little he minded the things
of God, set apart that Saturday for fasting and prayer, to seek God for the
conversion of his brother, who came home next monday a much reformed man, in so
much that he frequently afterward kept days of humiliation by himself alone,
and gave evident tokens of his conversion, and lived and dyed (I verily
believe) a child of God, I knew both the Brothers very well.

A Christian Gentlewoman of mine acquaintance being very dangerously sick, sent
to a Christian Friend of hers about twelve miles off, desiring to see her
before she dyed, sending her word that she was afraid she would come too
late; she went up to prayer, desiring of God, that in case she might come time
enough to do any Christian service to her friend, he would incline the heart
of her husband to be willing to let her go, for he never used to be willing
that she should go any whether from home, when she came down from her prayer,
her Husband met her, and told her that such a friend of hers was sick, and
wished her immediately to go, and did forward her exceedingly, and it pleased
God she came in time to be a help and comfort to her Christian friend, with
whom I am very intimately acquainted.

About the year 1646. We kept a public fast in New-Sarum in the County of
Wilts, where a woman, whom (to my knowledge) I never saw before nor since, sent
a Bil to be prayed for, largely setting forth how she was vexed by Satan, and
accordingly the bill being read, effectual prayers were made for her
deliverance, from that sore and strange affliction; the next Lords day
following the fast, the same Woman sent another Bill, desiring that thanks
might be rendered to the Lord for hearing the prayers of that Congregation on
the woman's behalf, and for his mercy in delivering her from the Devils power.
On both those days there was a Citizen present, who cursed both the Minister
and woman in his heart, saying, within himself, this is a mere juggle, a holy
Sister (forsooth) must be brought in pretending to be possessed of the Devil,
and then prayers must be made for her deliverance, and after thanks must be
returned for the mercy obtained by their prayers; and whereto does all this
tend, but to win credit to them and their prayers? But while the Citizen became
thus a judge of unrighteous thoughts, the righteous God met with him; For
immediately was the man surprised by Satan, in like manner as the woman
formerly had been, as he himself (about a month after being weary of his life)
coming to me of his own accord, confessed, and after private conferences, and
both public and private prayers, he found relief: Here was a judgment turned
into a blessing, for by this means God was pleased (I hope) to work a good
change in him. About a year after, another Inhabitant in that City was addicted
to some courses displeasing to God and his friends, especially his wife, who
desired nothing more than his Conversion and perceiving the next Lords day, by
the drift of a Text whereon the Minister then treated, that some thing might
be handled the next Lords day following, which would highly concern her
husbands spiritual condition, she importunately sought God for him, and
invited him to be present at the next Sermon, but he, whether he suspected
any thing, or no, that she had informed the Minister ought concerning him,
that so he might fit his matter to his particular, I cannot say: but so it
was, when the morning of the Sabbath Day was come, he could by no means be
persuaded to rise out of his bed, till the Sermon bell had ceased, and then
said he presumptuously (now will I rise in spite of any) but having raised
himself half up, he was there held, how they knew not: but so, as he could
not rise up, nor lie down again, this continued for some time, till his wife by
her earnest prayers, obtained his release: and then he got up, and dressed
himself, and made haste to the Church, and by reason of some occasion falling
out at that very time, he came before Prayers, or Sermon began, and heard the
subject which his Wife had desired of God he might hear. At Ballyhaes in the
County of Cavan after the English were almost all departed, the Rebels stopped
three Brethren, viz. Thomas North, Richard North, and William North, and
because they was skilful workmen, they stayed them to work for them, at length
there came to the house where they were, a Jesuit, a Priest, and a Friar, with
Soldiers attending them, who told them unless they would turn Roman
Catholics, they should be hanged, who answered, we hope you will satisfy our
Consciences first about the truth of your Religion; why said the Jesuit what
do you make doubt of in our religion? Sir, said, Th. North, do not you affirm
that some of you can keep the whole Law of God? yea, said the Friar so can I:
then Tho replied, St. John teaches us, if any say he has no sin he deceives
himself, and there is no truth in him, whether now shall we believe, St. John
or you? in the mean time, the Priest found a Bible lying in the shop, which the
Friar took and opened, and perceiving it to be an English Bible, he tore it
in pieces, and uttered these words; This is the Book which makes so many
Heretics; then said Thomas North, Sir, you said even now, you could keep the
morral Law, but now you have broken both Law and Gospel, which words so
incensed them, that they commanded the Soldiers to take the said Themas, and
to pinion his arms behind him, and to carry him to the Gallows, which they
did, and when they came to the place of execution, Thomas had a cloth before
his eyes, and he desired so much liberty as to pray, before he went up the
Ladder, and obtained leave, he fell upon his knees, and imagining that to be
his last prayer, continued therein a good while, when he had done, he raised
up himself, but heard no body about him, then he made a shift to pluck the
cloth from before his eyes, and saw no man, and so came home to his brethren,
who unbound his arms, and told him, that the Jesuit, Priest, and Friar, had
been there before him, and told them (their Brother was yet alive, and that
they were beaten with lightning from the Gallows) That was strange (said
Thomas) that there should be lightning on such a fair day as this has been,
for my part, I saw none, neither did I mind their departure, my spirit being
taken up in Prayer.

These passages the three brethren coming afterward safe up to Dublin, all
justified to be true. Dr. Teate.

CAAP. IX. Of watching over one another, and diverse other great advantages that
we gain for the increase of holiness, from the acquaintance with Gods people.
ANother great advantage from our Communion with Gods people, is, from our
serious and solemn engagement, to watch one over another, and faithfully to
reprove whatsoever we see amiss, and whosoever will not only patiently, but
thankfully receive reproof, is doubtless far from being an eminent
Christian, and those that make this Covenant, are not only to tell one
another, what they see evident to be amiss, but they are also to tell them of
their fears and jealousies, and of the reports, yea, even of slanders that are
spoken of them, for a Saint may get a great deal of good from slander, for
generally we do something, that gives some occasion to the slanderer to
misreport us, for if they report that one is a drunkard, and a glutton, though
we may be far from deserving those calumnies, yet it gives us just occasion to
examine our selves, whether we do not take somewhat too much liberty in the
use of the creature, and many times we should go so far, if slanders were not
raised, that we should deserve them.

Another great advantage from this our Communion with the Saints, is our being
acquainted with all their spiritual experiences, the ways and means that God
uses with them, what places of Scripture do most affect them, either by way of
Consolation, or provoking and stirring them up to a more strickt and
circumspect walking, and to a high prizing of, and longing after heaven and
Christ, which places will either stir us up, and work the same frame of heart
in us, or else they will much humble us, when we consider, the strange frame
of our own hearts, that those places that makes others like the charets of
Aminadab should not move us, and those places that inflame others should not
thaw us.

Another rare advantage that we have with Gods people is, from those high
discoveries that God makes of himself to them upon their beds of languishing a
little before they depart hence, and be no more seen, and because I will not
transgress my own thoughts in this particular, being confident that relations
of the great discoveries that God does make to his people will much affect the
Christian reader, therefore I shall relate some few of the eminentest I know. A
very precious Christian acquaintance being sick unto death, as those that were
about have thought; I coming to her, she said, Sir, I have examined my own
heart, but am not willing to trust it, but desire the seal of your Ministry,
and that you would try and examine, if there be any way of wickedness in me:
I put her to her choice, whether she would discover her own condition, or put
me to find it out by questions, she chose the former; and said O sir, God
has handled me on his knees from my Cradle to my grave; for I hope this
night, the nuptials between my Savior and my soul shall be consummate; I asked
her if she could remember the time of her conversion; she told me that she
always lived blameless since she could remember; But about twenty years ago,
I was at a Sermon, and the point that was spoke to was, that every done ought
to examine what it was that they had that they durst own at the day of
judgment; I went home and examined my graces, I found them weak, and bid them
stand by, I durst not own them at the day of judgment: I examined my duties,
and found them sinful, and when I found nothing in my self, I went out of my
self, unto that rock that is higher than I, and there I have been to this day.
Her pronunciation as well as her expressions being full of joy, and
earnestness, I asked her whether none of her sins lay upon her conscience,
and whether she used to have such joys; she answered, that God had hid all
her sins from her for the present, and that she formerly used rather to have
calmness, than joy, but now there was a beam of light and joy came into her
soul, but how she knew not, and speaking much of her desires to be dissolved,
I asked her why she desires to dye, she answered that she might be rid of
sin, and free from temptation, and have an eternity to praise her God in. A
Neighbor of hers coming in to see her, who was a carnal man, she left her
discourse with others and applied her self to him, and with abundance of
intention of spirit and voice, she said, O Sir, see that you get Christ, and
the time that you spend in your Garden (for he much delighted in his Garden)
spend on your knees, for I Will tell you, I would not loose the joys of my dying
hour, for ten thousand worlds, some about her wished her not to speak so loud,
for she would spend her self; not speak for my God, said she? I will speak
for my God as long as I am able to speak, and when I can speak no more, I will
hold my tongue: and it was so by Gods good providence, that she resting pretty
well that night, the next day she began to recover, whereupon she fell a
trembling every joint, and she being asked why she trembled, and what became
of her joys, she answered, that ^er joys was as great as ever, but she
trembled to think that she should live to dishonor that God that gave them:
when she was well recovered, I asked her what were become of her joys? she
answered me, that ever since she knew God, she had the faith of adherence,
and I hope that God would have mercy on me; but I never thought it almost
possible that God would ever shine upon such a dunghill as I am, but now I can
say that God has stamped upon my soul that I am his, and he is mine.

That precious Saint Mris. Drake, of whose life and death there is a little
Book, worth the perusing, out of which I shall only give you an account of her
carriage, and the wonderful raptures that God gave her a little before her
death: She was a woman of great temptations and desertions for the space of ten
years, yet notwithstanding the endeavors and labors of those four eminent
servants of God, B. Usher, Doct. Preston, Mr. Hooker, and Mr. Dod: but at last
growing sickly, and being free from her desertions, she became incessant in her
discourses of heaven, and of the things of God night and day, so that she took
little rest, but spent her time and strength in duties and conference, she
knew her end approached near, though others looked upon her distemper rather as
an indisposition of body, than a fit of sickness, but she being confident she
should dye, and thereupon went to her Fathers house, where she always desired
to end her days, and Mr. Dod coming to her, spending much time in prayer,
conference, and expounding the Scripture, she carried her self with such
unsatiable desires of more, and such inflamed discourses of the things of God,
that they were all filled with admiration. The Lords day before her death, she
called all her children together, and with many admonitions and zealous
instructions, and heavenly discourses, she spent much time that day with them.
The Tuesday following Mr. Dod came, and spent some time in heavenly discourses,
and then went to prayer, and suddenly as prayer was done, she broke forth in a
wonderful manner, in these expressions. Oh, Oh, Oh, what is this, what is this,
what is this? I am undone, undone, undone, I cannot endure it; O, O, O, let me
be gone, let me be gone, O, I must be gone, I cannot tarry, I cannot tarry;
O what shall I do? what shall I do? O Father, O Mother, O husband, kiss me,
kiss me, and let me be gone, come all, farewell all, let me take you by the
hand, and be gone: Lo, lo, the Angels are come, they wait and stay for me; O
dear Mother! why hold you me? I must be gone, O, he is come, he is come, he
is come: Now, you have it, you have it, you have it, why hold you me? Iet me be
gone, my work is done: O call, call, call, where is my crown: fetch me my
crown, bring, bring, bring me my white robes, quickly, quickly, quickly, why
run you not? the Angels stay, now you have it, you have it, you have it,
(meaning that now we had the issue and fruits of all our prayers) O, it
overcomes, overcomes, overcomes me; I am undone, undone, undone, what shall I
do? what shall I do? what shall I do? O you will not let me be gone, with
innumerable, such swift expressions as could not be remembered, she in that
short time of half a quarter of an hour, speaking more than one can treatibly
speak in an hour, with an extraordinary swiftness (no ordinary action of this
life) when with all she heaved up still all the time with fixed eyes, toward
the house top, as though she had seen some vision, and would have flown away
from them all. During which time (as we cannot blame them) The posture of all
the spectators was (except her Husband, who went weeping, and wringing his
hands up and down the chamber) silence, wonder, and admiration; They in all
their life time having never seen or heard of the like: which put Mr. Dod, her
Husband, and all of them to a nonplus (as being beyond all experience) but if
the Reader will have patience, this good creature shall her self expound this
rare riddle, yea, and Comment upon it.

This fit of sudden, extreme, ravishing, unsupportable joy, (beyond the
strength of mortality to retain, or be long capable of) being over, and she
laid again who formerly had striven to have got away from them all: all being
in an amazed astonished silence, she her self began thus: why are you
silent? where is Mr. Dod? who being near unto her, sat by her bed side, unto
whom she thus directed her speech, Sir, what did you think of me lately in
this strange posture I have been in? did not you imagine me to have been mad
all the time? Mr. Dod replied, no, but that it was very strange unto them all,
having never heard or seen the like, so (said she) surely it was very strange,
but will you know how it surprised me; as this morning, ere you came to
prayer, I being alone, prayed to God, that he would not absent himself for
ever: but that once before my death, he would reveal Christ unto me, give me
some sense, and feeling of his love, and open the brazen gates of this hard
heart of mine that the King of glory may enter in; after which as you had
prayed, this sudden out-crying fit of unsupportable joy, and feeling, surprised
me with such violence, rushing in upon me, as I could not contain my self,
but make this sudden outcry amongst you all: but I must confess unto you I know
not, neither do I remember what I said, but now I beseech you to make this use
hereof hereafter unto all in my case.

After me never despair of any, how desperately miserable soever their case
be, which at the worst cannot exceed mine, but use and apply the means unto
them, and they will prevail at length; I was like a piece of knotty timber, who
have endured so many the more knocks with strong wedges, so much ado there was
to work me. But now I thank God, who has heard my prayer, and revealed Christ
unto me, and now I care not for all this world, the fountain of all my misery
has been, that I sought for that in the Law, which I should have found in the
Gospel, and for that in my self, which was only to be found in Christ. A wrong
way I confess, which has occasioned unto me so much sorrow, but now all is
well, O pray, pray, pray, O give thanks, for now you have it, you have it, you
have it. This so solid and strange speech, so heavenly, rational, gave a
great deal of contentment unto all present. Mr. Dod according unto her desire,
frameing himself unto a Prayer altogether of thanksgiving, admiring Gods
infinite work in her, and for her, beseeching a happy close of this great work
begun: for matter of Petition now she cared not for, lying like a Conqueror
with an extraordinary cheerful aspect, full of rapt joy, as now she had been
possessor of all things, having no need of any thing: now that Christ was hers,
all things being hers also; The remainder of the day being spent in over-joyed
speeches, with exhortation to thanksgiving, still telling us you have it, you
have it, you have it, and taking our hands in hers, and heaving them up and
down many times together, very thankful to us all, as she wished us to be
thankful unto God for her.

The same Tuesday again, about four of the Clock in the afternoon, the Chamber
being full of her Friends, joyful to see her so fraught with joy, after so many
sorrowful days. Suddenly she fell out again in a strange manner, in such
another rapt fit of joy, beyond all expression, uttering just about the same
things as formerly, in the same manner as in the morning, enduring about the
same time: and so ceased, and was quiet again as formerly, she thereupon
called Mr. Dod, wondering at the strangeness of the thing, told him, that her
joy and sense thereof, was so overcoming, and strong, as she could not for her
life contain her self from bursting forth thus again, for as she said, her
frail flesh was overcome therewith, and so she entreated him again to give
thanks, he did so, spending the remainder of that day in heavenly discourses
of another world, hoping that she should that Night have stepped soundly, having
now watched, and been without sleep above a week together; but it seems as the
lame man, Act. 3.8. having received his feet, for joy did nothing but walk, and
leap, and praise God; so she having been as it were in another world, revived
with uncouth new joy, could not take any rest or sleep, but rejoiced always
and talked of the same, and so that Night having diverse Friends to watch and
sit by her, she spent the same in good discourse, and singing of Psalms.

All the time she had been ill, she could not of all the Psalms endure to
join in singing of the thirtieth Psalm, but that night of her self she called
for it, with this expression, come, now turn to the thirtieth Psalm (by the
Relator always urged upon her to belong to her) but I durst never appropriate
or apply the same unto my self until now, and so that Tuesday night sung the
same cheerfully, as was said, she passing this night over also without an
inclination to rest or sleep. On the Wednesday morning, her indulgent mother,
that worthy soul Mris. Tottle did rise betimes, and came to visit her, when
finding her in a strange and unusual attire, for that morning (now apprehending
death at hand) she had caused her self too be dressed from top to toe all in
white, concealing her conceit therein until her Mother came, who seeing her
thus strangely dressed, spoke lovingly to her in her accustomed phrase, how now
Daughter, what is the matter with thee? me thinks thou look like a bride,
so I am Mother, said she, a Bride now trimmed for Christ the Bridegroom, and
now Mother, I have my last suite to make unto you (for I am a woman of another
world) when I am dead, I pray you dress me just thus as you see me now, and
so let me be laid in my grave, for, for this cause, I caused my self to be
dressed thus this morning, that you might see how I would be laid in the
grave, whereupon her Mother bursting forth into weeping, she comforted her all
she could, saying, mother, me thinks you should rather rejoice to see me so
near home, after that I have so long a time been storm beaten, and sea-sick,
not now to grudge that I am arrived so near the Haven: And so prayed her to
suffer her willingly to depart home in peace, whereupon her Mother for that
time (being a matchless tender mother) parted with many tears. Soon after
this, came Mr. Dod, and Doct. Preston to her, to whom she with a great deal of
joy, told the same discourse as formerly she had done unto her mother, that
thus as she was then dressed, she desired to be laid in the grave; after
their departure, having prayed with her, and given thanks (for no other part of
prayer she now affected, as being heir of all things, not having need of any
thing) she sent for diverse of the house severally, unto whom she gave
seasonable and suitable exhortations, fitting unto their places, taking her
leave of them all, wherein she was so punctual, that with her good will she
would have had every servant of the house to have come severally unto her, but
that her mother fearing that which afterward came to pass, some weakness to
ensue so much watching, speaking and toyling incessantly of her spirits, durst
not expose her to the hazard of so insupportable a toil; being now very much
spent, this Wednesday after dinner, she called to void her Chamber of every
body, and sent for her Father to speak with, School, and take leave of him;
whom she dealt with, and schooled (having him all alone for above an hour
together, to whom when she had spoke her mind, and taken her leave of him,
she dismissed him. At his descending from her, she called to speak with the
Relat^r, whom having made to sit down by her, she first gave him many solemn
thanks for his care and pains taken with her: and then she said she had a
suite unto him, who replied, that any suite of hers if in his power, was
granted ere known, yet this served not the turn, but she would have his hand
to forgive her, which being done, she prayed him to forgive her; who wondering
at the strangeness of this needless suite, told her, that he had rather cause
to ask forgiveness of her, having much failed both in duty and love to her. O
no, said she, you must forgive me, that you for so many years together, have
showed me so much love, and been a means of my everlasting comfort and
happiness, that yet I have been so unkind unto you, for I have not loved you,
by the hundred part in that measure as I ought to have done; according to that
love you have showed to me, but will you know the cause, I could love no body
as I should, so long as I was not assured of Gods love to me (for that only
sets our love on fire, to run strongly the right way) I could until then,
neither love you nor any body else, during so much distraction and diversion,
as I should have done, and now that my love is thus kindled, this is my sorrow
(my time being short) that now I can no otherwise express my self, then by this
poor acknowledgement, In a time I am so unfit, and disabled to perform my
desires; but I well hope, that what I cannot do, that God that set you on work
for my good and my other friends, will perform, when I am gone: and so for that
time with abundance of love and thanks, she dismissed the relator.

Thus having in some ample manner, disposed of all the business she seemed to
have in this world; the remainder of this afternoon, she lay in her former
joyful posture, rejoyceing to speak of the best things unto every one near unto
her, yet without any rest or sleep, or inclination that way.

When Mr. Dod, and Doctor Preston, came to visit her, she still entreating to
give thanks, no other discourse she had, as wanting nothing: so continuing all
this day, until the evening late, that there was a great change, as in part
shall be showed; for least she should be lifted up through her former
revelation, joys and rapture, so short, which endured not surpassing her
strength, she had a weakening cooler to keep her down low: for, lo, lo, the
Scene now changes again, the curtain waves, and tosses, a little with an
uncouth wind, party colored, no firm impressions appeared. She who lately was
in a glorious triumph flying away forcibly from us all, as it were with Eagles
wings mounting upwards, is now suddenly surprised with an extreme fainting and
weakness of spirits, being for ten days and nights overwearied, watched and
toy led out, so as now she bewrayed some weakness in her expressions, not
being as formerly so lively and substantial, which continued the Thursday and
Friday after, never having any rest or sleep all the time, which distemper made
them send post to London for two Physicians, hoping by their advice to have
made her rest, but all in vain, no physic could cure her, but heavenly
Physic, therefore on the Saturday, Mr. Dod, and Doctor Preston, and Mr. Hooper
kept a private fast for her, the issue whereof was, in that forenoon she fell
asseep, rested soundly some five or six hours together, and then waked in a
very mild and gentle temper. Then she called unto her Cousen Herreis (a good
gentlewoman always exceeding careful of her) Sarah, tell me, did not I
lately, in some speeches forget my self? whereunto her answer was, truly
Cousen, so you did, but we imputed the same, to your many days and night
watchings, and overwearying of your spirits, unable so long to hold out; so it
was, said she, my spirits were spent and gone, which caused that weakness;
then she remembering all that passed, her strange raptures (but nothing which
then she had said in them) retaining her former grounds, comfort, and
cheerfulness (as in so much weakness could be expressed) called for Mr. Dod,
and Doct. Preston, with the rest of her friends, causing them to give thanks
with her and for her, venting her self unto them thus, That her time was now at
hand, prayed them not to leave her, and being very weak, spoke then her mind
unto her Father, Mother, and Husband, in a sort taking leave of them, sent for
her Children and blessed them, now imagining to have done all her work: and so
from thence fell into a silent rapture of joyful singing of Hymns, and verses
of Psalms, not greatly caring to speak unto any body save now and then unto Mr.
Dod, when he moved an occasion, and so she lay this Saturday night, and the
next Sunday, only when Mr. Dod came, desiring still to give thanks, all which
time she grew weaker and weaker, having by this time no audible, but a hollow
low voice, searce to be understood.

The Monday after in the morning, when she fell a sleep, being come, Mr. Dod
with the rest coming unto her, she when she saw them all about her, rejoiced
and smiled, taking them all by the hand with a cheerful countenance, beckned
to Mr. Dod to give thanks, and bent her self what she could with lifted up
hands to join, speaking softly to her self in her hymning way: and so whilst
they were at Prayer, suddenly her hands falling, and her lips going, she sunk
down in the bed, and departed, leaving all her friends mourning about her.

CHAP. X. Of the sixth help to a godly life, which is the getting and observing
of rules, to guide us in indifferent actions.
THe next means for the advancement of holiness, is, the treasuring up and
observing rules for the directing us what to do in indifferent actions. As for
those things wherein the word of God is plain, either in commanding of them as
good, or forbidding of them as evil, to deliberate what to do in such a case,
argues either a weak head, or a weaker heart, either want of knowledge, or want
of love of God, and we need no more in such cases, but to be conversant in
scripture, that we may know what God would have us to do, and in prayer, that
we may do it.

But for those things that in themselves are indifferent, and the scripture
has determined neither way, it is good to get some general Rules, fince we
have no particular directions in the word of God, some of which I shall
endeavor to set down.

First, When thou art in doubt what to do, walk by this Rule, consider with thy
self, what in thy conscience thou think God-will allow of, and what thou
shall dare to own, as for the matter of it at the day of judgment; and what
thou think thou shall be afraid to own then, be afraid to do now; and
consider whether those excuses, and reasons, and shifts (whereupon thou
neglectest to do what otherwise is a duty) will have weight in them at that
day; do thou in thy Conscience think at the Day of Judgment, it will be a
sufficient excuse for thee to say, such a one provoked me, and therefore I
swore? Do thou think that this will be a sufficient excuse for thy sin, that
most did so, or that I should have displeased such a friend, if I had not done
it? I remember it was storied of Ignatius Jordan, whose Life is lately
published, and worth perusal of all Christians, especially Magistrates; though
this story be not in the book, if I mistake not, a servant of the Bishop, who
had always been a loving friend to Mr. Jordan, was drunk, and brought before
him, and he set him in the stocks so many hours as was directed by the
Statutre; and being known whose servant he was, by his Badge and Livery, the
Bishop took it as a high affront to him; and therefore upon a Court day, when
he and his, etc. sat in Court, Mr. Jordan was sent for, and the Bishop began a
long Oration, and told him how much he had been his friend, and how that he
took it as a disgrace, and a high discourtesie from him, that he should set
his servant in the Stocks: Mr. Jordan gravely, piously, and mildly answered; My
Lord, when at the great Day of Judgment, if I had neglected my duty, it shall
be said unto me, I made thee a Magistrate to be a terror to evil doers, and
why did thou bear the Sword in vain, in that thou did not carry thy self as
the Minister of God, to execute wrath upon him that does evil? Such a day, such
a one was brought before you drunk, why did you not execute the Law upon him?
My Lord, Do you think it will be a sufficient answer for me to say, that he
was the Bishops servant, who had done me many a courtesy, and therefore I
thought it fit to be more tender of his honor, than of thine? Do you think
that God would take this answer: If you think he would not, I pray be
satisfied, that I have judged it fit, rather to please God, than man.

It is related also in the book of Martyrs, that the President of St. Julian,
and other, sent to the Angrongians, made enquiry for one dwelling at Angrogne,
and examined him, whether he had not baptized his child at Angrogne, and
wherefore he had so done? The poor simple man answered, that he had baptized
his child at Angrogne, because baptism was there administered, according to
the institution of Christ. Then the President in great rage, commanded him in
the Kings Name, to baptize his child again, or else he should be burnt: The
poor man desired the President, that he might be suffered to make his prayer
to God, before he should make answer thereunto, which after he had done in
the Hall, before all the company there present, he required the President that
he would write and sign the same with his own hand, that he would discharge him
before God at the Day of Judgment of the danger of that offense, if he should
baptize his child again, and that he would take the peril upon him and his:
The President hearing this, was so confounded, that he spoke not one word a
long time after, then he faid in a great fury, Away thou Villain, out of my
sight; and after that he was never called more.

2. The second rule to guide us in indifferent things, is, to think with thy
self, what do I in my conscience think I would wish I had done, when I come to
die, and do likewise; blessed is the man, the remembrance of whose life is
sweet unto him, in the hour of his death; Where is that man that ever repented
on his deathbed, that he had redeemed so much time by prayer and meditation,
etc. that he had forgiven too many injuries, or given too much to the poor? I
question since the world began, whether there can be one instance found of
this kind; therefore do those things that thou art confident shall not be a
grief, nor an offense of heart to thee, when thou shall come to breath out thy
last breath.

3. When thou stand'st in doubt of two things, which to do, and the Scale hangs
even, then consider which of these two the Saints would like, if they knew what
thou did, and do likewise, for we should do our duties of holiness before God
with that reverence, etc. as if all the world beheld us; and do what we do in
matters of the world, considering that God beholds us.

4. Do that, which if thou were to make a description of a Saint, you would put
into his Character: As thus; Suppose there were a Sermon preached at such a
woman's Funeral, and the Minister (when he came to speak of the deceased person)
should say, She was a woman, when she was dressing her self so exceeding
curious, that she would not have a pin nor hair awry, and she went very rich
and fashionable, would any one take this as any part of her praise? would they
not rather think, this argued her to be a Saint, that when she was making of
her ready, she was so busied about dressing of her soul, that she neither
cared what, nor how she went, as to her clothes: So if there were no place of
Scripture for family duties, yet this I think will carry it to any considering
Christian, that this is not a speech that agrees with it self, such a man is a
very holy precious Christian; for he will never have any family duties, never
prayed with his Wife, nor never instructed his family, does not this speech
contradict it self? So for a Magistrate, who would ever think this to be his
Character? that he was for matters of Religion like Gallio, never cared for
those things, so that men lived peaceably, as to the Commonwealth, nothing
regarding, whether they profaned the Sabbath, or blasphemed God, or committed
never such gross idolatry.

5. If thou can find an example of those whom the Scripture canonizeth for
Saints, to direct thee of that wherein thou doubtest, and their example be
rightly circumstantiated, and commended, that will serve to decide the
controversy; but if thou can find no example, then consider what thou
think in thy conscience such a Saint would have done, had they been in thy
stead, and especially what thou think Christ would have done in thy case;
for we having such honorable thoughts of the Saints, and especially of
Christ, whatsoever our consciences think to be evil, we should never think
they would have done, and our thinking that they would not have done it, it
strongly argues, that our consciences judge it to be evil, and then by
consequence we sin if we do it, for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin.

6. Whatsoever thou commendest in others, do likewise; whatsoever thou
condemnest, do not; for though it be no sure rule to judge of actions by, that
that is certainly evil in it self, which I condemn in another, for my
condemning of it, makes it not evil in it self, but makes it so to me, if I do
it; nay, it makes me not only guilty, but inexcusable; that of the Apostle is
clear in this case, Romans 2.1. Wherefore thou art inexcusable, O man, that
judge, for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self; for thou
that judge do the same things: It may be, that which thou do condemn
him for, is no sin, or if it be, yet he might not know it to be so, and so
might sin out of ignorance; but thou art inexcusable, for it can be no sin of
ignorance in thee, for thy condemning it in another, manifestly shows that
thou think it to be evil.

7. Consider, whether thou can beg a blessing of God upon thy endeavors in
such a matter, so that whatsoever thou dare not ask Gods blessing upon, do
not do, for it will be unsanctified to thee, since all things are sanctified
by the word and prayer.

CHAP. XI. The seventh direction, for the attaining of the Power of Godliness,
viz. the choice of some grace, wherein we desire to be most eminent in, and
several rules to direct our choice.
IT is a very good way for the attaining of the perfection of Holiness, to
choose some grace from among others, wherein thou desire to attain the
greatest eminencies, and most to exercise thy self in; not but that thou
ought to attain eminent degrees of every grace: But as Ministers endeavor
to get all manner of learning, as to be skilful in language, Church history,
in all the Arts and Sciences, to read Philosophers, School Divines, Casuists,
Commentators, etc. yet generally there is one or other of these, wherein they
endeavor after greatest eminency; and their greatest endeavor should be, to
attain a clear and full understanding of the Word of God: And we read of the
Saints in Scripture, though they neglected the practice of no grace, yet they
were generally most eminent in some one; as Abraham in Faith, Moses in
Meekness, Job in Patience, and Elias in Zeal. Now the rules to guide thee in
the choice of that grace, that thou should most strive for eminency in, are
these.

1. Choose that grace which is of most universal and special use, as Faith,
Humility, Meekness, etc. for though some other grace should be more excellent
in it self, yet that which is of more universal and continual use; will be
better in that respect for thee; as Patience is an excellent grace, but the
especial use of it is in adversity, and in times of affliction, which are not
always, for in times of comforts, and abundance, there is little use of
patience, but always of humility; we must be humble in afflictions, and
humble in comforts, for we must rejoice with trembling: Sugar is more
excellent and sweet than Salt, but we have more continual need of Salt than of
Sugar, and generally spend more of the one, than of the other.

2. Choose that grace which is most suitable unto thy calling: Art thou a
Magistrate, a Minister, a Tradesman? There are several graces which are most
suitable to these several employments; distributive justice more suitable to a
Magistrate; commutative justice to a tradesman; spiritual charity to a
Minister, instructing, reproving, comforting, and exhorting those that are
under his charge.

3. Choose that grace that is most suitable to thy relations: Art thou a Virgin,
Widow, or married, a Parent, or a Child, or a servant? These several
relations do require several graces, as an humble obedience and humility, for
servants and children, and those that are under government, a prudent, keeping
authority over children, for Parents.

4. Consider what is thy Master sin, and choose especially the contrary virtue;
as if thy Masters sin be covetousness, practice liberality; if it be pride,
practice abjection, and abasing of thy self, and humble familiarity with thy
inferiors, and with the poorest.

5. Consider to what temptations thy condition of life, thy employments, the
place wherein, and the persons with whom thou live, do incline thee. Abraham
b^ing to leave his Fathers house, and his Kindred, to leave all, and wholly to
depend upon the providence, directions, and especial commands of God, was most
eminent in the grace of Faith, which was most suitable to those temptations, to
which he was most incident, by reason of that his condition of life: Moses
having to do with a stiff-neck'd, and perverse people, who by their continual
obstinacy and rebellions, would often provoke him to anger and impatience, was
most eminent in meekness. Elias living in times of so great idolatry, and
general Apostasy, was most eminent in zeal. Solomon (having a great people to
judge, and he being but young, about twelve years of age) desired especially
to be eminent in wisdom.

Now, as I said before, my meaning is not, that the choice of any of these
graces should be with the neglect of others, but as in embroyderies, there are
diverse colors and materials, purple, blue, and Scarlet, Silk, Gold, and
Pearls, etc. but the ground is but one; so this one grace which thou chusest,
must be imbroidered with all other graces and duties. Now where two or three,
or more of these rules do concur, that grace is to be chose; the more rules
concur in your choice of any grace, the better; if it might be, it were best,
that all these might agree in the grace that you most desire to exercise, and
excel in.

CHAP. XII. The eighth and ninth Directions for the attaining the power of
godliness, viz. We ought not without just cause to leave off any duty, before
that effect be wrought for which we use it; as also concerning frequent
examination.
IT is an excellent practice not to leave any Duty without just cause, until
we have attained to that for which end we did begin the Duty, as for
example, if we go to confess our sins before God, we should not leave off
until we find our hearts affected with the sinfulness of sin, with an hatred
and detestation of it, and an abhorring of our selves for it; so if we set our
selves to praise God, we should not leave off meditating of the excellency,
mercy, loving kindness of God, and speaking good of his Name, until our
hearts are wrought up to an holy admiring of him.

For in this case, it fares as it does with one that is rolling a stone up to
the top of an hill, if he leaves off before he has brought it to the top, and
let it go, his labor is utterly lost, and the stone rowls back again as at
the first, but if he brings it to the top, there it rests, and returns not
whence it came: so if when thou prayest, thou do not bring thy self to that
frame of spirit, to which thou should be wrought, thou will fall back to
the same frame and temper of spirit, as thou had when thou did begin to
Pray.

It was reported of Mr. Bradford as I remember, that this was his practice. And
indeed I have heard of one, who at his first Conversion, had assurance, called,
and sealed the same day, and it was thus.

One being at a Sermon where the excellency, sweetness, and everlasting profit
of the love, and favor of God was set forth, and the Minister did very much
press every one to get assurance of his interest in Gods love; This Saint was
converted by that Sermon, and being wonderfully affected and enflamed with a
desire of knowing God to be his God, resolved to set upon the duty of prayer,
and resolved not to rise from his knees, until he obtained; and through his
importunity and wrestling with God, did prevail, and lived holily, and
comfortably ever after.

This story I commend not to others as a President, nor dare I absolutely
condemn it in him neither, though I am much inclined so to do, and to judge it
a rash resolution; but since the extraordinary motions of Gods spirit are not
to be judged or limited as well as not to be made a rule for others, I dare
not censure it in that particular; only I wish that every one of us were more
resolute, and importunate in and for the things of God; and that we would not
be so easily denied, when we beg spiritual mercies from the Lord, for if we
will be denied, God will deny us, and if we will not be denied, God will not
deny us: that which makes us generally not to be importunate, and give God no
rest, is, either our undervaluing of the spiritual mercy we beg, or our hard
thoughts of God, judging him not to be willing to bestow them, both which
(considering the abundance of mercy and love which God has shown us) do
wonderfully provoke him, and indeed would do so with us, for any one desiring
some Jewel of inestimable price, if we should plainly perceive he had a low and
base esteem of it, we should upon that very account deny him, so also if a
friend, one upon whom we have bestowed abundance of favors, yet when he comes
to us for some curtesy, we should fully understand that he thought all our
expressions of love to him to be but counterfeit, and that notwithstanding all
our protestations of love, we did not mean what we professed, would not this
wonderfully exasperate us? yet notwithstanding there are some cases wherein we
must leave off our duty before we find our Hearts wrought to that frame,
wherein they are suitable to the matter of that duty: if you shall ask what
those just causes are,

First, Ministers praying in the congregation, since the main of their
business, respects others at that time, and not themselves, and every thing
they do ought to be done as may be most for the edification of those to whom
they are sent, therefore though as for the fervency of their prayers, they
ought to act to the utmost, that their hearts may be brought to that spiritual
frame which is suitable to the duty they perform, yet as for their continuing
the duty, it ought not to be such as might justle out other Ordinances, or
hinder others edification: as for example, if a Minister should in his prayer
before Sermon, and in that passage wherein he makes confession of sin (because
his heart is not wrought to an humble frame) should continue so long that it
should take up all or most of the time allotted for his Sermon, that were
justling out one ordinance with another, and minding himself more than the
Congregation: this also holds in Family duties, and in all others wherein one
is a public Minister, wherein we are to suite our selves for the remedying of
their wants rather than our own.

Secondly, As for secret and closet Duty, yet even there also we are not to
continue so long, as to neglect necessary Family duties, which concern either
their temporal or spiritual good, or any other employment that is incumbent
upon us.

Thirdly, And least this should be a snare to any, I do not mean that one
sins, if one leaves off a duty before we have a sense of that frame of heart
wrought in us, that is suitable to the duty, for we may have such a frame of
heart, and not be sensible of it: So that if you desire and endeavor to get
that frame, and mourn under the sense of the want of it, when after much
fervency and wrestling with God, you prevail not, God will not lay it to your
charge as a sin; nay, further, it argues, that you have that grace that you so
earnestly desire, and mourn for the want of, for fervent desires after any
grace, are either actings, or signs of that grace, or both.

4. Nor do I mean, that as soon as ones heart is in such a frame, one should
leave off; nay, but rather should continue for a while, if just occasions
hinder not; nay^ indeed we should have a suitable frame of heart, before we
begin the duty; and that which is most to be wished, is, that all our duties
should come from our hearts, or if that be not, that they should go to our
hearts; as thus, that we should have a broken frame of heart, before we begin
our confession, and that if it might be, that all our praises should be flames
ascending from a heart already kindled with the love of God.

The next great help to a godly life, is frequent examination. This frequent
examination may be made several ways.

1. We are to examine our state and condition, as to the work of grace in us,
as the Apostle bids us, try our selves, etc. 2 Cor. 1.5. yet though this kind
of examination be of singular use to awaken us, and stir us up to sincerity
and repentance, in case we find our selves not to be in the Faith; as also
of more holiness, by way of joy and thankfulness, in case we find that we
have an interest in God; yet this is not that which is to be so frequent as
other kinds of examination; but having had assurance from Scripture grounds,
upon due and strict examination, we ought not easily to question our
condition, for Christ does not take it well for us always to be questioning
his love; for as when our Savior asked Peter three times, Simon, son of Jonas,
love thou me? Peter was grieved; so we do but grieve the Spirit of Christ,
when the Spirit has witnessed with our spirits, that we are the sons of God,
and Christ has manifested his love to us; and yet upon every slight occasion
we say, Lord Jesus, love thou me?

2. The second kind of examination, as to our inward frame of heart, is, to
examine the growth of our graces, which is profitably, at least, to be done
once every year; as tradesmen cast up their accounts, and make up their books
yearly, that they may see what loosers, or gainers they are at the years end;
and to this purpose, it is profitable to keep a Diary, that thereby thou may
be able to cast up thy account, for it is impossible otherwise to remember the
passages of a whole year. But indeed it is convenient, that the examination of
the growth of our grace, should be as often as we go to the Lords Supper; for
to do it daily, is very inconvenient, nor indeed can we perceive whether we
are grown or no: As when we look upon the shad^w, on a Sun Dial, except we
stay some considerable while, though it has moved, the distance is so small,
it cannot be perceived; but if we stay a quarter of an hour, we may easily
perceive that it has moved: So from Sacrament to Sacrament, is a considerable
distance, but yearly examination, concerning this matter, is as long a distance
as may be allowed, if it be not too much.

3. But the main thing here intended, is, to examine our actions; and there are
three particulars in that.

1. We must consider in the morning what we have to do that day, and what
temptations are incident to our several actions and employments, and how we
may manage all our businesses and affairs, most for the glory of God, the
edification of our brethren, and the salvation of our own souls: As for the
considering how to manage our employments most prudently for our temporal
lawful advantage, is a duty in its season, being rightly qualified: but it is a
sin, when thoughts of that nature steal away any portion of that time, which
we set apart for the immediate service of God. By this daily morning
pre-examination, we may be in a competent measure fore-armed, and provided
for all ordinary fore-known business.

2. But there are many actions and businesses that are occasional, that one
could not foresee at any considerable distance, yet even those we should
pre-examine, and fore-think what we are to do, before we do it: And as
Politicians do nothing, without considering how far it may be for their
interest, and how far not; so we should think, when any one comes to speak with
us, etc. what advantages Satan may get, and how far that action may be
improved to the glory of God, and then do as Nehemiah did, make thy prayers to
the God of heaven to direct thee to do what thou have to do; for if thou do
any thing without this examination, four great inconveniences come of it.

1. You will fall into many sins, which you might have easily seen, and avoided.

2. Though thou do that which is right, or do not fall into those sins
that are incident to such actions, yet it is little thanks to thee, no more
than it is to a sleeping Watchman, that the City is not taken.

3. Many opportunities of doing good, pals by thee unobserved.

4. For want of this watchfulness and consideration, (which is all one) or at
least includes examination, we do not what we do in the service of God, with
an actual intention of honoring of him, and an actual intention of honoring
God, does much add to the holiness of the action, and Gods acceptance of it.

3. Another kind of examination, should be post-examination, that is, to
consider and examine our actions, discourses, duties, etc. after they are
ended; for many passages will not seem to be sinful, or not so sinful, when we
look upon them before our doing of them, as they will do after; for the
temptations of pleasure, profit, etc. which entice us to the committing of a
sin, do either altogether cease, or very much abate of their vigor, when the
sin is committed; so that thou will by post-examination discover many sins,
which by pre-examination thou could not.

What was one of the great causes of the wickedness of the Jews, but that no
man considered with himself, and said, what have I done, Jer. 8.6. So that
there be three questions, What have I to do? that is pre-examination: What do
I? that is co-examination; and what have I done? that is post-examination. The
first is to be performed in the morning: The second, when any unforeseen
employment, or business comes upon us, and the last to be done at night, when
we take a review of all the passages of the day.

CHAP. XIII. The tenth help for the attainment and progress in holiness, which
is the choice of a faithful prudent director in the things of God.
IT is evident that only in the things of God we are negligent, in such things
we account that a burden and disgrace, which we do not so account in any thing
else; nay we pray, and wait and pay for that in the matters of the world,
which in the things of God, though we be entreated to receive freely, we
refuse, and if forced by any Church constitution, we call it imposing and
tyranny; I shall instance in some few things.

For our Children we seek out, the ablest, most experienced, and strictest
Schoolmasters, so they be mild withal, and such as are most careful and
frequent in hearing, examining, and directing our Children, we like them best:
we are at great charges for their education, and indeed, one can hardly be
prodigal in that case, always provided, it be not in teaching of them
vanities, as in dancing, traveling to see fashions, etc. and if in many years,
they attain to exactness in the tongues, and arts, we think their time, and
our money well bestowed, and make much of their Schoolmasters, and Tutors, and
they deserve it; and their whole time they spend in the attainment of these
things; but as for the matters of God, we think we can attain it, without any
Tutor to direct us in them, without spending any considerable time, attention,
or money therein: as if our souls only were the things that we need not care
for; or could without any help, furnish with piety and knowledge.

Physicians and Lawyers, how are their Houses and Chambers frequented, but for
Ministers, we think it enough, if we hear them preach without desiring any
personal directions or instructions in spiritual matters: Which are
notwithstanding as necessary and profitable for our progress in holiness, as
the former are in matters of this World: And the Papists do press auricular
confession, and blind obedience to all the commands of their Priests, and so
have mixed the advantages that we ought to endeavor to have from Ministers,
with so many superstitions, and so much will worship; that it has made people
neglect those benefits, that they may reap that way; and indeed peoples
unwillingness to give that due honor, and subjection, that they owe to
Ministers, makes them so much decry the superstitions of Popery, that they
neglect their own duty.

When any one goes to learn arts or Languages, he that teaches them, first,
by speaking with them, understands how far they have proceeded, and by that
is enabled to give them suitable directions, he directs them what lessons and
books they shall read, and takes a strict and frequent account of them, and
they are very exact in following their method and directions, so that though
other books or lessons may seem more pleasing to them, yet they deny
themselves, as for Example, in Music, there is a method in teaching, First,
the plain notes, and longer time, after that, shorter time, and so giving them
lessons as they are capable of them: but those that rather choose the
pleasantest than the best way, will rather learn some tunes they know, than to
go on methodically, and so never attain any perfection in the Art; so in
Arithmetic, Mathematics, if the directions of the Tutor be not followed,
they will find far more difficulty and uncertainty: Doubtless there are many
inconveniences that come for want of directions in the matters of knowledge and
practice of Religion; some from open profaneness and ignorance, fall upon the
study and disputes of the highest points of Divinity at first, and before they
are in any measure grounded in the Fundamentals of Religion, they fall upon
points that are so knotty, that Ministers of the greatest abilities are not
able to untye; and new beginners being received with such doubtful and
difficult disputations, it is no marvel, that they turn either Athiests, or
Heretics: It is true, that those that are grounded and established Christians,
do less want, but, I suppose, are more desirous of further directions and
instructions in the matters of God: but surely for beginners, there is a kind
of necessity, or great convenience this way; for Sermons are somewhat too
general, and cannot meet with the personal particular cases of every one, but
this way will; but pride, ignorance; and profaneness, makes people loath to
come to the light, because their deeds are evil; and Ministers have lost that
honor and authority, that God has, and people ought to give them, and this is
the peoples loss more than theirs; for what care we for honor, or dishonor,
if the work of God might go on as well with the one, as with the other, yet
many cautions ought to be observed concerning this matter.

1. As concerning the person whom we are to choose to be our spiritual tutor,
for great care need to be had whom we choose, especially for grown Christians,
for as for others that are new beginners, those that are of lesser knowledge,
and experience, and prudence, may serve; and by a simile, I shall set down most
of the rules that concern this matter; as those that cannot so much as read,
need not to go to School to the eminentest Scholars, to teach them, but those
of inferior gifts will serve the turn; so those that are very ignorant of the
things of God, may be instructed, until they make a further progress by
private Christians, which that Minister, whom they shall choose for their
Director, shall commend them to.

And this I would also have every one take special care of, what Minister it is
whom they choose for their Tutor, let him be one of good report, of great
prudence, experience, and leisure, if it may be, and one that is ready to teach
and to instruct. Now as it was with Moses, it must be with Ministers, they are
to choose out of their Congregation, some that are so qualified, viz. prudent,
experienced Christians, etc. to whom they are to commit the more ignorant sort,
that they might hear cases of lesser importance, and instruct Christians of
weaker abilities, and those cases that are of greater weight and difficulty,
are to be decided by themselves: and those Elders, like Ushers, are to fit them
for the Ministers further instruction of them: So that as when Scholars come to
a School, if the Schoolmaster finds them not to have learned so far, as to
fit them for those Forms, that are under his immediate teaching, he refers
them to the teaching of his Usher, till they be made fit for himself: So a
Minister should have diverse, to whom he may commend those who have made little
progress in the knowledge of spiritual truths, who may build them up, until
they be made fit for himself; for if all should be under his immediate
inspection, the burden would be too great for him to bear, as Jethro told
Moses; and as after some few years pupillage, and subjection to a Tutor at the
Universities, Students are left to study by themselves, and be Tutors to
others; so private Christians should be so long instructed, until they be
made fit to teach others, and then (save in some weighty cases, and
difficulties) they need not further directions from man.

2. It is to be cautioned, that I do not mean, that any one should be totally
subject to the advice of the Minister whom they choose, but in any thing wherein
they do but doubt of the sinfulness of it, they are to enquire of other
Ministers.

3. Nor do I intend, that in every slight occasion, that they with ordinary
diligence may satisfy themselves in, that they should go to be resolved of
the Minister; as we do not use to go to the Physician for a scratch with a pin,
or every inconsiderable matter, but what we can cure our selves, or is of
little consequence, we trouble them not with.

4 Nor do I think a Minister is bound to receive all that come to him upon this
account, for he is to receive no more than he can well instruct, and direct
this way; and so also, that he may not be hindered in the public offices of
his Ministry.

5. That every one is rather to choose his own Pastor, if he be rightly
qualified, than another; and if he should not be in respect of discretion,
and experience, etc. fit to be chose for a director, yet we are not therefore
to leave his Ministry.

I know people will be ready to say, What, do you make children of us, to put
us to school?

I answer. 1. Why do you by putting odious terms and expressions upon it, make
it hateful, and then dislike it, for the terms you your self have put upon it?
Why may you not as well say? Why do you endeavor by all your prudence and
industry to bring us to heaven? The question may be better asked in those
terms and expressions, than in yours; you call good, evil, and then you hate
it, because you call it so.

2. I do not intend that all should be used as children, if you call it so,
except you are children in knowledge; and then in some respect, it is necessary
that you should be used as children: If a man will go to learn to write, he
must learn his letters, as a child does; as in Music and all other Arts, the
method is much alike to children, and men; but for those who are already
grounded in Religion, and are knowing Christians, let them be willing to teach
others.

3. Why do not you say thus to Lawyers and Physicians, when they examine you,
concerning your health, or estates? and say, Why do you Catechize us, as if we
were children? It is a sad thing, that people study ways to make the
endeavors of the Ministers odious to them.

4. If a Physician live near you, and should offer that whenever you, or any
of your family were sick, if you would come to him, he would give you his
advice freely; would you say to him, what need you trouble your self with me,
or my family, we can look well enough to our own healths, without troubling of
you?

5. We are far from desiring, or judgeing it fit, that you should be subject
to us, as children are to their Parents or Masters; for we require it at your
hands, that you should search the Scriptures, and try, whether the things that
we preach are according to the Word of God, or no, only let it be done with
meekness, humility, and desire that you may know the truths of God, that you
may practice them; and therefore I will conclude all, with setting down some
plain, graduall propositions, and consider what is said, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

1. All are bound to accept the tender of Ministerial advice and instruction,
not only publicly, but from house to house; for though some think it not
necessary for a Minister to go to every particular person in the Parish, where
God has placed him, yet I know no one but holds it a sin, in any one that
shall slight the private instructions and advice of Ministers, and refuse to
have conference with them, when they shall give them a Christian visit, to
speak with them about the things of God.

2. That it is not enough for them to give the Minister the hearing, and
neither care to remember nor practice his private, as well as public spiritual
directions, that are grounded on the Word of God.

3. Every Christian is bound in doubtful and difficult cases, to seek their
advise, if by their own prayers and considerations, they cannot be satisfied.

4. That they are not lightly to reject their advice, but to observe, and
follow it, if they do not in their conscience think that it is in the least
contrary to the Word of God, nor any way prejudicial to any thing but their
laziness, or some carnal respects.

5. I question not but God has made a difference between private Christians
and Ministers, in this case, I mean thus, that one private Christian has not
the same obligation to ask, or follow the advice of another private Christian,
as of the Minister.

I shall offer only these places of Scripture for you to consider of, which I
doubt not (except there be some strong by as of prejudice upon your spirits)
will easily prove this to you, 1 Cor. 16.15.16, I beseech you brethren, (ye
know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that
they have addicted themselves unto the Ministry of the Saints) that ye submit
your selves unto such, and to every one that helps with us, and labors,
Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it
with joy, and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you. God h^th given
to us the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18.

These places are enough for sober Christians; and I am confident, that such
need not be pressed to come to Ministers for advice and direction, if they may
have but leave and opportunity, they desire no more: They are so sensible of
the great advantage that is to be had this way, that they will not say, I pray
prove it to me, that I am bound to take a Ministers advice, no more than a man
that is dangerously sick, will say, prove it to me, that I am bound to send for
a Physician; as except you can prove it to be a sin, the sick man will send
for a Physician; so though it could not be proved an absolute duty, if
apparently it be no sin, an humble Saint (that desires to use all profitable
means for soul advantage) will joyfully make use of this.

CHAP. XIV. The eleventh help for the perfecting of Holiness, viz. keeping of a
Diary.
1. IT is certain, that it is our duty, not only to be affected with present
mercies, at the very time of Gods bestowing of them, but to keep them in
remembrance, for so David did, Psalm 103.2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. Hence it is, that the Saints of old have given
names to places, to their children, to continue the memory of mercies they
received: So we read, 1 Samuel 7.12. that Samuel named the place Eben-ezar, to
keep in memory an outward deliverance, so in respect of soul mercies, David can
tell you what God has done for his soul, Psalm 66.16. So Paul can tell you of
the great Raptures he had twelve years before, 2 Cor. 12.

2. There is as little doubt but we ought to remember sins; so David, My sin is
ever before me, Psalm 51.3. Deuteronomy. 9.7. remember, and forget not, how thou
provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath, in the Wilderness.

3. It is a Christians duty also, especially when he has signally prayed for
any mercy, to keep in memory that he has done so, or else when the mercy
comes, it will neither be so sweet, (since he cannot receive it as an answer
of prayers, if he have forgot that he prayed for it) nor will he be
encouraged, upon the account of Gods answering his prayer, to pray with more
confidence afterward, nor yet give God the glory due to his mercies, in any
measure, as he ought to do, since the giving of a mercy, as an answer of
prayer, does exceedingly exalt the mercy, and in some cases, is greater than
the mercy it self, as in temporal blessings.

4. It is very profitable; nay, I may say, it is a necessary duty, for every
Christian to examine the growth of his graces, it is a duty that God commands,
2 Peter 3.18. to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

5. It is a necessary duty for us to keep the vows and promises that we make
to God, exactly in our remembrance; nay, and indeed, except we keep them
verbatim, they will be very great snares unto us; for to many vows, there are
many circumstantial expressions and cautions to be had, of which I have largely
spoken in my Treatise of Meditation, Chapter the tenth.

6. It is also of great advantage, to know our sins before they come to be
customary, or of any long standing, to know them, when they are but a day old;
which I have also more largely shown (and am not willing to repeat) in my
Treatise entitled, (Directions for Christian Perfection) in the Chapter, where
the benefits and directions for Diurnal examination are set down.

All these things being duly considered, it being without controversy, that
all these forenamed duties, are necessary for every one that owns the name of
Christian: Now the only question is, what is the best expedient to help us to
remember our sins? Gods other mercies, and in particular his signal answers of
prayers, our vows, etc. Now I am confident, there is no expedient comparable
to this, viz. keeping a Diary: And whosoever, through laziness, or undervaluing
the performance of these duties abovenamed effectually, I say, if upon that
account any do neglect to keep a Diary, he highly sins against God, and his
own soul, because he neglects that spiritual profit that he might reap
thereby. I will set down some other benefits, and motives, that may persuade
you to keep a Diary.

1. Thy very writing down all the Spiritual passages of the day, will much
affect thee, and necessitate you particularly to remember them, and so put you
upon that profitable duty of Diurnal examination, though it is true, there is
much more required to perform that duty solemnly, than a bare writing down what
we have done that day.

2. In times of desertion, it will be of great advantage, since we may have
recourse to our songs in the night, and to all our spiritual experiences, and
those often sealings that God has bestowed on us at Sacraments, since all such
things are to be set down in our Diary.

3. Upon days of Humiliation, to look over our grosser failings, nay, and Gods
mercies also, will serve very much to the melting of our iron, and breaking of
our stony hearts.

4. It is evident, that diverse callings that are exact in their observations,
do keep Diaries of all their proceedings; as Seamen, Travelers, States men,
Physicians, Tradesmen, Merchants, etc. and why should only Christians neglect
that course that is so profitable to others? What Tradesman almost is there,
that does not keep an account of his expenses, and his receipts; and Merchants
keep several kinds of books; nay, diverse of the Heathen have observed this,
though but in civil matters, as I could give you instances, if it were
convenient, in this place.

But I must answer diverse Queries, and diverse Objections, that the way may be
made clear before you.

Quere 1. You will ask, What are the things that we must set down in a Diary?

I answer, I have already mentioned them, though I shall a little more fully
and particularly speak of them; you are to set down,

1. The mercies of God.

2. Your sins.

3. Your special signal prayers for any peculiar mercy; as suppose you have set
a day a part on purpose to seek God, in the behalf of such a relation, that
walks in ways destructive to his own soul, write down, in that day, which you
set a part for this end, the cause and motive of your keeping that day, a day
of Humiliation.

4. If God shall give you an answer of this, or any other like special prayer,
write it down.

5. You are to write down every vow, and promise, that you make unto God, in
this Diary, on that day, when you make it, and the causes and motives of making
such a vow, if you keep a larger Diary.

6. You are to have some mark in your Diary, which you are to join to every
duty, whereby you may know how you perform that duty; whether with special
fervency, and inlargements, or whether in such a way, as nothing is remarkable,
either in respect of excellency, or deficiency.

7. We are to set down in this Diary, the afflictions that God lays on us,
or ours, and our carriage under them; as when God smites a child with
sickness, such a day, and I was exceedingly impatient; or through mercy,
patient under it; and I examined what might be the cause of this chastisement,
and I found it to be such, or such a sin, and set upon reformation of it.

Quere 2. What mercies, and what sins, are to be set down in the Diary? For to
set down all, were endless and impossible, for it is in him we live, and move,
and have our being, every time we speak, breath, move etc. are mercies
wereceive from God; so also for our sins of infirmity, and humane frailty, we
may say of them, as David says, Who knows how often he offends? So also for
afflictions, we are not to set down every light affliction, as if a finger does
but ache a little, or if we fall in the street without any harm, etc. But I
would not be mistaken. I do not say, we are not to take notice of the
lightest affliction, for that were to despise it, and contrary to that command,
Pro. 3.11. for the meaning of those words, is this, that be the affliction
never so great, we are not to dispond, or faint; so be the affliction never so
light, we ought not to despise it. So for sin, none is so small, but you ought
to endeavor against it, and mourn for it, yet it is not to be set down in the
Diary; but those that are grosser sins, as angry words, praying without any
considerable marking what one prays, or reading a Chapter, without diligently
observing what one reads: As for drunkenness, lying, and such abominations, I
do not expect that persons that are guilty of such sins, should keep a Diary:
But under these grosser sins, I do comprehend diverse sins of omission, and
diverse sins of thought, as any Atheistical thought, without resisting of it;
for if it be merely from Satan's injection, they have diverse times less guilt,
than some sins of humane frailty, so for some sins of omission; as for example,
in many cases, if thou hear one swear, and do not reprove him, or see
one that truly wants, and do not relieve him if thou can. So all other
omissions of necessary duties, I do not mean all omissions in duties, but all
omissions of duties; for whenever you pray, or give alms, you do omit, as to
the degree of your intention, to do it to Gods glory; nor is there any act of
holiness whatsoever, wherein we do not more or less sin; so then, a total
omission of any duty, is to be taken notice of, or a partial omission, if the
duty be of any long continuance, and if it be any proportionable part of the
time that is omitted; as for example, in keeping the Sabbath to spend half an
hour of it without Sabbath day thoughts; and so in a day of Humiliation, though
to set down the minimum quod sic, what is the least portion, is very difficult;
but in such cases, the uprightness of the upright will guide them, Pro. 11.3.
Further it is to be considered, that the more perfect and holy any person is,
the more progress he has made in piety; so he is to take notice of his
failings, for that miscarriage which is more than usual, is to be taken notice
of, for that will be more than usual to him, which is but usual to another;
nay, that fervency, attention, and feeling, which is frequent to him in holy
duties, may be eminent and singular to another, whose graces are much weaker;
as we take notice of diverse answers to questions, of the matters of Religion,
as extraordinary in a child of five years old, which are not remarkable in a
grown knowing Christian: So if you ask me what mercies we should take notice
of, I answer, extraordinary mercies, whether it be of extraordinary actings of
graces, or receiving comforts in duties, or other times. Further, we are to be
more particular and exact in the observing of our failings in our Master sin;
as if anger be your Master sin, take strict notice of your failings that way.

But there are some objections I shall answer.

1. I have not time to do this great work.

I answer, It will not take up any considerable time, to keep a profitable
Diary, such an one as may be much better than none.

I know one that writ but a line for a day, from which he has received much
advantage, in which the main passages of his life were set down, as to the
substance of them; for in such a Diary we must use letters for words, and
particular marks for some sins, which being of such common use, we cannot
forget what they mean; as for example, P for prayer, M for meditation, R S for
reading the Scripture, R alone, for reading other books, C for conference, a
littler, to signify our rising, a V for a Vow. If God come in more especially
in acting our graces, or comforts in any duty, as prayer, meditation, reading,
conference, etc. to give this mark -- over the letter that stands for that
duty; as for example, if God comes in much in prayer, draw over the P that
mark, thus, P. If you have had many failings in prayer, then draw that mark
under the letter, thus. P So you may do in all other duties, as meditation,
conference, hearing, over or under, as are your incomes or failings in those
duties which that letter stands for.

But if there be no especial defect or incomes of God in the duty, then let
the letters stand without any marks, either over or under, and when you keep
days of fasting and prayer, then put before the line you set down for the day
F, which signifies a Fast day. I shall give an instance, whereby all this may
be made more plain.

SEPTEMBER.

T. 1. r. 6. P. 6. 7. M. 7. 8. St. 12. C. 1. St. 5. C. 6. W. 2. r. 5. P. 5. 6.
R. V

S. 6. 7. St. 12. C. 2. R. 3. St. 6.

V. to keep a Diary. The meaning is this: Tuesday, being the first day of the
month, I rose at six of the clock, prayed with special incomes from God, half
an hour; (for when 6. and 7. are set down, it signifies half an hour past six,
and so in other figures, when two are set down) meditated while half an hour
past seven, with special incomes from God, either in respect of actings of
graces or comforts, (for the stroke over the letter signifies so much) I
studied while twelve of the clock, came again to my Study at one, and studied
while five, and conferred about matters of God, until six.

Wednesday, being the second day of the month, I rose at five of the clock,
prayed but with much deadness for half an hour, for the stroke under signifies
so much; Read the Scripture, but nothing extraordinary, either for deadness, or
incomes of Gods Spirit; for if there be nothing over or under the letter, it
is to signify so much; studied while twelve, came again to my Study at two,
Read some devotionary book while three, with affection, studied while six, then
made a Vow to keep a Diary.

The meaning and use of the strokes in the Margent, is, that with ones eye one
may quickly see, what vows, what incomes or failings have been in that month;
for at the end of every month, it is convenient to set down, whether one is
increased, or decreased in holiness, or comforts; and as when one makes any
vow, one puts an V in the margent before that day; so also, if one has made
any signal prayer for any mercy, one is to put a P before that day, if one has
received any signal answer of prayer, put an A in the margent, before that day;
and if one has received any signal deliverance out of sin or danger, put a D
in the margent; and if you have kept a day of Fasting and Prayer, put F in the
margent; and so in other things, common prudence will direct.

Thus you see that I have shown you how easy a thing it is to keep a Diary,
and how little time it takes up; yet notwithstanding, I could wish you would
write your Diary somewhat larger; as when your affections are raised in reading
the Scripture, to set down the verse which most affects you; so when you hear a
Sermon, when you come home, to write down those passages that most affect you,
and most concern you: So when you make any vow, to write down what was the
especial occasion of making that vow; so when you find your heart somewhat
dead in duties, to set down what the cause was of that deadness, if you can
find it out, whether it was for want of preparation, or some sin the day
before, which caused God to withdraw himself: So if God comes in with any
special comforts, write down that place of Scripture which was the golden pipe
that conveyed them; for generally, as I have elsewhere said, his comforts are
the kisses of his mouth, that is, something that the mouth of the Lord has
spoken, some passage in the Word of God, brings our comforts. This was that
which quickened David in his afflictions, Psalm 119.50. This is that which
David did especially praise God for, Psa. 56.4. and 10. for this it seems was
that which conveyed to him all his comforts: Or if God does any other way
satisfy thy fears and doubts, as I remember it is related in the life of Mr.
Murcate, that when he was once in great doubts of Gods love toward him, this
was darred into his soul, with a great deal of evidence and power, If I am not
thy father, am I thine enemy? And at another time, upon the like occasion, If I
am not thy father, why do thou follow after me? This is set down, with many
other singular passages, in a Diary he kept, which was found in his Study
after his death. But for all particular directions, it is almost impossible to
set them down, but either God will direct you, if you set to consider what is
to be done in the case, or consult with some experienced friend that keeps a
Diary, only I shall add this, because it concerns most Christians, as Scholars
may set St, to signify studying, because that is the work of their particular
calling; so others, whose particular callings are trades, or Merchandise, etc.
they may set down a great E, to signify Employment, etc.

The next objection is, I have not skill, I know not how to keep a Diary. For
that, I think, I have already in some considerable measure answered, by setting
down several directions, and have also told you, that for other particulars
that may occur, you must have recourse to some experienced Christian; only I
shall add this, that I would have you leave about four leaves at the beginning
of your book you intend for a Diary, each leaf divided into five parts, thus,
and thus super-scribed.

Vows. Prayers. Manifestations and deliverances Answers. Sins. September. 3.
November 6. January 10. March 9. April 2. November 10. December 10. March 11.
April 13. May 7 March 16. February 16. August 8. July 3. June 9

The reason of doing this, which will be very little trouble, since all these
heads do seldom occur, is, that you may speedily find out what vows you have
made, and so know whether you have performed them; what prayers you have made,
and whether they have been answered; what extraordinary manifestations you have
had, like that of Mr. Murcate, or of like nature; and whether you have given
special thanks and praise to God for them; so you may easily see what grosser
failings you have been guilty of, and whether you have particularly humbled
your soul before God for them: As soon as ever you made any vow, prayer, or
received any deliverance, etc. you are to enter the day under the respective
head, and when you have performed the vow, or your prayer be heard, or given
thanks for the mercy, or particularly repented of the sin, you are to draw a
line under the respective day of the month, under that head.

But you will object, by this means all my doings shall be made public to all
the world when I die, which may be very scandalous to Religion, in several
cases, and to make ones graces and comforts known, though after death, may be
an occasion, or act of pride, while we live.

To this I answer: 1. If thy sin be publicly known, thou should do
something to make thy repentance as publicly known, as David did, Psalm 51.
but if it be secret, thou may have a secret mark in thy Diary, to signify
it, which none can know but thy self; and as for Gods manifestations, and
mercies, of that nature toward thee, as answers of prayers, comforts, etc.
thou should not be too willing to conceal them, but willing to make them
known to some of Gods people, Psalm. 66.16. But if thou can write Short hand,
all this is answered; or else, it is probable, God may give thee so long time
before thy death to dispose of matters, as to give thy Diary into the hand of
some Christian friend.

Object. 2 is, Why do you press this as a duty, though not absolutely necessary
to all, yet of great spiritual advantage? How comes it then, that so many
eminent Saints do not, have not kept a Diary?

I answer. 1. Suppose through ignorance they have neglected this duty, will you
therefore conclude, that it is unprofitable to them that know it? Eminent
Saints may live all their lives in a sin of omission and commission; as for
instance, in Poligamy, though our Savior proves it to be a sin from the
beginning, Mat. 19.5, 6. So also for meditation, I suppose it has been very
much neglected amongst Christians, I mean, as to the making of it a solemn
particular duty, and yet solemn meditation is of singular use.

2. How do you know what eminent Saints have done, or what they do? for such
things as these are kept so secret, communicated, it may be, not to the most
bosom friends.

3. Some you say do not keep Diaries, and others do keep Diaries; and I suppose
I shall sufficiently shown you the footsteps of keeping a Diary in the
practices of the Saints in Scripture.

4. Suppose no such thing has been done, does that argue, that it is not
convenient to be done now? Printing has not been many years, shall we
therefore decry it, as not expedient; so the Scripture has not been long
distinguished into verses, nor always into Chapters: Do we rather choose
Bibles not so distinguished, and account such distinctions and divisions
useless, doubtless, though as to Ordinances, we ought not by our humane
prudence to invent any that are new, and not commanded in Scripture; yet as for
the decent orderly mannaging of them, as may be most to edification, Christian
prudence is very useful, and we commend this only upon that account, not as a
thing of absolute necessity, but if any better way can be found for the
performance of those duties mentioned in this Chapter, or a better model for
keeping a Diary, as I doubt not but many may be use them, but in the mean time,
neglect not the using of any, because you cannot have the best.

5. I understand not this question, it is somewhat like a question once
proposed to me, I pressing one of my Parishioners, some years since, to mind
holiness, make it his business, and to spend one hour a day, reading and
praying, etc. and giving more particular directions for the daily time set
apart for Gods service, after by many evasions and excuses he endeavored to
shift off this exhortation, all which, by Gods assistance, I having taken off
and answered, he at last in some discontent asked me, why I should offer to
press him to spend an hour a day in the immediate service of God, etc. Had I
pressed any of the neighbors to it, or did I ever press it to any other before?
Why should he be the first that I should speak to? So it is for you to ask,
Why should I be the first that should keep a Diary? Though, let me tell you,
thou art not the first (as I suppose) of thousands, yet because Scripture is
the soundation of all matters of Piety, therefore I shall show many places
where the year, the month, the day of the month is set down, when such and
such things were done, when the waters abated, and the tops of the mountains
first appeared, when the Ark rested, when the earth was quite dry, the very day
when Moses spoke to the people such and such things, the very month, day, and
year of Solomon's Reign, and from the children of Isreal's coming out of Egypt,
is set down; when the Temple began to be built, and the very day when it was
finished; the very year, and month, and day, when Nebuchadnezzar came up
against Jerusalem, and when the famine began, etc. Genesis 8.4, 5, 13, 14. Exodus
19.1. Deuteronomy. 1.3. 1 Kings 6.1. and 38. 2 Kings 25.1, 3, 8, 2 Kings 25.27. And as
for the Prophet Ezekiel, he has kept a perfect Diary of several times, when
the Word of the Lord came unto him, and diverse other circumstances added also,
besides the year, month, and day, as of place where, and persons with whom he
was, as by these places following, plainly appears, Ezekiel 1.1, 2. Ezekiel. 8.1.
Ezekiel. 20.1. Ezekiel. 24.1. Ezekiel. 26.1. Ezekiel. 29.1.31.1.32.1.40.1.

Why should the Spirit of God write down so particularly the year, the month,
and the day, surely it is for our instruction; there may be some spiritual
advantage got by knowing the very day when the Lord did bestow such or such a
mercy, etc. then only to know that God did bestow it on us, but not know when:
This was not only the practice of Ezekiel, but of other Prophets also; as Jer.
29.1. 2 Hagg. 1.1. Hagg. 2.1, 10, 20. so if you observe the book of Psalms,
there are 99. that are ascribed to David, 74. have his name prefixed, 25. of
them have no name prefixed, yet some of them, the Scripture it self, entitles
David to, Acts 4.29. Heb. 4.7. and Ainsworth supposes the rest of the 25. to
be his also: Now you shall find in those Psalms, as it were, a Diary, of the
most remarkable passages of David's life; nay, you shall find in many of the
Psalms, the very prayers and meditations that David had upon several
particular occasions, as in these Psalms following, 51.52.54.56.57.59.60. so
Psalm. 3. and many others, as by their several titles do appear. How often do
you find mention of Nathan the Prophet, Gad the Seer, Ahijah the Shilonite,
Jaddai, Shemmajah, Iddo, etc. these were private Records, or Diaries, kept by
them, of remarkable passages, that concerned the Church of God; and that
expression, (is not this written in the book of Jasher) Joshua 10.13. and 2 Samuel 1.18. cannot be meant of any particular person, for the same person could
not live from Joshua, till the time of David; but the meaning is, Is it not
written in the book of the Just? for holy men in those times, and since, used
to keep Records, of the special mercies and judgments of God, as Grotius
observes; and the very title of the book of Chronicles, signifies, (the words
of days) Now it is evident, that in civil matters also, not only the Kings of
Israel, and the Kings of Judah did keep Diaries, (for where you read, Is it not
written in the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, and in the book
of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah, those are meant) but even Heathen
Emperors, as Julius Caesar, writ his own Commentary, that is Diary, so the
word signifies. Tyberius Caesar, and Augustus Caesar, had their Diurnos
Commentarios, as Gasper Sanctius in his Prolegomena to the Kings, observes. So
Ahasuerus, and the Kings of Persia, had Secretaries by them continually to
write down all that they did, and said, and all that befell them, as Diodate
upon Hester 2.23. observes.

I have been a little larger in this business, because people think it is a new
thing, and that there are no Scripture proofs at all for it, to prove it
either a profitable, or an ancient practice among the people of God; but
doubtless (as I have said) if there were no spiritual advantage to be got, to
know the particular times of matters, the Scripture would never have been so
punctual, and particularly in setting of them down. But to prosecute this a
little further, do but consider, that whether you keep a Diary or no, God does,
Revel. 20.12. and in his Diary are all your sins, and all your good works set
down; surely if it were possible for us to see it, every minute we should see
something written, either in the black Register of our sins, or in the Records
of our good works; and it would startle us, if an Angel should be by us, and we
should see him write down every idle word, as we speak it, and tell us, this
you must answer for at the day of Judgment, it would make us more watchful;
yet though we cannot see this done, nor read what is written in those books,
yet we may do something toward it, by keeping a Diary of our own, and by
judging and condemning our selves out of our own, we may prevent our being
judged and condemned out of Gods Diary; nor was David ignorant of this truth,
that God does keep several books of Records, (to speak after the manner of men)
some where our sins are written down, Psalm 51.9 for blotting out, supposes
writing down; and other where the members of our bodies are set down, Psalm
139.16.

A third book that David observes that God keeps, is of the afflictions and
tears of his people, of their several wanderings, when they are driven from
place to place; and as for their tears, he bottles them up, and writes them
down, Psalm 56.8. I shall conclude the answer to this objection with this
further argument, or motive, to keep a Diary; you may read of Gods Diary, that
he kept of his own works, for God has set down every day what he did; all
the works of the Creation are set down, in their several respective days, when
they were created; as you may read at large, Genesis 1. Now certain it is, that
this is written for our instruction, and I question not, but for our imitation;
for as Gods reviewing of his works every day, is an excellent president to put
us upon diurnal examination, so his setting down every thing that he did, upon
every one of those six days, is an excellent president to put us upon diurnal
Records of our actions.

Object. 5. To set down what time we spend in holy duties, and the several
incomes of God, as to the actings of graces, and bestowings of comforts, seems
to be an act of pride, and will be subject to puff us up.

I answer. 1. Will not the remembrance of them have the same effect, though
they be not written down in a Diary? And are we not bound to remember them,
to remember our songs in the night, and the days of the right hand of the most
High? nay, are we not bound in some cases to tell others, what God has done
for our souls, Psalm 66.16. In how many places of the Psalms do we read of
David's fervent prayers unto the Lord, and his answering of them? It is
spiritual cowardice to neglect a duty, for fear of the temptations that
accompany it.

2. But I suppose, that the goodness and mercies of God, will rather cause thee
to fear, than to pride thy self, and nothing humbles a soul more, than the
consideration of Gods mercies; therefore if thou should find at any time thy
heart begin to be puffed up, then do but look over thy diary, and remember thy
sins, and the mercies of God will make thy sins out of measure sinful, and by
consequence, make thee more humble; and lay thee lower.

3. Instead of puffing thee up, thy former duties, and Gods former mercies,
will stir thee up to more thankfulness, and more obedience; for when we shall
see in our Diary, that many years ago, Gods comforts, and the actings of his
graces, were so and so, and find them no more now, it will be a shame and a
grief unto us, and it will provoke us to more diligence, and stir up the graces
of God in us; and in case of backsliding, it is of singular use, for we shall
see from whence we are fallen, and what our first works were, that we may do
them.

Object. 6. I can neither write nor read.

I answer, it is a wonderful, and a lamentable thing, and a thing that we have
cause to stay all people that come by, and wish them to stand, and wonder at it
that Christians should be so negligent of the great, incomparable, spiritual
advantages, that are to be got by reading, and yet to neglect to learn; and
the Prophet Isaiah seems to say as much, Chapter 29. the 9. and 12. compared;
for there the Prophet does wish all to stay, and wonder, and cry out, when they
see and consider, that there is such a deep spirit of slumber and sottishness
upon people, that any one should say, (when the Scripture is given into their
hands to read) I cannot, for I never learned to read; and I believe there
scarce can be a better work through England, than this, that all the children,
throughout the whole Nation, should be brought up to reading, writing, and
Catechism, that those Parents that are able, should be compelled so to do, and
those that are not, their children should be taught upon the Parish, or County
charge, therefore there is no other answer to this objection, but that you must
learn to write, but howsoever learn to read. I am confident it were better to
have the use of ones eyes only for reading the Scriptures, and want them in
all other things, than to have the use of your eyes to all other things in the
world, and want them to read Scriptures. It may be some will say, it is an
imprudent thing to set down such particular instances, and directions, for the
keeping of a Diary, as I have done in this Chapter; but when since they may be
profitable, by helping those that know not which way at all to manage this
duty, I am much of that Saints mind, Ignatius Jordan, who used to say, fie
upon this discretion; I mean as he did, when discretion hinders us at all in
the duties of holiness; and indeed, where one man makes use of his discretion
for the furthering, ten do make use of it for the hindering the glory of God.
In cases where there is no sin, and where there be much profit to others, I
think every Christian should say, Let them have the benefit, and me have the
shame: I think generally we do stand too much upon punctilioes of honor, in
such cases as these are. Now I must desire you to remember, if you keep this
Diary, to improve it to the utmost for your spiritual advantage, by observing
what vows you have made, and not kept, or prayers unanswered, that you may
keep the former, and be more fervent in the latter, and often to review your
sins, that you may mourn for them, and so of the rest; for you must know, the
writing of them down, is not the only work you are to do, but serves only as
an help to enable you to do those several particular works that are mentioned
in the beginning of the Chapter.

CHAP. XV. The last help to a godly life, wherein are set down several stories
of Gods Providence, examples of graces, etc.
NOw I shall come to the last of those helps, wherein I shall set down several
signal stories of Gods Providence, the actings of the graces of Gods people,
and Gods manifesting himself unto them, and several others, which I thought to
have digested, and set down under several heads, but considering that many, if
not all the stories, may be made use of severally, and so be referred to
several heads, I thought good rather to set them down as they came to my
memory, little regarding curiosity of method in this, or any other case: I do
acknowledge and bless God for it, that many of them have much affected me, the
Lord make them so to you, and much more abundantly.

I shall begin with an excellent story of Origin, the fame, of whose excellent
learning, and singleness of life, being brought to the ears of Alexander
Severus, the Roman Emperor, he sent for him to come to Rome, and commanded
the Provost of Egypt, to furnish him with all things necessary for his journey:
When this Provost had provided him a Ship, and all things necessary, and beheld
him but simply apparrel'd, he prepared for him diverse garments, in the most
honest and comely sort that Philosophers then used, but Origin would receive no
part thereof, not so much as hose or shoes, but like as he used always to go
from his childe-hood, (that was, in a single garment of cloth, and barefoot)
so went he to Rome; and when at his arrival, there were brought to him a Mule,
and a Chariot to use, which he liked best, he answered, that he was much
less than his Master Christ, who rode but one day in all his life, and that was
on a silly Shee-Asse; and therefore he would not ride, except he were sick,
or decrepid, so as his legs might not serve him to go; and when he was brought
into the presence of the Emperor, and his Mother, the Emperor with most
gentle countenance, embraced him as he kneeled, and enforced him to stand upon
his feet; his Mother also saluted him with the like courtesy, and rejoiced
much to see him. The Emperor beholding his native gravity, and stern
countenance, judged him in his heart to be a reverend personage; then demanded
he of him, what he professed; and when he answered, Verity; the Emperor
asked him, what he meant thereby? It is the Word (quoth he) of the living
God, which is infallible: The Emperor asked, which is the living God, and why
he so called him? Origin answered, that he did put that distinction for a
difference from them, whom men (being long drowned in error) did call their
Gods, whom they confess to have been mortal ones, and to have died; but the God
whom he preached, was ever living and never died, and is the life of all things
that be, like as he was the Creator of them. And when the Emperor had
required him, to declare the unity of God the Creator, he devoutly lifting up
his eyes, after a short meditation, with an incomparable and compendious
eloquence, forthwith opened that mystery, and in such wise, that as well to the
Emperor, and his Mother, as to all the standers by, it seemed they were
brought out of a long sleep, and then began to see things as they were indeed,
and that which before they honored and esteemed, were but vain dreams and
imaginations: The Emperor after a little pause, said to Origin, that he much
marvelled, why men of such great and wonderful knowledge, should honor for
God, a man that was crucified, being but of a poor estate and condition: O
noble Emperor (said Origin) consider what honor the wise Athenians at this
present do to the name and image of Codrus, their last King, for that when they
had wars with their enemies, who had answer made by the Oracle of Apollo, that
if they slew not the King of Athens, they should have the victory; Codrus
hearing thereof, preferring the safeguard of his people before his own life,
took to him the garments of a slave, and bearing upon his shoulder a burden of
sticks, he went to his enemies Camp, and there quarrelling of purpose with
some of them, and in the press, hurting one with his knife, he was by him that
was hurt, stricken through the body, and slain, which being known to the
enemies, they being confused, raised their Camp, and departed; and for this
cause the Athenians have ever since had the name of Codrus in reverence,
worthily, and not without cause. Now then consider, most excellent Prince, how
much more worthily, with what greater reason and bounden duty, ought we, and
all men, to honor Christ, being the Son of God, and God, who not only to
preserve mankind from danger of the Devil, his ancient enemy, but also to
deliver man out of his dark and stinking dungeon of error, being sent by God
the Father, from the highest heavens, willingly took on him the servile garment
of a mortal body, and hiding his Majesty, lived under the visage of poverty,
and finally, not of his enemies immediately, but much more against reason, of
his own chosen people the Jews, unto whom he had extended benefits
innumerable, and after his temporal Nativity, were his natural people and
subjects, he quarrelling with them, by declaring to them their abuses, and
pricking them with condign rebukes, at the last, he was not slain with so
easy a death as Codrus was, but in most cruel fashion was scourged, until no
place in his body was without wounds, and then had long and sharp thorns set
and pressed upon his head, and after long torments and despights, he was
constrained to bear a heavy Cross, whereon afterward, both his hands and feet
were nailed, with long and great nails of iron, and the Cross, with his naked
and bloody body, being lift up on high, was let fall with violence into a
Mortais, that his joints were loosened, and notwithstanding all this torment
and ingratitude, he never grudged, but lifting up his eyes to heaven, he
prayed with a loud voice, saying, Father, forgive them, for they know not what
they do. This was the charity most incomparable of the Son of God, employed for
the Redemption of mankind, who by the transgression of Adam, the first man
that ever was created, was taken prisoner by the devil, that is to say, kept in
the bondage of error and sin, from actual visage of Gods Majesty, until he
were on this wise redeemed, according as it was ordained at the beginning.

At these words of Origin, they that were present, were wonderfully astonished;
and therewith the Emperor with a sturdy countenance said to Origin, You have
wonderfully set forth a lamentable history, but yet notwithstanding therein be
things dark and ambiguous, which require a more plain declaration; for what
makes you bold to affirm, that Jesus, which in this wife was crucified, was
the Son of God, and God, as you have called him? Sir (said Origin) sufficient
testimony, which of all creatures reasonable ought to be believed, and for
most certain proof, to be allowed: What testimony is that, said the Emperor:
Truly, said Origin, it is in diverse things. First, the promise of God, by whom
this world was made; also by his holy Scripture, speaking by the mouths of his
Prophets, as well Hebrews as Greeks, and other, whom ye call, Vates and
Sybillas: Also by the Nativity of Jesus of a pure Virgin, without carnal
company of a man, the most pure and clean form of his living. without sin: his
Doctrine divine and celestial: his miracles most wonderful and innumerable, all
grounded on charity only, without ostentation; his undoubtful and perfect
Resurrection, the third day after he was put to death; his glorious Ascension
up into heaven, in the presence and sight of five hundred persons, which were
virtuous, and of credence; also the gift of the Holy Ghost, in speaking all
manner of languages, and interpreting the Scripture, not only by himself, but
also afterward by his Apostles and Disciples, and given to other, by
imposition of their hands; and all these ordinarily followed, according to the
said promises and Prophecies.

I omit to speak of the confession of Devils, which by Jesus, and his Apostles,
in his Name, were cast out of people which were possessed; the Oracles, and
answers of them, whom ye untruly call gods, do remain in confirming this
testimony.

And when Origin had said all this, he forthwith began there, and disclosed
the answers of Apollo, made at Delphos, affirming Jesus to be God; and
afterward he recited and declared the Prophecies, as well of the Hebrews, as
of the Sybils, and other. Last, the promise of God to the Patriarks, by the
which it manifestly appeared, that Jesus was Christ, and God; and that by his
temporal nativity, he was King of Israel, and that the Jews were his natural
Subjects; which declaration of Origon was so evident and plain, and set forth
with such wonderful eloquence, devotion, and learning, that it persuaded the
Emperor, and diverse others that were present, to embrace the profession of
Christian Faith, and Doctrine; and for that time, the Emperor licensed Origin
to return to Alexandria. And when this Emperor on a time, perceived some to
wonder at the learning of Origin, whereby they were induced to embrace the
Christian Profession: Truly, (quoth he) the humility and charity of the
Christian people, which I have heard of, and do daily behold, does much more
stir me to believe that Christ is God, than his arguments. And another time,
when two Christians contended proudly together; and accused each other for
speaking reproachful words against the Emperor, he called them before him,
and prohibited them to name themselves Christians, saying, Your pride and
malice do declare, that you be not the followers of him whom ye profess;
wherefore, though ye find lack in me, which I will gladly amend, yet will I
not let you, against Justice, reprove him by your acts, whose life and doctrine
you all do affirm to be uncorrupted and without lack.

Thus was this Noble Emperor, and his Mother, with diverse others, by the
learned speech of this man (agreeing with the simplicity and singleness of his
life, void of all pride and pomp, and the humility and charity used in those
days among Christians) induced to embrace Christian profession.

It is storied of a certain Doctor, who seeing a poor beggar, that had his feet
filthy, fowl, and naked, whose clothes were not worth a half penny, and he
saluted him on his sort, God give you good morrow, my friend: The poor man
answered him; Sir, I do not remember that ever I had an evil morrow: The Doctor
said unto him, God give you a good and happy life, wherefore say you that,
quoth the beggar to him, for I was never unhappy? which the Doctor not
understanding, said unto him again, God bless you my friend, I pray you speak
what you mean: Then the poor beggar answered him, Good Mr. Doctor, I shall do
it willingly; You know you bad me good morrow, whereunto I replied, that I had
never any ill morrow; for when I have hunger, I praise God, if it freeze, hail,
snow rain, be it fair or fowl, I give praise to God; though I be poor,
miserable and despised on earth, I give thanks unto God, and therefore I never
had any evil morrow: You did wish unto me also a good and happy life,
whereunto I made you answer, that I was never unhappy, because I have learned
always to resign my self to the will of God, being certain, that all his works
cannot be but very good, by reason whereof, all that happens unto me by his
permission, be it prosperity, adversity, sweet or sower, I receive it, as from
his own hand, with great joy and comfort, and therefore I was never unhappy,
for I never desired any thing but the good pleasure of God; which the poor man
having said, the Doctor answered, but what would you say, if God damn you: If
God would damn me, said the poor man, verily I have two arms to embrace him,
viz. of faith and love, by which I would embrace him in such sort, that he
should be constrained to descend with me to hell, and I had rather, without
comparison, be in hell with God, than without him in Paradise. The Doctor
learned in this communication, that a true resignation, accompanied with
profound humility of heart, is the shortest way to attain unto the love of God.
After that, he asked of him from whence he came, unto whom he made answer,
that God had sent him: The Doctor enquired yet of him, where he had found God?
I found him (quoth he) so soon as I had renounced all creatures, and my self:
And where did thou leave him, replied the Doctor: I left him, answered the
poor man, with the pure and clean of heart, and amongst men of good will: But
who art thou, my friend, quoth the Doctor unto him? The poor man made him
anlwer, that he was a King: and he asking him, where his Kingdom was: It is
(quoth he) in my soul, for I can so well rule and govern my senses, as well
outward as inward, that all my affections and passions do obey grace, which
Kingdom is without doubt more excellent than all the Kingdoms of this world.
Moreover, the foresaid Doctor demanded of him, who it was that had brought him
into so great perfection? It was silence, answered the poor man, and my high
and lofty meditations, and the union which I had with God; I could take no
repose nor comfort in any creature of the world, by means whereof I found out
my God, who will comfort me world without end.

I have sometimes considered the great prudence of Amphilochius, Bishop of
Iconium, and the great success that God gave to it; for he having formerly
delivered a Petition to Theodotius, for the calling in of his Edicts, whereby
he gave leave to the arrians publicly to preach, he took this way to
accomplish that design; Theodotius having made Arcadius his Son Caesar, and
co-Emperour with him; as diverse of the Roman Emperors did, establish their
Successors with equal honor and power with themselves, during their lives;
diverse Bishops, and other Ministers, came to show their respects, and to salute
Theodotius and Arcadius, the new Emperor, with whom Amphilochius came also, a
man of great piety; but for gifts and other excellencies of small account, all
the rest of the Bishops having shown their several respects to Theodotius and
Arcadius, Amphilochius only saluted Theodotius, but took no notice of his Son
Arcadius, who sat there in all his Robes of Majesty, and received equal honor
of all others. Theodotius supposing that he had forgot himself, told him, that
his Son was made Emperor with him, and so imminded him of his duty.
Amphilochius, upon Theodotius his speech, went to Arcadius, and stroaking him
upon the head, said, it is a very pretty hopeful boy: Theodotius being
wonderfully incensed with this contemptible carriage, in a great deal of rage
commanded him to be carried away to prison, when he was gone a little way, he
turned back, and spoke thus to Theodotius: Are you thus incensed, because I do
not give the same honor to your Son, whom you have made equal to your self, by
your Edicts? And do you think that God will be will pleased with you, that
suffer the Arrians so to dishonor Christ, whom God has exalted far above all
heavens, and given him a name above all names, that at the name of Jesus every
knee shall bow, and has set him on his right hand, and will, that all men
shall honor the Son, as they honor the Father: Upon this Theodotius calls
back Amphilochius, and receives him into favor, calls in his Edicts, that
gave liberty to the Arrians. Thus God honors them that honor Christ.

A Christian Matron, of excellent parts and piety, languishing long under the
pressure of hideous temptations, woefully at length yielded to despair, and often
times attempted the destruction of her self, and after often and curious
seeking occasion for that bloody fact, at last getting upon a rock that hung
over into the Sea, putting off her apparel, she threw her self headlong into
the same, but receiving no hurt by her fall, she was there miraculoussy
preserved, for the space of two hours, laboring all that while industriously
to drown her self, after which time, being found, and with much difficulty
drawn forth, and recovered, she did yet conflict with that extremest desperate
horror, almost a whole year after. But at length, by Gods Providence,
listening on a time, (though very unwillingly at first) to her Husband, reading
that Text, Isaiah 57.15. Thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth
Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones; by little and little, abundance
of spiritual comfort flowed into her heart, in which condition she continued
many years after, even until her death, which fell out, Anno Christi, 1595
Bolton. Mrs. Katherine Brettergh, upon her deathbed, was assaulted with most
grievous temptations, which made her cry out, that a roaring wilderness of Woe
was within her, that her sins had made her a prey to Satan, and wished that
she had never been born, or that she had been made any other creature rather
than a woman, crying, Woe, woe, woe, etc. a weak, a woeful, a wretched, a forsaken
woman; but at length, by Gods wonderful mercy, she recovered such comfort,
that in the ravishments of spirit; she cried out, O Lord Jesus, do thou
pray for me? O blessed and sweet Savior, how wonderful! how wonderful: how
wonderful are thy mercies? O! thy love is unspeakable, that have dealt so
graciously with me. O Lord my God, blessed be thy name for evermore, which
have showed me the path of life: Thou did, O Lord, hide thy face from me
for a little season, but with everlasting mercy thou have compassion on me;
and now blessed Lord, thy comfortable presence is come, yea, thou art come to
thy handmaid, with fullness of joys, and abundance of consolations: O the
joys, the joys, the joys, that I feel in my soul: Oh they be wonderful! they
be wonderful! they be wonderful! O Lord, I feel thy mercy, and I am assured
of thy love, and so certain am I of thy love, as thou art the God of truth,
even so sure do I know my self to be thine, and this my soul knows right
well; O blessed be the Lord! O blessed be the Lord! that has thus comforted
me: O the joy! the joy, the delight some joy that I feel: O! praise the Lord
for his mercies, and for this joy which my soul feels full well, praise his
Name for evermore.

Mr. Peacock, a blessed servant of God, being in horror of conscience,
recounting some smaller sins, burst out into these words, And for these now
(says he) I feel an hell in my conscience; and afterward groaning most
pitteously, he cried out, O me pitteous wretch! Oh! mine heart is miserable!
Oh! oh miserable and woeful! the burden of my sin lies so heavy upon me, I
doubt it will break my heart: Oh how woeful and miserable is my state, that thus
must converse with Hell Hounds! being asked whether he would pray; he
answered, I cannot: Then they said Let us pray for you: Take not (replied he)
the Name of God in vain, by praying for a Reprobate. But after a while, this
tempest of temptation being over: Truly (said he) my heart and foul has been
far led, and deeply troubled with temptations, and many inconsiderate speeches
have flowed from me in the same, for which I humbly and heartily ask mercy of
God: I now find that the Sea is not more full of water, nor the Sun of light,
than the Lord of mercy; yea, his mercies are ten thousand times more: What
great cause have I to magnify the goodness of God, that has humbled, nay,
rather exalted such a wretched miscreant, and of so base a condition, to an
estate so glorious and stately? the Lord has honored me with his goodness, I
am sure he has provided a glorious Kingdom for me, the joy that I feel in my
heart is incredible. Bolton.

In the Marian Persecution, there was one Mr. Samuel, a godly Minister,
convented before Bishop Bonner, who committed him to Prison, and there chained
him up to a Post, in such sort, that standing on tip-toes, he was fain to bear
up all the weight of his body in that manner, to his intolerable pain;
besides, he allowed him but three morsels of bread, and three spoonfuls of
water a day, so that he was extremely tormented with hunger, and thirst, and
had his body so miserably dried up, that he would fain have drunk his own
water, but could not make one drop: But after that he had continued in this
miserable case three days, he fell asleep, and one clad all in white, seemed
to stand before him, telling him, that from thenceforth he should neither
hunger nor thirst any more, which also came to pass, though he was not burnt
till many days after.

One Mr. Laremouth, alias Williamson, Chaplain to the Lady Anne of Cleve, a
Scotch man, being cast into prison for the Truths sake; as he was on a time
meditating, he heard a voice (probably of an Angel) saying to him, arise, and
go thy ways; whereunto, when he gave no great heed at the first, the second
time he heard the voice again: upon this, he fell to prayer, and about half
an hour after, he heard a voice the third time, speaking the same words;
whereupon rising up, immediately part of the prison wall fell down, and as the
Officers came in at the outward gate of the prison, he went out at the breach,
leaped over the prison ditch, and escaped, and in his way meeting a beggar, he
changed his Coat with him, and coming to the Sea shore, he found a Vessel
ready to go over, into which he entered, and escaped. Acts and Mon.

Mr. White of Dorchester, being a member of the Assembly of Divines, was
appointed Minister of Lambeth, but for the present, could get no convenient
house to dwell in, but one that was possessed by the Devil: This he took, and
not long after, his Maid sitting up late, the Devil appeared to her, whereupon,
in a great fright, she ran up to tell her Master, he bid her go to bed,
saying, she was well served for sitting up so late; presently after, the Devil
appeared to Mr. White himself, standing at his beds feet, to whom Mr. White
said, If thou have nothing else to do, thou may stand there still, and I
will betake my self to rest; and accordingly composing himself to sleep, the
devil vanished.

Multitudes of the Orthodox Christians in Africa, being banished by the Arian
Vandals, as they were driven away by Soldiers, a woman hasted after them,
leading in her hand a little child, encouraging him, and saying, Run Sirrah,
seeest not thou all the Saints how merrily they go forwards, and hasten to
their Crown? One asked her, Whether she went? She answered, pray for me, I
go with this little boy, my Nephew, to the place of banishment, taking him with
me, lest in my absence he should be seduced from the truth, by the subtilty
of the Adversaries.

Under the eighth Persecution, there was one Marinus, a Noble man, and valiant
Captain in Caesaria, who stood for an honorable office, that of right fell to
him, but his Competitor to prevent him, accused him to the Judge, for being a
Christian; the Judge examining him of his Faith, and finding it true, gave him
three hours time to deliberate with himself, whether he would lose his office
and life, or renounce Christ, and his profession. Marinus being much perplexed
what to resolve on, a godly Bishop took him by the hand, led him into the
Church, laid before him a Sword, and a New Testament, bidding him freely take
his choice, which of them he would have; whereupon, Marinus ran to the New
Testament, and chose that, and so being encouraged by the Bishop, he went
boldly to the Judge, by whose sentence he was beheaded. Acts and Mon.

There was a certain Athiest, that denied providence, and it raining very fast,
as he was journeying, he took shelter under a Smiths Shade, and there fell a
declaiming against providence, saying, they had rain enough, and too much
before, and where was providence to send more, when there was too much already;
the Smith seemed to take no notice of what he said, but a while after, brought
him one of his tools, and asked him whether he knew to what use that was put,
he looked on it, and said, he could not tell; he desired him to consider a
little more, he did so, and answered, that he could not imagine to what use he
put that to; the Smith showed him two or three more, and though he studied
much, yet he could not tell him for what use they were: The Smith then said to
him, you great Dunce, cannot you tell for what use these tools serve, and dare
you judge of the works of Gods providence.

There is a famous story of providence in Bradwardine to this purpose; A
certain Hermit, that was much tempted, and was utterly unsatisfied, concerning
the providence of God, and resolved to journey from place to place, till he
met with some that could satisfy him; an Angel, in the shape of a man,
joyned-himself with him, as he was journeying, telling him, that he was sent
from God to satisfy him in his doubts of providence: The first night they
lodged at the house of a very holy man, and they spent their time in discourses
of heaven, and praises of God, and were entertained with a great deal of
freedom and joy: In the morning, when they departed, the Angel took with him a
great cup of gold: The next night, they came to the house of another holy man,
who made them very welcome, and exceedingly rejoiced in their society and
discourse, the Angel notwithstanding, at his departure, killed an Infant in the
Cradle, which was his only son, being many years before childless, and
therefore was a very fond father of this child: The third night they came to
another house, where they had like free entertainment, as before; the Master of
the Family had a Steward, whom he highly prized, and told them how happy he
accounted himself in having such a faithful servant; next morning, he sent this
his Steward with them part of their way, to direct them therein; as they were
going over the Bridge, the Angel flung the Steward into the River, and drowned
him: The last night they came to a very wicked man's house, where they had very
untoward entertainment, yet the Angel, next morning, gave him the cup of gold.
All this being done, the Angel asked the Hermit, whether he understood those
things? he answered, his doubts of providence were increased, not resolved, for
he could not understand why he should deal so hardly with those holy men, who
received them with so much love and joy, and yet give such a gift to that
wicked man, who used them so unworthily; the Angel said, I will now expound
these things unto you: The first house where we came, the Master of it was a
holy man, yet drinking in that cup every morning, it being too large, it did
somewhat unfit him for holy duties, though not so much, that others, or
himself, did perceive it, so I took it away, since it is better for him to
loose the cup of gold, than his temperance. The Master of the Family, where we
lay the second night, was a man given much to prayer and meditation, and spent
much time in holy duties, and very liberal to the poor, all the while he was
childless, but as soon as he had a Son, he grew so fond of it, spent so much
time in playing with it, that he exceedingly neglected his former holy
exercise, and gave but little to the poor, thinking he could never lay up
enough for his child, therefore I have taken the infant to heaven, and left
him to serve God better upon earth: the Steward, whom I did drown, had plotted
to kill his Master the night following; and as for that wicked man, to whom I
gave the cup of gold, he was to have nothing in the other world, I gave him
something in this, which notwithstanding will prove a snare to him, for he will
be more intemperate, and let him that is filthy, be more filthy. The truth of
this story I affirm not, but the moral is very good; for it shows, that God is
an indulgent Father to the Saints, when he most afflicts them; and that when he
sets the wicked on high, he sets them also in slippery places, and their
prosperity is their ruin, Pro. 1.32.

Acertain godly woman, riding behind her Husband, who was a persecutor of Mr.
Bolton, one need not add, that he was a wicked man, as they were riding, it
thundered and lightened extraordinarily, which was so terrible, that he
trembled exceedingly; his Wife, with a cheerful voice, said, Husband, what ail
you? why do you tremble thus? He answered, Do you ask me why I tremble? Do
you not hear how horribly it thunders? She answered, yes, I hear it: And do
not you tremble also? says he: She answered, no: Not tremble, said he: She
again answered, no, and said, she was not at all afraid: Not afraid! said he,
Why how comes that to pass, that such dreadful claps of thunder make you not
afraid? I will tell you why, said she, with a very cheerful voice, because it
is the voice of my Father: He was amazed at her cheerfulness and answer, and
began to think with himself, surely these Puritanes have something within them,
that they are able to bear up in such storms, and that they have peace, and are
cheerful, while I tremble; and being not far off, immediately he did ride to
Mr. Bolton, beseeching pardon, that he had persecuted him, and desired that he
would tell him, what he should do to be saved.

A Doctor of Divinity, of singular learning and piety, (I forbear names, since
the Parties, whom this story concerns, are, as I suppose, all yet living) his
maid being to go to Market, came to him for money, but all the money he and his
Wife could make, was but five shillings, to get provision for the following
week, though he had many hundreds a year for merly; his Wife being much
troubled that they were brought to such straits, and that they were like to be
greater, fell a weeping, and told her Husband, that there was little likelihood
they could live together, and that therefore she would take one or two of her
children with her, and live amongst her own friends, if he could provide for
himself, and the rest of his children: Nay, dear Wife, said he, we have lived
thus long together, let not us now part, let us rely on Gods providence; She
in her grief and haste, answered, Well, send Providence to Market, and see what
it will bring home: It was so that day, a Noble man, who knew this Doctor very
well, dining with diverse Gentlemen at an Inn, who were to go a Hawking that
afternoon, looking out of the Window, saw his Maid, who being an ancient
servant, he knew, and sent for her up, asking her, how her Master did: She
answered, very well, and fell a weeping: He enquiring the cause, she told him
what straits they were brought to, he wondering, and being troubled at it,
called the Inne-keeper, and wished him to give that Maid ten pound, and every
one of the Gentlemen gave twenty shillings a piece; so the Doctor sending
Providence to Market, it brought him home fifteen pound; doubtless it is,
because we do not trust, not because God either cannot, or will not give, that
makes us so often want mercies, and such providence would be usual, if our
confidence in God were so.

A Widow Gentlewoman that I knew, being unable to follow Suits of Law, lost a
considerable Estate, and was fain to work for her living, she married a
Daughter to a Minister that had a great living, but he that was sequestered
dying, another was presented, and this Minister was turned out, and for a
pretended debt cast into prison, his Wife being great with-childe, and ready to
lie down: Hereupon the Mother went to the house, to fetch away her Son-in-laws
goods, where she found another of her Daughters near death, she not knowing
before of her sickness: The workmen that were mending the house for him that
was to come to it, would needs uncover the Chamber where this sick Maid lay;
the Mother desired them, but to forbear till her Daughter died, or recovered,
but they would not; and when she went to carry away the goods, there stood two
ready to seize upon them, one for Taxes, and the other for debt. In this sad
condition she came home, I being present, yet neither by her pronunciation, nor
by any expressions, could any one discern her to be moved with these
afflictions, making only a Narrative of them, without complaining or blaming
any; yea, when her Daughter wept and wailed greatly, she said to her, Is not
Christ yours? Why are you so troubled? What would you have more?

There was a certain Christian woman, who being very sick, sent for me, amongst
other things, to order and dispose of things concerning her outward Estate; I
knowing that she was a woman of many and great experiences of Gods goodness,
entreated her to impart some of them to me, which she did, and was so very much
affected therewith her self, that the joy of the Lord proved her strength, and
so raised up her spirits, that she recovered of her disease, and was well from
that very hour, though it was some time before she recovered her strength.

A godly woman told me, that she much frequenting Sermons, and desiring to
walk in the ways of God, afterward fell into great desertions, but being in
secret prayer, God came in with abundance of light and comfort, sealing unto
her soul that part of his Covenant, viz. I will take away the heart of stone,
out of thy flesh, and give thee an heart of flesh; and withal did assure her,
that she should never want, which seemed the more strange unto her, because
she had a very plentiful Estate at that time; but within a month after these
comforts, she being to receive the Lords Supper, all her former fears and
troubles returned upon her, insomuch as a little before the bread was
administered to her, though she could not say, that the devil appeared to her in
a bodily shape, yet he seemed to her as if he did, and told her, that she
should not eat; but then the Lord was pleased to bring into her mind that
passage in the Canticles, (Eat, O my friends) notwithstanding Satan still
continued terrifying of her, and when she had eaten, told her, she should not
drink; but the Lord brought that second clause of the verse into her mind,
(drink, yea, drink abundantly, my beloved) and so she drank also, and presently
was filled with such unspeakable joys, that she knew not how she gat home,
which soul-ravishing joys continued for a fortnight after, and filled her
mouth with songs of praise, so that she could neither sleep, nor eat, more
than she forced her self to do out of conscience of duty. At the fortnights
end, when God was pleased to abate her measure of joy, she came to a settled
peace of conscience, and assurance of the love of God, so that for twenty years
after, she had not so much as a Cloud upon her spirit, or the least questioning
of her interest in Christ, but has lived cheerfully and contentedly, without
the least murmuring against any of Gods dispensations, though she has had many
and great afflictions, but her carriage has been eminently Christianlike, full
of patience, yea, rejoicing in the Lord, in the midst of all her sufferings.

One having in dispute said, that if Gods children could not fall away, then
that supposition, Heb. 6.6. (if they shall fall away, etc.) is nonsense: But
some years after, being convinced of the perseverance of the Saints, it came to
his remembrance what words he had spoken concerning that place of Scripture,
and he presently apprehended that he had charged the spirit of God with
nonsense, and by consequence, that he had blasphemed the Holy Ghost, and the
temptation came with so much violence, that he could not withstand it, which
filled his conscience with terrors, and he received the sentence of
condemnation within himself, believing that his sin was unpardonable; and so
being in much terror Satan followed him with temptations, persuading him, that
it was in vain for him to pray, or to serve God any more, seeing he must
certainly go to hell; yet did he presently go to prayer, begging of God, that
though he must go to hell when he died, yet that he would be pleased to let him
serve him, whilst he lived, upon which his former terrors immediately
vanished, being clearly convinced, that none could pray that prayer that had
committed the sin against the Holy Ghost.

There was a woman, who was thirteen years under desertion, which was so
vehement, that for most of the time she was fain to keep her bed, through
weakness; Mr. Ludlam, a godly Minister, in Leicestershire, went to comfort her,
and pray with her; but when he came, and proffered to do it, she shrieked out,
utterly refusing, and forbidding him to pray with her; for, said she, I have
too many mercies abused to answer for already, yet would not he be put off, but
prayed by her, and so prevailed with God on her behalf, that the next morning
she was delivered from all her fears, and had such exceeding joy, that the like
has scarce been heard of.

This Mr. Ludiam himself, on his deathbed, the night before he died, had a
great conflict with Satan, but though heaviness endured for a night, yet joy
came in the morning; whereupon he spoke to this purpose, This night has been
as the shadow of death to me, but now I can say, and am assured, that God is
mine, and I am his and so he died.

The same woman, that having been under great desertions, on a time, being at a
Sermon, wherein the Minister wholly preached of promises and mercies, she was
never more terrified at any Sermon in her life, because she saw such sweet
mercies, such precious promises, and such unspeakable joys, and yet she had no
share in them: She told him also to the glory of God, that during the time of
her desertion, she had sometimes prayed with that earnestness, that the very
blood has gushed out of her nose, and that when she has been walking in the
streets, in the midst of all her horrors, expecting every step that the earth
should open, and that she should sink down to hell, yet that even then, if she
heard but an oath sworn, she was ready to fall down as dead, so exceedingly was
she troubled, that God should be so dishonored.

A precious holy man told me of a woman that was six years in desertion, and by
Gods providence hearing Mr. Rollock preach, she of a sudden fell down,
overwhelmed with joy, crying out, O, he is come, whom my soul loves! and so
was carried home for dead, and for diverse days after she was filled with
exceeding joys, and had such pious and singularly ravishing expressions, so
fluently coming from her, that many came to hear the rare manifestations of
Gods grace in her; and amongst the rest that went to hear, there was one that
could write Shorthand, who yet a great while stood so amazed at her
expressions, that he could not write; at last, recovering himself, he wrote a
whole sheet of paper, which this Minister read, and told me, that of all the
expressions that ever he read in the book of Martyrs, or elsewhere, he never
read any so high, as the lowest of them.

Recalling to mind an eminent and evident hand of God, showed unto us in a
wonder of mercy, in the late wars, we being at the Town, called Saltash, in
Cornwall, where we were three hundred and odd soldiers of the Parliament, taken
in that Town, being taken by Sir Richard Greanvile, Genesis to the King of the
Western parts; some had quarter given, others were cruelly butchered; yet the
next day, this onslat being made about midnight, and contrary to the Law of
Arms, we were appointed by the said Genesis Greanvile, all to be executed on
Gallows's appointed for that intended execution, to which place we were
brought, and by seven at a time, they intend our execution; then having hanged
up seven in a short space of time, one of those seven dropped down, the rope
breaking, and not being so much as staggered, but stood on his feet; and this
the Regiments of Horse and Foot, as also all the multitude of people saw: and
some of the people cried out hang him no more; yet the Colonel of Horse, who
was commanded to see the execution performed, strictly commanded the
Executioner to be sure to take him, and hang him again, or he should be hanged
for him, and caused him to take two ropes, and twist them together, which done,
he was taken by the Executioner, and hanged therewith, who after a little space
dropped down again, both the Ropes breaking, and was then sensible, but had
more wrong by the Ropes, yet was lively, sensible, as all beholders stood
amazed at, insomuch, that the Colonel rode to the Genesis and acquain'ed him
therewith, as also of the cries, both of people and Soldiers, hang him no more
for Gods sake: All this time the other six were hanging, the Colonel came, and
gave command to hang on others, and let him alone, which accordingly was done,
another was taken up, and he had not long hanged, but also the Rope broke, and
he dropped down; and then the Soldiers, and all with one consent, cried, hang
no more for Gods sake, and no more were hanged; and then they went and shot an
Ensign of Colonel Vowse his Regiment (whose name was Keckwich) to death, a
Cornish man, as if they were persuaded they could hang no more.

He that was, as you heard, twice hanged, was a precious Christian, he lived in
Taunton Dean, his name was Nicholas Weeks, who died in Lidner prison
afterward; the other, we know not his name, but he was a Devonshire man, and
of a small stature.

Eyewitnesses were of this, very many; but to this, have these testified it
for a certain truth.

Kettilby Woodhouse. Will. Anstees, Lievt. Will. Horsham.
This wonderful, and almost miraculous deliverance that God bestowed, because
it seems almost incredible, I have annexed the names of those that testify it,
with one of whom I am very well acquainted, and know him to be one of so much
veracity, that I durst believe it upon his single report, though I should not
be willing to propose it to others, without more witnesses.

Jaddus, the High Priest, understanding that Alexander was highly incensed
against Jerusalem, and intended speedily to come against it, he desired the
Jews to keep a Fast, as also he himself did, and offered Sacrifice, begging of
God to direct him what should be done in this matter; and the next night, in
his sleep, God appeared unto him, and wished him to open the gates of
Jerusalem, and in all his Priestly Robes to meet Alexander, the rest of the
Priests being clothed all in white, which he doing, Alexander, as soon as he
saw him, fell prostrate before him, his Army wondering at his carriage:
Parmenio asked him what he meant to worship the High Priest, when all others
worshipped him: He answered, he did not worship the High Priest, but that God,
whom the High Priest served: For, says Alexander, when I was in Dio,
considering what to do in my wats, God appeared unto me in this very artire,
and wished me to go on, and he would prosper me, and I never since saw any in
that attire before now; and therefore it is that I do show that respect to the
High Priest, and then giving the High Priest his hand, was conducted by him
into the Temple, and offered Sacrifice according to his directions, who also
did show him the Prophecy of Daniel, wherein he told him it was prophesied,
that one of the Grecians should destroy the Persians, and he supposed that he
was the person meant by the Prophecy, of which Alexander was very joyful, and
bestowed great favors, both on the Highpriests, and the rest of the Jews.

Now because of all the stories of the Martyrs, either in the time of the
Primitive Church, or since, by the far greater cruelty of the Popish
persecution: I do not know that ever I read any story equal to this, which is
recorded by Josephus, of the Martyrdom of the seven sons of one Mother; I
thought good to insert this story, which, though as for the substance of it, it
is in the book of Macchabees, yet being exceeding more large in Josephus, I
have transcribed it out of him; and the rather do I set down this story,
because generally Expositors do think, that the Apostle (in Hebrews 11.35.)
has relation to the sufferings of these worthy Martyrs, and it was thus:
Antiochus, whom the Prophet Daniel calls a vile person, Dan. 11.21. after he
had Martyred Eleazer, a man of great age, reverence, piety, and constancy,
caused seven brethren, who were brought up, and instructed by that blessed
forenamed Martyr, Eleazer, to be brought forth to Martyrdom, the Tyrant
beholding them, and their Mother amongst them, with merry and gladsome
countenance, he thus spoke unto the children, I wish your good, O admirable
young men, for so both your beauty of body, and Noble parentage, persuade me,
do not therefore like mad men resist my command, avoid not only torments, but
death also; for I desire not only to exalt you unto honor, but also to
increase your riches and possessions, contemn the superstitious and superfluous
belief of your Countrymen, and embrace our Religion, which if you refuse to do,
(as I hope you will not) I will devise all torments, whereby I may by a
lingering and painful death, consume you; and to the end he might terrify them
the more, he commanded all instruments of torments to be presented to their
view; so wheels, rods, hooks, rakes, racks, cauldrons, cages, gridirons, were
brought forth, and engines to torment the fingers and hands, gauntlets,
bellows, brazen pots, and frying pans. Then Antiochus said, Consent unto me,
O prudent young men, for if that I command you to commit a sin, yet do not you
offend in doing it, seeing you commit it only upon compulsion: But the young
youths, guided by a Divine Spirit, contemned so many kinds of torments, and
despised the Tyrants threats and flatteries, and with one consent, denied to
eat of the Sacrificed Swines flesh, as they were commanded; wherefore, said
they, do thou persecute us that are innocent, we both desire, and wish to
die, and will, until such time as death expels life, firmly keep that which
God commanded, and Moses taught us; and do not thou seek to seduce us, by
protesting feigned love toward us, the pardon which thou do offer, is to us
more dangerous than punishment, we are armed with contempt of death, and esteem
not thy words, as being by our late Master Eleazer, taught to despise them: Why
then do thou think such pusillanimity to be in us young men, seeing of late
thou foundest such courage in an old man; we follow him, thou can not try and
know our minds, except by tearing our bodies, thou search them out; We will
safely and securely suffer for our God any thing, and leaving this earth, we
shall be entertained into heaven, and thou for so tyrannizing most cruelly
upon innocent souls, shall be reserved unto hell fire.

Antiochus being greatly moved, to see, that he could neither prevail by fair
promises, nor threatenings, he caused them to be beaten with Bulls Pisles; and
first, he commanded the eldest of the seven brethren to be stripped, and
stretched out upon a rack, and his hands to be bound behind him, and then to
be most cruelly beaten, who wearied his tormentors by his sufferings, so that
they more desired to leave beating him, than he desired they should leave:
This done, he was put upon a wheel, and a weight hanged upon his feet, and so
stretched round about it, that his sinews and intrals brake, and so his pains
increased; yet for all the pain, his mouth was not hindered from calling upon
God, who beheld all; and reproving the Tyrant that devised those torments for
the innocent, he cried out after this manner, O thou that persecutest the
Majesty of God, I whom thou thus tormentest, am no Conjurer, nor Murderer, but
one that dies for the truth, and observing of the Laws of God: Then the
Tormentors wishing him to yield, Your wheels, said he, are not so sharp and
cruel, that I thereby will be forced to forsake heaven, whereon my mind is
fixed; tear my flesh, yea, if it so please you, roast it at the fire, torture
each part of my body with several cruelties, you shall for all this find your
selves unable to force us young men to sin. As he thus spoke, a fire was
kindled, and he, as he was upon the wheel racked, was so thrown into the
fire. And thus he was so burned, that his bowels appeared, he (being nothing
moved, though his flesh was) out of the midst of the fire, cried thus to his
brethren; O beloved brethren, learn by me an example of constancy, contemn and
despise the alluring baits of this world, and rather obey God than Antiochus,
who can, if he please, humble the proud and mighty, and exalt the lowly and
dejected. As thus he spoke, he was taken out of the flame, and flean alive,
his tongue was pulled out of his mouth, and he put into a Drying Pan, and so
he ended his days. After him, the second Brother being haled by the
Soldiers, Antiochus, before he asked him whether he would relent, caused all
those instruments of torments to be shown him also, thereby to terrify him;
but he nothing thereat moved, and denying to eat of their foresaid Sacrifice,
his hands were bound with iron chains, and he being hanged up by them, the
Skin of his body was flean from the Crown of his head unto his knees, so that
the intrals in his breast appeared naked, yet in such manner, as he might abide
great torments, for he was cast before a cruel Libbard, thirsting most
extremely after blood, to the intent that he might devour with his teeth the
rest of his body, but the beast smelling of him, forgot his cruelty, and
turning away his face, he did no hurt to the Martyr; but hereat the
Tyrantsrage increased, and the Martyr by suffering such torments, was made more
constant, crying aloud, O how pleasant is that death unto me, which is caused
by all sorts of torments for Gods sake; yea, so much the more pleasant, for
that I assuredly hope to find reward for it in heaven; Let these torments
inflicted upon me (O Tyrant) satisfy thy cruelty, for my pain is not by thy
tortures increased, but rather my pleasure, as thou shall find by my patience
in this agony; more willing am I to suffer, than thou to punish, yea my pain in
suffering, is less than thine by inflicting the same upon me; I am tormented
for the truth and observing the Law, and the Justice of God shall banish thee
from thy Regal Seat, thou by tormenting art tormented, and almost consumed, thy
wrath and fury being almost spent upon me in vain, thou shall not escape the
Day of Judgment, eternal pains are there prepared for thee, which neither thy
profane mind is able to endure, nor thy cruelty of power to decline, thy
sinful soul being condemned to eternal punishments.

Thus he remaining constantly in his Faith, and animated by his Brothers
example, departed unto heaven.

Then the third Son was brought, whom all pitied for the death of his two
Brethren, and many exhorted him, by his Brothers examples, to desist from his
opinion, and so avoid punishment, but he being hereat angry, thus replied: One
Father begot us, one Mother did bear us, one Master instructed us, we are all
of one mind, and all alike affected, do therefore no longer prolong the time in
vain; I came hither for to suffer, and not to speak, use all your tyranny
possible against this body, for you have no power at all over my soul. The
Tyrant hereat moved to see this third nothing relent by his brothers deaths; he
devised more cruelty, than humane wit alone could invent; wherefore he
commanded a Globe to be brought, and tied the holy Martyr about it in such
sort, that all his bones were set out of joint, and displaced, whereat the holy
Martyr was nothing dismaide; the skin also of his head and face was pulled off,
and then he was put upon the wheel, but he could not be racked any worse,
for that all his bones were displaced, and did hang one separated from another
in most pitiful manner, And when blood issued from him abundantly, he was
deprived of the use of his hands and feet, but perceiving his life to be
spent, he spoke thus, and died: We (O Tyrant) endure this torment for the
love of God, and thou the Author of such unjust cruelty shall suffer
everlasting pain; then his tongue being cut out of his mouth, he was put into
a Drying Pan, and so amidst those torments yielded up the Ghost: Next after
followed the fourth Brother, whom all the people persuaded and entreated to
obey the King, but he contemning their exhortations, said thus with all
constancy, Your fire shall not separate me from the Law of God, nor from my
Brethren, who instead of this mortal life, enjoy life everlasting: I denounce
unto thee, O Tyrant, destruction and overthrow, but to such as believe,
salvation. Make trial of me therefore, and see if God will forsake me, who
has with open and stretched out arms, received my three brethren that are
gone before me, and whom the Womb of so holy a Mother at several times brought
forth unto glory. The cruel Tyrant hearing this, was much moved, and leapt down
from his Chair to torment this Martyr himself, that so he might overcome him,
and in his fury commanded his tongue to be cut out, but he hereat not
terrified, said unto Antiochus, This cruelty will nothing avail thee, neither
shall thou hereby, as thou supposest, conquer me; our God needs not by voice
to be awakened, but rather by secret cogitation to be prayed unto, to help
his servants; and our God knows all things before we ask; and before we our
selves enter into cogitation thereof, he understands our necessity; cut out
my tongue, thou can not cut out my mind, while my life remains: Those
prayers which by it I have uttered to Almighty God, have taught it to suffer:
Would God thou would so sanctify all parts of my body by punishing them, for
thou therein inflictest punishment upon thy self, and reward upon me, and
think not that thou shall thus escape long unpunished: When he had thus
spoken, his tongue was cut out of his mouth, and he bound to a stake, and
there he was beaten with ropes ends, and he did patiently endure this,
notwithstanding the color of his face became dead and wan, being loosed from
thence, he was put upon the wheel, and then praying for the Church of God, he
by death went unto the rest of his Brethren. Then the fifth Brother, before he
was haled to torments, spoke in this manner; Behold I come to be punished
before thou command me, hope not therefore any jot to alter his mind, who, as
thou see, desires to be tormented; the blood of my four innocent brethren,
which thou have shed, has condemned thee to hell fire. I am to make them up
the number of five, that by it thy pains may be increased: Tell me for what
offense by us committed, do thou thus punish us? For what impiety do thou
so persecute us? What villainy have we committed? What wickedness, what
naughtiness have we attempted? This is all thou can allege against us, that
we honor God our Creator, and live justly, in obedience of his Laws, and
therefore do not esteem thy punishments, but they are to us honor and
salvation, and not punishment, we shall be greatly rewarded by God, if no part
of us be left free from torment.

Whilst thus he spoke, his Executioners, by the Kings command, took him, and
cast him into a brazen pot, and was pressed down in it, his head to his feet, and
afterward he suffered all other torments, which his Brethren had endured, yet
not amazed hereat, he suddenly started up, and thus he said, Cruel Tyrant,
how great benefits do thou against thy will bestow upon us; yea, the more
thou art incensed against us, the more acceptable to God shall thou make us;
yea, I should be sorry, if thou should show mercy upon me, this short
affliction gains us life everlasting; if this temporal death should not
betide me, everlasting life could not befall me: and thus he finished his
agony, and died. Then the Tormentors laid hands upon the sixth Brother, who was
permitted, either to choose honor, or else punishment, but he aggrieved at his
offer, said, although I be younger in my years than my Martyred Brethren, yet
my constancy of mind to theirs is not inferior, for we were all nourished up
together, all together instructed, and we will all die together in the fear of
God; hasten therefore to thy devised torments, and that time which thou would
spend in exhorting me, spend it in devising tortures for me. Antiochus hereat
confounded, commanded him to be bound to a Pillar, with his head hanging down,
and this done, he caused a fire to be made so far off him, that it could not
burn him, but roast him: He also commanded, as he hung, to be pricked with
Awles, that so the heat might pierce into the holes that they made in his
flesh. Whilst thus he was tormented, much blood like froth gathered about his
head, and face, and he then spoke in this manner, O noble fight! O valiant
war! O strife beyond piety and impiety! these men have past their agonies,
whose Crown of Martyrdom is the punishment of their persecutors: I do most
willingly follow my Brethren, that as by blood I am conjoined unto them, so by
death I may not be separated from them; devise some new torment, for those
which thou have already devised, are already overcome; our God gives us more
courage to suffer, than thou have to punish, and so the Precept of God
remains firm in us: And as he thus spoke, one took hold of his tongue with a
hot pair of Tongs, and suffering the same torments that his Brethren had done,
and fried in a Drying Pan, he gave up the Ghost.

Six of the Brethren being now dead, by diversity of torments, only one of the
seven remained alive with his Mother, younger in years (but not in constancy of
mind) than the rest of his Brethren; he presenting himself before the Tyrant,
moved him to compassion, both for that he was left alone, and the last of his
Brethren, and also that he was to perish, wherefore he called the child unto
him, and into a place where no instruments of torments were, and taking him by
the hand, he said thus unto him, hoping to win him by fair speeches; By thy
Brethrens calamity, thou now well have learned what is prepared for thee, if
thou disobey me, deliver thy self therefore from these torments, and I will
give thee what honor my Kingdom can afford, thou shall be a Magistrate, and
General of my Army, and one of my Counselors; but perceiving himself not to
prevail, he caused the young man's Mother to be called unto him, who coming,
and standing near her Son, the Tyrant said thus unto her, Where are now, O
worthy woman, all thy Children? Behold, of such a number, if thou please, thou
may have one left, advise therefore thy child, and mollify his obstinate
mind by wholesome counsel.

The Mother having heard what the King said, she bowed her self unto the King,
which done, that the King might not understand her, she spoke in Hebrew to her
child, as follows.

Pity thy Mother, O Son, and comfort thy sorrowful Mother, who bare thee nine
months in my womb, and gave thee suck three years, and with great industry
have brought thee up to this age; I pray thee, dear Son, consider the heaven
and earth, and all that in them is, and know that God created them all of
nothing, who also of nothing made mankind, fear not this Ethnicks pains and
torments, but imitate thy Brethren, and contemn death, that in the day of mercy
I may receive thee, and thy Brethren again in heaven.

As his Mother thus admonished him, he in the Hebrew Tongue requested to be
unbound, for that he had a secret to disclose unto the King, who being
unfettered, he presently ran to the torments prepared, for there was a
Drying Pan red hot, that was prepared for such as were to suffer, unto the
which the child coming, remembering his Brethren, and beholding also the King,
he said unto him, Who gave thee this Purple? And who exalted thee to this
Kingdom and Dignity? even he whom thou in us do persecute, whose servants
and worshippers thou killest, and tormentest, for which thy wickedness, thou
shall suffer eternal fire, and torments, which shall have no end; thou art of
higher dignity and authority in this world, than other men, yet he that made
other men made thee also of the same nature, that they are of, all men are
born; and must die alike; he that kills another, shows that himself may
be killed; thou tearest and tormentest thy own picture and image all in vain,
thou in thy fury killedst him, whom not long since God created like thy self,
and according to the same Law, thou think all lawful which thy Kingly power
can command, thou pullest out our tongues, and tearest our bodies with
flesh-hooks, and consumest us with fire; but they who have already suffered
this, have received everlasting joy for their reward, and thou shall answer for
all the punishments inflicted upon them; think not that I expect any favor at
thy hands, I will follow my Brethren, and remain constant in our Law.

The Tyrant hearing this, was wroth, and caused him to be tormented, but his
Mother in torment comforted him, and with her kind hands held his head, when
with violence of the tortures, blood issued out of his mouth, nose, and privy
parts, the Tormentors not ceasing till life in him was almost spent, but they
(by Gods appointment) gave over, and so he took strength again, to endure more
than any of his Brethren had done; at last, his hands and arms being cut off,
he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and cried, O Addonas, O Sabaor, be merciful
unto me, and receive me into the company of my Brethren; let thy wrath now
cease, and show mercy to thy Jerusalem, for thy Names sake. Having said thus,
his tongue being pulled out, he of his own accord went into the fiery
Drying Pan, and so to the great admiration of Antiochus died.

Mr. Deering, an eminent Minister in Queen Elizabeth's days, being at a great
Feast, had a young gallant that sat over against him, who amongst other vain
discourses, brake forth into swearing, whereupon Mr. Deering gravely and
sharply reproved him; the Gallant, being impatient of reproof, flung a glass of
Beer in his face; Mr. Deering took no notice of the abuse, but wiped his face,
and fell to his meat, as before: The young Gallant fell to his old discourse,
and swore again, and Mr. Deering reproved him, as before, upon which, with more
violence and rage, he flung another glass of Beer into his face, but he again
showed his zeal for Gods glory to be right, by his meek and silent bearing of
this injury also, at which the young gallant being astonished, rose up from the
Table, and fell down on his knees, and asked him forgiveness, professing, that
if any one had offered him those affronts, he would have stabbed him to the
heart.

A certain Knight, not many years since, was playing at Tables, his Chaplain
standing by, the Knight being angry, swore; whereupon his Chaplain reproved
him, and he swearing again, he reproved him again; whereupon the Knight in
much anger turning to him, said, Who art thou, that thou dare thus reprove
me? To whom the Chaplain answered; nay, but who art thou, that thou dare
thus blaspheme thy Maker? The Knight being convinced by this just reproof,
retired into his Chamber, and gave his Chaplain twenty pieces for his
faithfulness to him.

A Miller in Leichestershire, sitting in an Alehouse, on a Sabbath day, with
one of his companions, said to him, I hear that bawling Hooker (meaning Mr.
Thomas Hooker, that precious servant of Christ, that died in New England) is
come to Town, let us go and hear him, we shall have excellent sport, and
accordingly they went on purpose to jeer him, but it pleased God the Sermon so
wrought upon him, that being pricked to the heart, he went to Mr. Hooker,
entreating him to tell him, what he might do to be saved? and afterward went
with him to New England.

Thomas Ward of Tiso, in Warwickshire, was all his younger days very loose,
and dissolute, a scoffer at, and enemy to all goodness, and an hater of good
men; but it pleased God at last to conver thim after a strange and wonderful
manner, which was this: In a morning, as he lay in his bed, plotting and
contriving how to molest and persecute some of his godly Neighbors, and to
bring them into the Bishops Court at Worcester, there appeared a Vision to him,
of a City, wherein there were many poor ragged Lambs in the streets, and a man
driving of them, and he heard a voice, saying to him, What are these? to which
he answered, sheep: Then said the voice again, these are my sheep whom thou
persecutest: Presently after, he saw another Vision, of a pile of Faggots, and
heard the voice, saying, What are these? He answered, Faggots: Then said the
voice, as these are bound up for the fire, so thou deservest to be bound hand
and foot, and cast into everlasting fire: Truth Lord, said he; yet withal he
cried earnestly to the Lord for mercy; and presently after he saw in another
Vision, a Pillar of Brass, but so bright and glorious, that he was not able to
look upon it: Then said the voice, be of good comfort, for thou art a Chosen
Vessel, which shall suffer many things for my Names sake; to which he said,
Lord, if it be thy will, let it be now; and presently he had a blow given him
on his side, as with a dagger, the mark whereof he carried with him to his
grave. After this, it pleased God to raise him up with comfort, and he became
an eminent Professor and was very zealous for the truth, though he met with
much persecution by the Prelatical Party, from which he was scarce ever free,
till they and their Courts were taken away: This he himself related to Master
Benjamin Lovel, a godly Minister, that lived near to him, and who was
intimately acquainted with him, and from whose mouth this was wrote.

An exceeding poor woman, that was given much to scolding, and debauchery, used
to speak much against going to be examined by the Minister before Admission to
the Sacrament, yet at last, by the importunity of her Husband, she was
prevailed with to go to her Minister, Master Fairclough, who finding her gross
ignorance, discovered the great danger of it to her, and withal, instructed her
with so much mildness and sweetness, that she brake forth into tears,
beseeching him to give her some directions in spiritual matters, which
accordingly he did, and withal referred her to a godly Neighbor, that might
read them unto her, and ever after she became eminent for piety, insomuch,
that she and her Husband being very poor, in the evening she would fetch an
handful of thatch from her house, wanting candles, and kindling of it, she
would get her Husband to make haste, and read as much out of the Bible as he
could whilst the blaze lasted, which she would mark diligently, and with a
great deal of care and joy remember, and talk of it.

In the late bloody massacre in Ireland, diverse English-women came to the house
of Mr. Creighton, Minister of Virginia, in the County of Cavan, having a Maid
in their company almost naked, unto whom an Irish Rebel came as she was in the
way, (these women being in her company) requiring her to give him her money,
swearing, that if she did not, he would presently kill her, and withal drew his
Sword: The young woman answered, you cannot kill me except God give you leave,
and his will be done: Hereupon, the Rogue thrust three times at her naked body
with his drawn Sword, and yet could not pierce her skin. Upon this miracle he
was much confounded, and so went away, and left her; this they attested upon
oath.

A godly Gentlewoman, whom I very well know, yet living, when she was a
child, being in the Country in the harvest time, was playing by the side of a
Pond, none being left at home but a man who was in the house reading a book,
the Girl stepping upon a board that was loose to play with the Ducks, fell into
the Pond, where she was like to perish; but it pleased God, that the man, as
he was reading, was suddenly so troubled, though he knew not for what, that
he could read no longer; whereupon he walked up and down the room, but could
not be quiet; then he walked forth, and espied a Straw-Hat swimming upon the
water, and looking earnestly, he saw the child rise to the top of the water,
and so catching hold of her, drew her out, and saved her life.

A Gentlewoman of a considerable Estate, that constantly at the years end gave
all the overplus of her Estate to the poor, resolving not to increase her
Estate, and there being a Famine, she desired leave of the Earl of Warwick, to
plow up forty acres of land which she was tied by her Lease not to plow
without leave, he giving her leave, she plowed it, and sowed it for the poor
with pease, when they were ripe, she gave notice to the poor of the Country to
come and gather them, which they did; and the Babyliff, when time was, carried
in the Straw for Fodder, but thinking he might have some yield of pease, he
thrasht some of the Straw for a Trial, and had as much yield (notwithstanding
the poor had gathered them clean, as was thought) as usually they had for a
Crop. Thus God increases their store, that are liberal to those that are in
want.

I have heard it related of Mr. Fox, that as he was journeying, a poor man
asked something of him for Jesus Christ's sake: Why, do thou know Jesus
Christ? said Mr. Fox, and discoursing with him, he found that he spoke
savourly and understandingly of the things of God: I have no money, said Mr.
Fox, but go with me to the Town which is close by, and I shall give you
something; where selling his horse, he gave half the money to the poor man,
and went the rest of his way home on foot.

There was a very poor Widow that had many children, and a rich Brother, that
was a Batchelour, who lived as poor as she, who very seldom would give her
any thing, sometimes some small single money; the last time she came to him,
though she was in great want, and used much importunity, yet he would not
give her a farthing; she then begged a cup of drink of him, he pretends that
he was so poor, that he had not money to buy himself bread, and so sent her
away with nothing but her own tears to drink; but though weeping may endure for
a night, joy comes in the morning, for the Lord struck that hard-hearted man
with death, and this poor woman being Heir to his Estate, was worth next day
ten thousand pound, which with a great deal of care he had scraped together,
and with a great deal of uncharitableness had kept; and though he would not
give her a farthing over night, he was forced to leave her all the next
morning.

Luther has this story: A certain woman, in the time of famine, having nothing
at all for her children and her self to eat, being brought to very great
extremity, she resolved upon this course, she made her self, and all her
children ready, and with a great deal of comfort and confidence she walked to
a Spring, not far from her house, as she was going, one met her, who asked her
whether she was going with her children? She told him, that all her provision
was quite spent, and she was going with her children to such a Fountain close
by, being confident, that God that had provided drink for her and her children,
would there provide food for them also; and he that heard the young Ravens,
and provided for them, would much more take care of her, and her little ones;
he that met her, wished her to return home, for she should meet with
provision that was ready for her there, she returned, and found a considerable
quantity of meal, which was food for her and her children; but whence this
provision came, she knew not, nor knew the man who told her of it.

There was a certain poor family, being in great wants, and had little or
nothing for their children, when dinner came, they put them off with
play-things, and told them they would see if they could get them something for
Supper; and when Supper came, they would give some small piece of bread, and so
get them to bed: And thus they used them so long, while at last the children
would not to bed, but cried for bread; that night, it was so, that my Lord
Fawkland waking before midnight, and could not sleep, it came into his mind,
that this family was in great want, insomuch, that he called up some of his
servants and sent them with a great loaf, and a Cheese to the house; when the
servant came, he found the children crying for bread, and the Parents weeping
by them, who with a great deal of joy and eagerness, received that unexpected
provision. Thus the Lord ordered it by his Providence, that they were not only
then relieved, but their necessities being related to the Lord Fawkland by his
servant, he took care of them for the future.

Speed in his Chronicles relates this story, there being a great famine the
year before, as soon as the corn was eared, the poor would gather and eat,
insomuch, that the Inhabitants of the Parish came to the Priest, desiring him
to curse the people for gathering and spoiling the corn, but one of the
Parishioners stood up, and charged the Priest, that he should not curse them
for his corn, for it did him good, to see the poor eat his corn, for he was
very sensible of their necessities, but the clamours of the others prevailed;
but as the Priest was cursing the poor, there fell a great storm of Thunder,
and Lightening, and Hail, which beat down all the corn so, as if Horses and
Carts had gone over it, nor would either beasts, or any fowl, eat any thing of
it, only this good man's corn, though intermingled with others, stood untouched,
not an ear of it being blasted.

Doctor Hill, in his book of living and dying well, has a remarkable story of
a young Gentleman of one of the Innes of Court, who it seems expected to die
suddenly, and before he should be twenty four years of age, and so he did,
having these verses found about him, viz.

Not twice twelve years full told, a wearied breath
I have exchanged for an happy death:
Short was my life, the longer is my rest,
God takes them soonest, whom he loves best:
He that is born to day, and dies to morrow,
Loses some hours of joy, but months of sorrow;
Other diseases often come to grieve us,
Death strikes but once, and that stroke does relieve us.
So grave a Doctor setting down this story in his book, I thought it no
lightness in me, to set it down in mine.

The story of Mr. Holland (not only because it is very remarkable, but also
because it has pleased God to affect me very much with it) I shall setdown
here also. This Mr. Holland was a pious and faithful Preacher of the Gospel, as
some that have been acquainted with him, and have heard him, have testified of
him, a man that was a stranger and Pilgrim in the world, neither having any
thing to do with it, nor indeed knew it, his Wi^e mannaging all his worldly
affairs for him; he knew not what the common coyns of gold were worth, and for
his clothes, except his Wife had otherwise ordered it, he would have worn them
till they had been rags; he spent his time wholly in his Study, and a man of
great charity, insomuch, that if he had no money about him, and a poor man had
begged of him, he would have given his Gloves, or Handkerchief, or Band, etc.
being regardless of all things, save the glory of God, and the Salvation of his
own and others Souls: This precious Saint, the day before his death, calling
for a Bible, continued his Meditation and Exposition, on the eighth to the
Romans, for the space of two hours; but on a sudden, he said, O stay your
reading, what brightness is this I see? and they said, it is the Sunshine;
nay, says he, it is my Saviors shine: Now farewell world, welcome heaven, the
Day Star from on high has visited my heart, I doubt not but you all see that
light, but I feel a light within me, that none of ye all can know; and then
turning himself to the Minister, who preached his Funeral Sermon, who was one
of them that came to visit him, he said, Sir, I desire you would preach my
Funeral Sermon, for this night I dye, and speak this from me, and speak it
confidently, that God deals familiarly with man, (a rare and sweet expression)
I feel his mercy, I see his Majesty, whether in the body, or out of the body, I
cannot tell, God he knows; but I see things that are unutterable. And being
thus ravished in his spirit, he roamed toward heaven, with a cheerful look,
and soft sweet voice, but what he said was not understood; raising himself
toward morning, as Jacob did upon his staff, he ended his blessed life with
these blessed words.

O what a happy change shall I make, from night to day, from darkness to light,
from death to life, from sorrow to solace, from a factious world to a heavenly
being. Oh my dear brethren, sisters, and friends, it pittieth me to leave you
behind, yet remember my death when I am gone, and what I now feel, I hope you
shall feel, e're you die, that God does, and will deal familiarly with man; and
now thou fiery Chariot, that came down to fetch up Elijah, carry me to my
happy hold; and all you blessed Angels, that attended the Soul of Lazarus to
bring it to heaven, bear me, O bear me into the bosom of my best beloved.
Amen. Amen. Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly, and so he fell asleep.

FINIS.
A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
PART. I. Showing, wherein the Power of GODLINESS consists, viz.
CHAPTER I. IN inward Admirings and Adorings of God. page 1. Chap. 2. In our
high prizings of Christ. p. 4. Chap. 3. In living contrary to Providence. page
13. Chap. 4. In mortifying Temptations. p. 15. Chap. 5. In the manner of
conquering of Temptations. page 21. Chap. 6. In inward Mortifications. p. 27.
Chap. 7. In having dominion over our thoughts. page 31. Chap. 8. Wherein the
Perfection of Holiness consists, as to several graces. page 33. Chap. 9. In
high Acts of Hope. page 37. Chap. 10. In the love of God, in four particulars.
page 40. Chap. 11. Wherein the Power of Godliness consists, as to Knowledge,
or the high acts and effects of Knowledge. page 46. Chap. 12. Wherein the Power
of Godliness consists, as to Humility; or wherein Christian Humility chiefly
consists. page 50. Chap. 13. Wherein the Power of Godliness consists, as to
Patience; or several special signs and acts of Patience. page 61. Chap. 14. Of
projecting, and contriving, how we may glorify God most. page 63.
PART. II. Wherein is set down Cautions and Discoveries of several mistakes,
most common to the people of God.
CHAPTER I. THe first Caution, viz. That we should not judge our selves by the
degrees of Grace. page 67. Chap. 2. The second Caution, That we should take
heed that the works of our General Calling, justle not out the works of our
particular calling, page 71. Chap. 3. The third Caution, which is, that we
should take heed of degenerating into will worship. page 75. Chap. 4. The
fourth Caution, which is, that especially new Converts take heed of
over-burdening themselves with over-difficult, or multitude of duties. page 77.
Chap. 5. The fifth Caution, against several mistakes of the people of God, in
spiritual joys and sorrows. page 79. Chap. 6. Of letting the Truths of God
lie loose upon us. page 89. Chap. 7. The next impediment, is, want of
consideration. page 93. Chap. 8. The next impediment, is, putting off God with
solemn duties. page 96. Chap. 9. The next impediment, is, carnally to think,
that God will be contented with any thing. page 97. Chap. 10. How not watching
over our thoughts, is a great hinderance to the power of Godliness. page 107.
Chap. 11. The next great impediment, is, endeavoring impossibilities. page
109. Chap. 12. The next impediment of Holiness, is, our not taking heed of
occasions, temptations, and beginnings of sin. page 111. Chap. 13. The next
impediment is, to neglect the smaller acts, either of Holiness, or sin. page
113. Chap. 14. The next impediment is, our ignorance and senslesness of the
sins of Omission. page 117. Chap. 15. The next impediment, is, not to come
fully off for God. page 118. Chap. 16. The next great impediment, is, worldly
company. page 122. Chap. 17. The next impediment, is, abundance of worldly
employment. page 124. Chap. 18. The next great impediment, is, to have a carnal
opinion, that it is easy to be religious. page 127. Chap. 19. The next great
impediment, is, not to do what we can, because we cannot do what we would,
or should. page 139. Chap. 20. The next impediment, is, that we are not
convinced of, and affected with the vanity of the things of the world. pa. 155.
PART. III. Wherein are set down several means and helps for attaining the
Power of GODLINESS.
CHAPTER I. THe first thing that is necessary for a godly life, is faith. page
161. Chap. 2. The second means to a godly life, is, to discover and mortify
our Master corruption, or sin. page 176. Chap. 3. The next help for the
attainment of the Power of Godliness, are Ejaculatory Prayers. page 198. Chap.
4. The next great help and direction for attaining of Holiness, is, reading of
holy books. page 221. Chap. 5. Wherein is set down a Catalogue of several
books, for the ignorant and poorer sort, who, in respect of their poverty
cannot buy, and of their ignorance, cannot understand books of greater value
and depth, and for others. page 232. Chap. 6. The next great help for the
attaining of Holiness, is, communion with Saints; and first of solemn
conferences, and how to manage them. page 238. Chap. 7. Of the second great
advantage that we may gain from our converse with the people of God, in
reference to temptations. page 245. Chap. 8. Another great advantage that we
receive from our acquaintance with the people of God, is, in reference to their
prayers. page 250. Chap. 9. Of watching over one another, and diverse other
great advantages that we gain for the increase of holiness, from the
acquaintance with Gods people. page 267. Chap. 10. Of the sixth help to a godly
life, which is the getting and observing of rules, to guide us in indifferent
actions. p. 287. Chap. 11. The seventh direction, for the attaining of the
Power of Godliness, viz. the choice of some grace, wherein we desire to be
most eminent in, and several rules to direct our choice. page 296. Chap. 12.
The eighth and ninth Directions for the attaining the Power of Godliness, viz.
We ought not without just cause to leave off any duty, before that effect be
wrought for which we use it; as also concerning frequent examination. page
300. Chap. 13. The tenth help for the attainment and progress in holiness,
which is the choice of a faithful prudent director in the things of God. page
312. Chap. 14. The eleventh help for the perfecting of Holiness, viz. keeping
of a Diary. page 324. Chap. 15. The last help to a godly life, wherein are set
down several stories of Gods Providence, examples of graces, etc. page 354.
Books printed for Joseph Cr^nford, at the King Head in St. Paul's Churchyards.
(...), or the Sum of Practical Divinity, practiced in the Wilderness, and
delivered by our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, being observations on the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of St. Matthew; to which is prefixed
Prolegomena, or Preface, by way of Dialogue, wherein the perfection and
perspicuity of the Scripture, is vindicated from the Calumnies of Anabaptists
and Papist's, by Thomas White, Minister of Gods Word at Anne Aldersgate. London.

Animadversions, or the Rabinical Talmud of Rabbi John Rogers, wherein is
examined his Doctrine, as of the Matter of a Church The duty of separation Form
of a Church The subjects of Church Power.
etc. By Zach. Crofton, Minister of Gods Word at James Garlic Hythe, London.

A Vindication of the Answer to M. Brabourn, concerning the Civil Magistrates
Power, as to changing Church Government, wherein the Reverend M. Perkins, and
some Truths of God, are vindicated from the lies, and scurrilous expressions
cast upon them, by John Collings, Minister of Gods Word in Norwich.

The Pattern of Patience, in the example of holy Job; a Paraphrase upon the
whole Book, being an expedient to sweeten the miseries of these (never enough
to be lamented) times.

The Husbands Authority Unvailed, wherein is moderately discussed, whether it
be fit, or lawful, for a good man to beat his bad Wife.

A Method and instructions for the Art of Divine meditation, with instances of
the several kinds of solemn Meditation, by Thomas White, Minister of Gods Word
in London.

Enchiridion Medicum; containing the causes, signs, and cures of all those
diseases, that do chiefly affect the body of man, divided into three books,
with Alphabetical Tables of such matters as are therein contained: Whereunto is
added a Treatise, De facultatibus medicamentorum compositorum, and dosibus. By
Robert Bayfield, Doctor of Physic in the City of Norwich.

The Crown of Righteousness, by Thomas Watson, Minister of Stephen Walbrook,
London.

The Golden Mean; being some serious considerations; together with some Cases
of Conscience Resolved, for a more full, and frequent Administration of, yet
not free Admission unto, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; by Stephen Geree,
Minister of Gods Word, and Pastor of the Church of Abinger, in the County of
Surrey.


