A SERMON PREACHED AT DORCHESTER IN The County of Dorcet, at the General
assizes held the 7. of March, 1632.

By John White of Dorchester, Rector of the Church of the Holy Trinity.

Pro. 24. verse 21. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not
with them that are given to change.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1648.

SIR,
AT your last being in Dorchester, you seemed to receive some addition of
Confirmation of the Justice of the Parliaments cause in taking up Arms against
the King, from some discourse which you heard from Mr. White: But I then told
you that Mr. White not many years since was clear of another Judgment, not
only in this point of Resistance, or more properly making War, but almost in
the whole matter Controverted between the King and the two Houses, And that
some of us who were his daily hearers were much scand^lized to see his late
practice and Preaching to move Antipodes to his former Doctrine, e^pecially
recommending and pressing things so point blanck opposite, on the consciences
of his Auditors, as no less then the truths of Jesus Christ, and necessary in
respect of our Obedience: This I told you I could make good unto you in four
particulars, First in the point of the Subjects taking up Arms against their
Sovereign, Secondly in that of Episcopacy, Thirdly concerning the book of
Common Prayer, and Lastly touching the Ceremonies of the Church: But your haste
then going for Exter Fair, and your many businesses with your other Chapmen,
would not dispense with you to stay the making good of my Allegation: And
therefore it was your earnest desire, That at better Leisure I would in writing
give you such satisfaction as might leave you without all scruple in these
particulars, which I shall now endeavor to do as briefly as I can.

First for the unlawfulness of Subjects resistance and taking up Arms against
their lawful King, or supreme Magistrate, what his Judgment was in this
point, I must appe^le to his Sermon Preached at the Assizes held for this
County, The Copy of which Sermon, together with the Epistle Dedicatory to the
Judges of the Circuit, I have here sent unto you. I would not trust to the
fidelity of my Apprentices Brachigraphi who took this Sermon from the Pulpit,
when he Preached it: for so the Necessity of keeping pace with the Speaker, The
easy mistake of those Characters, and the supplements of Memory used by those
that are Maste^s of that Art, might render this Copy suspected: But to take
away all Objections, I procured a more Authentic Copy from his own Original.
I say no more but as our Old Schoolmaster Mr. Chick was wont to say, Res ipsa
loquitur: Out of his own Mouth you may Judge of him.

Secondly for the authority of Bishops, and Thirdly for the Lawfulness nay
Necessity and Excellency of the Book of Common Prayer, There are two other
Sermons of his published, not in print, but in Manuscript: The first asserting
the Authority and calling^ of Bishops to be, if not Iure Divino yet are
Apostolico; and equalling the Authority of their Order with that of the
Observation of the Lords day: The second vindicating the Liturgy from the
usual cavils of Se^taries, and by impregnable Arguments preferring this set
form before all Extemporary Conceptions especially for the Public worship of
God. Nay, we that were his Parishioners, and daily hearers in the execution of
his Parochial Exercises, must testify, That he has very frequently magnified
the Book of Common prayer, justified it against all Objections, and affirmed,
not only that it was consonant to the word of God, but likewise that if the
Holy Ghost had vouchsafed his immediate Assistance in composing any book since
the Bible, it was in composing the Common Prayers of the Church of England. But
though I have labored it yet I cannot procure these Sermons: They were by
Master White himself presented heretofore (as a Testimony of his conformity)
to Bishop Cook, late Bishop of Hereford but then Bishop of Bristoll, and Master
Whites Diocesan, whose Executors are able to produce these undoubted
Testimonies both of their Authors (then) Orthodox Judgment, and the truth of
my (...)

Lastly for his Approbation of the Ceremonies of the Church I shall appeal,
First to his own Practice in his Pastoral charge, not only in my time but in
my Fathers as you (...) Secondly, to his frequent justification of them in the
Pulpit; when you see Master ^tro^g at Dunstans do but ask him what he has
heard, and seen in this particular: Lastly to his serious Recommendation of
Doctor Burges his Defense of Bishop Mortons Treatise of the Three Innocent
Ceremonies to the Clergy of these parts, exhorting them to buy them: And though
his mere Intimation of things to be done, or not to be done, had more
influence on his brethren of the Ministry then the Commands of their Bishop,
yet to be sure to put one of those Books into the hands of every one of the
Clergy, he prevailed with Master Archdeacon Fitz^erbert to recommend the Book
to those with whom he thought his own persuasion had not so effectual
authority: I cannot have so mean an opinion of Master White that he should
thus industriously recommend this Book to others, merely to help off an
impression, though Doctor Burges were his Wives Brother, mistake me not, I
mean not your Paul's P^rgation Burges, no, this Doctor John Burges Pastor of
Sutton Coldfield (...) Warwick-shine, was an (...) man, and a Schol^r, Things
(God knows) that Cornelius was (...) guilty of; But I believe he did recommend
that Book not out of my sinister or by and but purposely to propagate those
Truths which were learnedly defended in is; and because they were such Truths
of which he himself stood fully convicted in conscience, for had he but
doubted of the lawfulness of those Ceremonies he was better acquainted with
the regulations of a Scrupulous Conscience then to recommend that to the
practice of others, of whose lawfulness He himself doubted. But I detain you
too long. Read this Sermon and then judge of the truth of my Affirmation of
the rest, by what satisfaction you receive in this Particular, from

Your Friend and Servant, W. P.
Dorchester, Sept: 14. 1647. For my Friend Mr. G.S. at the Sign of the -- in
Watling-street, London, these.



To the Right honorable Sir Thomas Richardson Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench,
And Sir John Denham Knight, one of the Barons of the Court of the Exchequer,
And to the right Worshipful John Brown of Frampton Esquire, high Sheriff of
the County of Dorcet, mercy and peace from God the Father through our Lord
Jesus Christ.
RIght Honorable and Right Worshipful, howsoever your Command for the
publishing of these Impolished and scarce well-digested meditations, plead my
Apology in this act, both to your selves and to the whole world, to your
selves who cannot distike the fulfilling of your own will, and to the world
when have nothing to blame in my exposing these Imperfect notes to the public
view, but my obedience to your Command (which I was the rather Enforced to
yield to in this action, by laying aside and renouncing mine own will, and
Judgment, that I might subscribe to the direction of so high authority, lest I
should be produced as an Instance against mine own doctrine) notwithstanding
it lies upon me to present both unto you, and to all an account of my grounds
and Intentions both in the choice and in the manner of prosecuting this subject
concerning the dignity and power of men in authority. I confess I might for my
Justification here in have recourse to the usual plea, of the Correspondency
of the argument to the auditory and occasion, but I must freely acknowledge
unto you, to whom I owe an account of all my action, that besides this general
respect, other Incident occasions have carried a great stroke in fixing my
thoughts upon this Subject above any other.

You may be pleased therefore to understand that a good spare since, the
observation of some passages, here at home among our neighbors, begot in me a
resolution in my ordinary course of Catechizing, among my own people, to
handle and open at large this argument of the power and authority of Governors
as to inform them more fully of that whereof too many of them seem to be
Ignorant, as also to put them in mind of that which was too often forgotten;
while I expected to bring this resolution into act, in my ordinary walk, which
mine own bodily Infirmites Interrupted, it fell not in so soon as I expected,
I was not only requested, but in a sort Importuned, to supply that room in
which I stood before your Lordships at the last assizes, and by that means as
I conceived, hastened by Gods hand, to the undertaking of this task, which had
bin too long deserred; and because withal some like occurrence in other parts
discovered the errors of men in their Carriage toward Governors to be an
Epid^micall disease, I conceived it needful, not only for the instruction of
my own people, but for the removing of scandal, to proclaim unto the world,
that groundles Jealousies, uncharitable Constructions, harsh Censures,
unchristian Imprecations, Insolent behavior, and uncivil Carriage toward
such as are in place of authority, are but the fruit of some distemperd
passions, of ill governed minds, and not the effects or Issues of any godly
dispositions, which being governed by the Spirit, are taught to yield unto all
men, the fruits of Love, Peace, long suffering gentleness, goodness, and
meekenes; and much more toward such as are in authority, honor, reverence,
subjection, and fervent Prayers, for the prosperity of their persons and
estates It is easy to observe, that, that dangerous evil of swelling the heart
against the higher powers (being the Issue of pride and Atheism) is nursed up
in our private families, wherein undutifull Children and Servants, being
unacquainted with bearing the yoke of their own Masters and Parents, by use of
Custom easily take heart, to break in sunder the bonds of Subjection to
public Governors. Ignorance of God and his word, must needs be a great
occasion of this mischief, and withal, neglect of that private Discipline
which was exercised in former ages, of which we come so far short in these
times, that if the succeeding generation suffer a decay this way,
proportionable to that which we find already, it must needs be esteemed a sad
presage of a fearful Confusion to Ensue: as the Prophet gives it the symptoms
of a state past hope of recovery, that the Children shall presume against the
ancient, and the vile against the honorable, Esaias 3.5.

As for my manner of handling so weighty an argument if it be performed Crassa
Minerva, men may be pleased to consider that it was intended for a Sermon, not
for a Treatise, a Sermon to be heard, not one (as Lisias said of his oration)
not to be passed over often with a curious eye, a Sermon Confined in the limit
of an hour, in which when many things were to be delivered, it cannot be
wondered if that fell out, which is observed to happen in the reedifying of Rome
after the Gauls had burnt it, festinatio ademit Curam viros dirigendi, haste
occasioned the neglect of art in ordering of the work: which also enforced the
breaking off the very body of the work it self in the midst, as all that
heard me know; so that what is now presented to your view may be termed rather
mince murorum, as the Poet calls them, then a complete building, wherein yet
if the foundation be firmly laid, I shall have no cause to repent my labor,
hoping that some skillful Architect may be moved by this occasion to take in
hand so weighty a work, and to raise it up to some larger proportion, and to
bring it on to perfection; the same scantnes of time which hindered me both in
digesting, and delivering, these abortive meditations, a consideration which
might have sufficiently warranted the carrying of them from their birth to the
grave of oblivion, will I trust plead my excuse before all equal minds,
against such as may perhaps blame my large unfolding of the duties of
obedience, when I throng up the Correlative duties of Governors into a more
narrow Room, seeing they falling into the last place, must of necessity be
handled, not as was intended, but as the time permitted. If it be replied, that
men usually take Impression of things as they are presented unto them, and
consequently that such a manner of pressing the duties of Subjects at large and
of Rulers more slightly, may probably breed in Governors minds a large
expectation of reverence and obedience from Subjects, and a slight reguard of
their own Correspondent obligations to them again; Let me crave leave to be
so Charitable as to hope better things of them, that great Law giver would not
believe that any would be so wicked, as to Commit paracide, and therefore
thought it needless to make a Law against it. God forbid that any man's eye
should be evil because other men's are good; and that good deserts should breed
thoughts and purposes of evil in any heart, much more in such excellent and
divine Spirits. It is the honor of Princes to resemble God, that they hold all
men obliged unto them, and yet themselves lie in no man's debt. If it be Regium
benefacere and male audire, to do good when they receive evil, how much more
does it become Princes when they are provoked by Love, observance and patience,
to cry out with David, quid Retribuam: or with God, who has given first and it
shall be recompensed? Romans 11.30. to receive all and pay nothing back again
(which is the manner of Cheaters and banckrouts, It is a thought that can as
little enter into Princes hearts, as it beseemes their person and places.

I have thus far endeavored to satisfy your Lordships concerning the occaesion
of the choice of the argument handled in this Sermon, and the manner of my
prosecution thereof, wherein if any man observing that by-possage, Concerning
some abuse in point of Customs, and wonder that I take occasion by way of
digression, to discover my Judgment concerning that evil; he may be pleased
to understand, that the groundless and foul slanders of shameless men who
amongst others have charged my self in particular, not only with secret
encouragements, but with open Justifications, of all the fraudulent and
Indirect courses that are used in those affairs, Enforced me to a necessary
clearcing of mine own Innocence, which I conceived might to best advantage be
performed publicly, and that in the presents of a thousand witnesses of my
own people, who may testify the Consonancy of my Apology to that which at
other times they had heard more then once out of my own mouth; of the various
Censures that may pass some on the substance of the doctrine, others on the
form of delivery, the style and phrase of speech, and manner of application, a
third sore on mine own person, and the most on my scope and Intention, in
undertaking this task, I am neither altogether regardlesse, nor too much
sollicitous. If I say not with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.3. I esteem not to be
Judged of man's Judgment, yet I may truly say, that as no humane respect guided
me in the choice of the argument, the deductions of the Conclusions, the
forms of expressions, or manner of application, so I see no reason why I
should Judge of mine own work, altogether according to the Censures and
opinions of men, whom if I should study to please, then can I not account my
self the Servant of Christ, before whom in the sing leresse of my heart having
powered out the thoughts of my soul, I leave him to plead my Apology before
all men's Consciences, in the faithful performance of this service in this
work: wherein how far I have trod under foot all self respects, other
then such as concern me as a Minister of the Gospel, I appeal to his
Judgment, who knows the secrets of all hearts. There remains no more but my
hearty prayers for you all, and for all in authority, for the multiplying of
all those graces abundantly on you which may adorn both your persons and
places; and make you accepted of God and honored of men, that when you have in
the fear of God ruled over men on earth, you may receive Crowns and Scepters
and Kingdoms that cannot be shaken hereafter in the highest Heavens.

Your humble Servant in the Lord Christ, John White.

A SERMON Preached at Dorchester at the General Assizes held there the 7. of
March 1632.
Text, Psalm 82.61. I have said ye are Gods.


THe words, which I have Chosen, as the fittest theme for this Assembly and
Occasion, are part of an Assize Sermon Preached by God himself in Person, in
the most Solemn Assembly that ever was, a meeting of the Gods of the earth;
upon an occasion of a high nature, the arraignment of all the great Monarchs of
the world; Indighted of the fowlest Crime that can be charged upon them, the
abuse of their places and offices; producing the most dangerous effects that
can be Imagined, the general disturbance of the whole world; and thereof by
the most authentical testimony, Gods own witness, Convicted and found guilty.
This Crime is aggravated diverse ways, First, By the nature of the fact, it was
Injustice, and that in the highest degree, Injustice in Judgment. Secondly, By
the Inducement thereunto, it was the acceptance of persons, and those of the
worst deseres, of the persons of wicked men. Thirdly, By the fearful
consequence which followed thereupon, the putting the foundations of the earth
out of course. Lastly, By the cause of all, wilful Ignorance, both of their
duties which was to defend the fatherless, and of their condition both
present, they were Gods, in this verse, and future, they shall dye like men, in
the next verse.

So that these words which I have chosen, taken in relation to the scope to
which they are here directed, are, one circumstance of this fearful crime of
Injustice; it was acted by Eminent persons, dishonouring their places, and
abusing the trust committed unto them by God himself: I have said ye are Gods.

But if we take them simply in themselves, they contain a Description of the
state of Governors, by 3. Circumstances. First, By their Eminency, to which
they are advanced, they are Gods. Secondly, By the person that advanced them to
this honor, he who has all honor in himself. Thirdly, By the Evidence by
which they hold it, by the word of God, which is stronger then all the
Potentates in the world, yea more certain and durable then the world it self,
for it abides for ever. Esaias 40.8. Every one of these Circumstances yield a
Considerable observation, of them therefore in their order, as the time will
permit, and first of the state to which Governors are advanced, they are Gods.
God himself has spoken it, and therefore we have warrant to Justify it as
an undoubted truth.

Doct: Magistrates are Gods.

Gods indeed, but with many differences, which make them Deos minorum gentium,
Gods of a younger house; for First, They are no Jehovahs, that is a name
peculiar to the God of Gods, and his memorial throughout all ages; as himself
speaks of an other title of his, Exo. 3.15. A name ever held Incommunicable
and uncommunicated unto any Creature, until our new Pelagians in their late
Censura Censurae told us that the name Jehovah is every where Communicated unto
men in Scripture, which yet you must in Charity believe upon their bare words;
for neither do they quote one Text, among all the Texts that they allege,
neither do we yet find any one considerable testimony of Scripture, to
Justify that bold assertion (no) the highest Title given to Magistrates, is
that which they enjoy in Common with Angels, they are Elohim, which is rendered
strong and mighty powers, or as the Apostle Romans 13.1. Calls them, higher
powers; he could not say highest: for there be higher then they, Ecclesiastes
5.8. Secondly. They are called Elohim in the plural number, not Gods alone,
for that God also appropriates to himself, Esaias 46.9. I am God and none else,
and so Moses proposes him to his people, The Lord thy God, is one God, Deuteronomy.
6.4. Magistrates are Gods with God, There be many that be called Gods, 1 Cor.
8.5. All of them the Sons of the most high, as it is affirmed of them in the
latter clause of this verse, whereupon they have good warrant to call one
another Brother as usually they do; they be Gods not Nati but Facti, by
nature the best of them considered in himself, is but Adam, a man of Read
earth, or if you will Enoch a man of miscries and weakness, as both their
birth and death, and manifold Infirmities of their lives declare. But they are
Gods by Institution and special Commission, Gods to whom the Word of God comes
to make them so, as our Savior Speaks citing my Text, John 10.35. Men called
to be Gods nor by a Writ under Seal, but by a bare Message from God, as we
shall see hereafter, and yet with a Test me ipso, I have said ye are Gods.
These differences my Text points unto us, between God and the Assembly of Gods,
out of which arises a Fourth, they are Gods not absolutely, but in relation to
God: they are no Gods before him, they stand in the same Rank with the rest of
the works of his hands. Job 34.9. But in Relation to Men they are Gods, Ruling
over Men, but in the fear of God, as David tells his Son Solomon in 2. Sa.
23.3. Wherefore God who found no place for them in the first table, which is
plena ipso, filled with himself, yet set them in the front of the second, as
it were in a middle rank between God and Man, to whom that of the Poet
concerning fame may be applied, Ingrediturque solo et Caput inter nubila
Condit, they have their footing on earth, but are lifted up to the heavens by
the Eminencies of their Dignities and honors. Lastly, Unto all these Dignities
must be added a Fifth as a necessary Consectary of the former, Magistrates are
no Gods at large, or boundless Gods, they are Gods within a Compass, within
certain restrictions and limitations. First, They are limited in time, only
Jehovah is God from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm 90.2. Whose Dominion
therefore is an everlasting Dominion, Dan. 7.14. But Men-Gods as they are not
from everlasting, so they are not to everlasting; every one of them apart holds
his Commission at longest but for term of life, and all of them together,
their Patents are terminable with the world: at the end whereof. Christ
himself the grand Patentee, under whom all earthly Monarchs claim, Pro.
8.15.16. shall yield up his Sovereignty into his Fathers hand, that God may be
all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Secondly, Magistrates are limited in place, in heaven
they have nothing to do, that is Gods Jurisdiction alone, there he has Set
his own Throne, Psalm 11.4. Magistrates have their thrones on Earth at Gods
foot which is called his footstool, Esaias 66.1. And yet no one Magistrates
Commission extends over all the earth, that God challenges to himself too, to
be The Lord of all the earth, Psalm 24.1. Princes and their dep^ties are every
one of them Governors within their Circuits and several limits and no
farther. 3. Magistrates are limited in the bounds of their authority both in
respect of the object and subject thereof; in respect of their object a
Magistrates authority reaches not to all things: to prescribe and set out
Rules of duty, whether in worship to God, or service to men, or sobriety to
ones self, this belongs to God alone as his peculiar prerogative, whose will
is the rule of righteousness, and the foundation of all; duty only the
prescribing of order in duties required, and the limitation thereof in the
Circumstances of their persons, times, places, manners, measures. Or for the
Conservation of peace and uniformity, that is the Magistrates task. Wherefore
the Apostle commanding us to pray for such as are in authority, prescribes the
petition in this form, That we may lead under them a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty, 1 Timothy 2.2. Where he makes godliness and honesty as
the foundation laid to their hands, and requires us to pray that Magistrates
only by their wisdom and Laws, may take order that such as walk in those
ways, may live quietly, and peaceably, without molestation or disturbance.

Thus Magistrates are limited in respect of the object of their authority,
their limitation is no less in respect of the subject of their power; for
their Commands reach no further then the outward man, the spirit is Gods
peculiar, none but he alone can erect a throne in the Conscience who is the
Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.9. A God of the Spirits of all flesh, Number. 16.22.
Wherefore no earthly Prince did ever make a Law to the thoughts, which he only
can know, that searches the heart and Reins, and knows the thoughts a far
off, Psalm 139.2. And therefore he only can prescribe unto the thoughts, who
is able to examine and take account of them. Let me not be mistaken, when I say
the Magistrates Command reaches no further then to the outward man, I still
hold the Apostles Rule, that obedience must be yielded to authority for
conscience sake, and therefore with sincerity and truth, and not only in fear
and outward show, as we shall see anon. Lastly, Magistrates are limited in
their power both of Jurisdiction and Conservation; in their Jurisdiction, the
distribution both of rewards and punishments is limited, as well in the
subject, which is man's outward estate, over which Magistrates have power, (no
mortal man can either distress or relieve the Conscience) so in the time and
duration, men's rewards and punishments reach not beyond this present life, when
that is ended they can do no more, as our Savior speaks, Luke 12.4. In which
place he forbids us to fear men, but advises us to fear God rather who can
cast both body and soul into hell, that is, whose power reaches beyond men's,
in those two respects that I have mentioned, namely that it is both Internal
and External. Again, in the power of Conservation Magistrates are limited, it
is God alone who upholdeth all things by his mighty power, Heb. 1.3. and in
whom all things live, move, and have their being, Acts 17.28. to sustain
without means, as Moses and Eliah, for forty days without meat; to create and
give means, as Manna in the Wilderness, and water out of the Rock; And
lastly, to give efficacy and power to means, when they are prepared, whether
extraordinary, as to a little oil, and a handful of meal to be sufficient
for many days food or ordinarily, as for bread to nourish, or clothes to keep
us warm, this is Gods work, Deuteronomy. 8.3. and Job 37.17. Magistrates cannot
give, but lay up provision for a time of need, as Joseph did, and may use and
apply means, but cannot give them efficacy and success. So that to support
and help where the Lord helps not is beyond the power of the greatest Prince,
even in the judgment of that wicked King. 2 Kings 6.22. Thus we see how far
such as are called Gods come short of the true Jehovah, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords.

But if Magistrates be not such Gods, as we have mentioned, what Gods are they
then? wherein consists their mighty power? and what dignity have they above
their Brethren? surely very much every way: for first, they are honored with
Gods own Title, they are called gods, not by base flatterers, as the Popes are
by the Canonists, but by the Oracle of truth, by Gods own mouth, and by his
servant Moses, who forbids men to revile the Gods, Exodus 22.28. and by the
Apostle, who tells us that Antichrist shall advance himself above all that is
called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. that is above all authority and power, even above
Kings and Princes. 2. Magistrates are graced with Gods ornaments, Majesty and
Glory, wherein they are invested, Dan. 5.28. Gods own Robes, Psalm 104.1. 3.
Magistrates sit upon Gods own Throne, the Throne of Israel (for so it is
termed, 2 Kings 9.25.) it is Gods throne, Jer. 3.17. they shall call Jerusalem
the Throne of the Lord. 4. Magistrates execute Gods judgments, as Jehosaphat
calls them. 2 Chronicles. 19.8. and Moses, 1 Deuteronomy. 17. So that Magistrates are every
way Gods representative; and are therefore said to judge for him, or in his
steed, 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Again, they are Gods in respect of those whom they
govern, they are their heads. 1 Samuel 15.17. to guide and direct them; and thus
Moses was Arons God, Exodus 4.16. Gods in respect of their provident care over
them, for their good, whom they do as it were bear in their bosoms, as Moses
speaks, Number. 11.12. as God does his people, Exodus 19.4. Gods in observing and
taking an account of their ways and actions, and Gods in rewarding and
punishing their deserts. Neither are all these vain Titles to commend them to
men, and to make them glorious in outward pomp; but they are accompanied with
a divine spirit for the most part, wherewith God furnishes and assisteth them
to discover secrets, and to discern and judge between Plea and Plea, between
Cause and Cause, Deuteronomy. 17.8. this spirit came on Saul when he was set apart
unto his sacred function, 1 Samuel 10.9. and upon Solomon being yet a child; and
although it be not inseparably annexed to the seat of Justice, yet it is
rarely denied to such Governors as seek it as they ought, where their own or
their peoples sins hinder not that mercy. 2. These outward dignities are
accompanied with an effectual power by which the hearts of people are subdued
unto them; so that when he says to one go he goes, Luke 7.8. nay nations and
kingdoms are moved and quieted, commanded and countermanded by their words,
trembling at their Indignation, as the beasts at the Lions roaring, Prove.
19.12. So that Solomon had good cause to say, that there was power in their
word, Ecclesiast. 8.4. and that, of death in their wrath, and of Life in the
light of their countenance, Prove. 16.14.15. These are no small advancements
unto mortal men to have power to dispose not only of the hearts and lives, but
in some sort of the hearts and wills of their Brethren, many times their matches
every way save in their place and dignity, and for that honor which God has
put upon them; and as Magistrates are called Gods, so they be to be esteemed
Gods, and that for two weighty reasons.

First, for the preserving of Gods honor amongst men: of wicked men it is
testified, that God is not in all their thoughts, Psalm 10.4. and that because
he is not in their sight as his Judgments are not, verse 5. wherefore as Kings
make their power visible to all their sub^ects, even those who are removed from
their presence in the persons of their deputies to whom they delegate their
authority, that their fear may be preserved, and their power be acknowledged
throughout all their dominions: so God to preserve his fear and honor among
men, that cannot behold the presence of his invisible power and godhead,
stamps his Image upon mortal men his Deputies that they may be as it were
visible Gods amongst his people. And indeed as it argues a Princes power, when
his stamp and Proclamation can make base metal pass for current coin, as
well as gold and silver; so it cannot but be acknowledged as a mark of Gods
fear in the hearts of men, when his Commission not only procures reverence
from men who are of worth in themselves, but acceptance and respect unto such,
who sometimes have nothing to honor them, but the very stamp of authority
that God has put upon them.

Secondly, if we regard public peace and prosperity, Governors and
Magistrates must needs be acknowledged to be of absolute necessity as well for
direction as correction: (seeing order which is the foundation of peace must
needs proceed ab uno as well as it tends ad unum) there must of necessity be
one like the head in the body to command all the members, and direct them in
their several offices and employments: and for Correction the necessity
thereof is manifested by daily and lamentable experience; the petulancy of
untamed spirits, impatient of rule and order, which know no Law but their own
lusts, is such, that notwithstanding Laws and Magistrates, prisons and
gallows, judgment and executions, vix nunc obsistitur illis qui laniunt
mundum, we have much to do to keep the world in quiet; what would be our
condition if all these means of restraint were removed? Solomon tells us that
deferring sentence against an evil work sets the hearts of men on fully to do
mischief, Ecclesiastes 8.11. what would be the effect of taking away the
sentence altogether, and the authority that decrees it? thus it is not only
true, but every way necessary, that there should be Gods upon earth, furnished
with his spirit, armed with his power, and made awful by his Majesty, that God
may enjoy his honor, and men their peace and safety.

Before I can apply this point (for the correcting of this general evil
custom in Sermon-hearers) who oftentimes make use of the directions and
reproves, received from the mouth of Gods Ministers, to prescribe unto, and
censure others, rather then to apply them to their own souls; Let me crave
leave to intimate that I have nothing to do at present with small or great,
but only with every soul within these Walls, which hear me this day. To you
therefore I say, are Magistrates Gods? and dare you deny them that service and
observance which we are to yield even to ordinary men? how dare we deceive and
beguile them? will a man rob God, Mal. 3.8.
Are we not ashamed to slight and despise them? they are marked out for Sons
of Beliall that despised Saul, 1 Samuel 10.27. Do we not tremble to scandalize
and traduce them? either with whispering Insinuations with treacherous Absolon,
2 Sa. 15.3. Or by open railing with wicked Simei, chap. 16.5. Do we not
account it presumption to pass our censures upon their persons and actions,
more freely then we are warranted to do, upon our Brethren of the lowest
rank? Is it fit to say unto the King thou art wicked? Or to the Princes ^e
are ungodly? Job. 34.19. Who art thou that Judge another man's Servant, Says
St. Paul? Romans 14.4. We may more justly object, who art thou that judge
thine own Lord? Do but weigh how far the eminency of the person against whom
we offend advances the sin, to beguile the King is not only base robery but
sacrilege, to scandalize him is not a simple slander but a degree of blasphemy,
to violate his person is not an ordinary murder but treason and paricide, in
the highest nature. Secondly, Consider that things of this nature, are not more
heinous then manifest, and impossible to be hid, Curse not the King, no not in
thy thoughts, nor the rich in thy bed Chamber, Says Solomon, for a bird of the
air shall carry the voice and that which has wings shall declare the matter,
Ecl. 14.20. As if God had given charge to all his creatures to attend upon the
persons of his Gods, and to avenge their wrong. Lastly, rest assured that such
sins can much less escape unrevenged then they can pass unespied, when so
many parties of such eminency and power are Interested in the wrong; Princes
for their places and dignities, the state for her peace and safety, and God
himself the avenger (as David calls him) Psalm 94.1. for his own honor
which is shamefully defaced by slightning his Commissioners, neglecting his
deputies, and consequently villifying his authority. Injuries which if men
avenge seven sold, as appears in the fearful execution done by David upon the
Ammonites for abusing and disgracing his Ambassadors, 2 Sa. 12.31. Surely God
must needs avenge seventy times seven fold, and so much more, quanto magis
potest qui pollet, etc. These considerations laid together, cannot but make a
tender conscience tremble at such a gulf of mischiefs, careful to avoid the
occasions, appearances, and bordering passages, of such dangerous courses as
lead so apparently to destruction a; wise man will rather choose a foul way,
then a path so near the edge of the Clife, that a slip of his foot, a blast of
wind or the least unexpected accident, may cast him head long into the Sea; and
a man possessed with Gods fear, would rather trespass upon his own liberty,
estate or peace,
then hazard himself upon the gulf of Gods fearful indignation, by slighting
or contemning his power and authority in the persons of his Vicegerents, that
bear his Image. But I choose rather to insist upon an exhortation then reproof.

If therefore Magistrates be Gods, let them be respected and acknowledged to be
Gods, both by the duties of performance and the manner of performance; the
duties we owe to Governors may be reduced unto three heads, reverence to their
eminency, subjection to their authority, and retribution and supply to their
maintenance for their care and providence, all included in the fifth
Commandment under the name of honor; all to be seasoned with that sweet
affection of love, of which they are the fruits, and all Enforced by the
strength of the law of nature, as that Title of Parents given to all kinds of
Governors by God himself as in that Commandment necessarily implies: of
these three Circumstances in order a few words.

The f rst of these duties is reverence; distinguished from fear taken in a
strict signification three ways. First, Fear seems to be an Involuntary
passion, arising Immediately upon the representation of a formidable object,
whereas Reverence is a voluntary affection, grounded upon Judgment and
approbation, and mixed with some kind of love and desire, toward that which we
reverence. Secondly, Though eminency may be conceived to be common to the
object both of reverence and of fear, yet fear seems to look more directly
at the eminency of power, and reverence to respect the eminency and worth of
goodness. Lastly, Fear supposes Inequality between the persons fearing and
feared, for a man fears not much his equals much less his Inferiors; but a
man reverenceth oftentimes eminency of the worth and abilities of such as are
below him, not only in place, but in worth and parts. This reverence we may
conceive to be the advancement of another Eminency either in worth or place in
our Judgment and affection, with the manifestation thereof in our words and
behavior; that reverence which we yield to a person for his worth, is given
unto him for himself, and is grounded upon the due estimation of his eminent
parts, whom we reverence; reverence given to a man for the place and rank
wherein he stands is bestowed on him not for himself, but for him which placed
him in that room, as upon an Inferior Magistrate for the Kings sake, and upon
the King for Gods sake; and this is that reverence which we claim unto
Magistrates as their due;
and that not belonging unto their personal abilities, but to their places,
and consequently yielded unto them, not so much for themselves, as to God in
whose room they stand, and whose person they represent; a circumstance worth
our consideration, as serving for a double use, First, To Enforce the necessity
of that duty of reverence to Governors howsoever qualified, or deserving
otherwise, as not due to his person but to his place not to himself whom we
reverence, but to God whose Image we reverence in him: seeing there is no more
reason why God should lose his right, because he demands it by the hand of an
unworthy person then why a Landlord should lose his rent,
because his bailife that requires it is a wicked person, or an unfaithful
Servant. Secondly, This consideration of the ground upon which reverence is
due, discovers the haynousnesse of men's sin, that deny it to those to whom it
belongs; it is not a trespass against men, but a sin against God himself as
he tells Samuel, 1 Sa. 8.7. They have not rejected thee, but they have rejected
me;
This reverence (as has bin intimated to you) has the spring whence it flows
in the heart, the judgment allowing, the will submitting unto and choosing, and
the affection embracing and entertaining any person Invested with authority
from God by his Ordinances; this reverence of heart casts a veil before the
eye of the mind, for prying too boldly into Magistrates secrets; it serves for
a bridell to the thoughts, to hold them back from uncharitable censures of
their purposes and actions, and for contempt of their places for their failings
and personal defects, from this root of inward reverence, springs all the
fruits of respective carriage toward Governors, such are, waiting for their
words and directions, keeping silence at their Counsels, receiving and
performing of their Commands, keeping distance from their persons, advancing
them in their presence with honorable Compellations and reverent gestures, and
in their absence Commending their deserts, silencing their defects, excusing
their errors, and opposing their detractors: without the Concurrence of both
these,
I mean inward and outward reverence, we fail in this duty, and especially
where Inward is withheld, there outward performances are no better then
Histrionicall gestures, and base dissimulations. Reverence to the Eminency of
Magistrates places must be accompanied with subjection or rather obedience to
their authority, the foundation of authority originally is the dependence which
one person has upon another, now seeing not only men but all Creatures have
their total and absolute dependence upon God, it must needs follow that to him
alone belongs absolute and plenary obedience, this obedience we term an
absolute and full submission of the whole man, to do and suffer according to
Gods will. Submission we term it, which is a voluntary act, and is then truly
performed when sensible appearances, natural Inclinations and self respects,
raising in us a desire to do any thing, which the will of God has discovered
to oppose, we readily lay aside our own choice, and choose and embrace that
which God prescribes of such submission we find a lively evidence expressed in
our Saviors Prayer, Ma. 26.39. Father if it be possible, yet not as I will but
as thou will, we always call this an absolute submission, to distinguish it
from that which is respective, which is obedience yielded unto one for another,
as the Apostle calls obedience of Children, obedience in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1.
And the service thereupon, service to the Lord, and not to man, verse 7. We
add further that this submission is total without limitation, either in the
subject or object, it has no limitation in the object, for it must be
obedience in all things, such as the Children of Israel tender unto God, Deu.
5.27. All that the Lord shall speak unto thee we will do, and that (as God
supplies it afterward verse 32.) not only what, but as the Lord has Commanded,
without turning aside either to the right hand or to the left; the limitation
of the subject is Included in the term following, when we say it must be the
submission of the whole man; of the understanding, to approve that which is
Commanded as just and holy, Psalm 119.128. To. 7.12. Of the will, to elect and
choose it as good, Psalm 119.30.137. Of the affections, to embrace and delight
in it, Psalm 119.16.24. And of the outward man, to prosecute it with
cheerful and constant Endeavors, which the Prophet terms, Running the way
of Gods Commandments, Ps. 119.32. Lastly, It is added that this obedience must
be manifested in doing and suffering, doing with all the heart as our Savior
did his Fathers will as himself expresses, 4. John 34. My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and suffering cheerfully and with joy, To. 5.3. Heb.
10.34. Choosing and embracing the will of God in that which we suffer, not only
as necessary, but as good, as the Prophet David does his Chastisements, Psalm
119.71.75. This is truly to Bear Gods yoke, Lament. 3.27. or Indignation,
Micah. 7.9. Of this kind of obedience to God we may discover a double
foundation. First, Gods sovereignty and authority, Secondly, His goodness and
holiness, so that we owe subjection to his person as to our Lord that has
right to Command us, and to his will as holy and good, both in it self and
unto us which therefore we Embrace as the rule of our duty, not only submitting
to it of necessity, as not able to alter it, but embracing it voluntarily, as
not willing to alter it, and esteeming it the fittest for our good, and this is
properly obedience for Conscience sake, both of the power of the Commander, and
of the equity, holiness, and goodness of the Commandment, and is that
obedience, which is peculiar and due to God alone; obedience to man is
submission to do what man requires, or suffer what he Inflicts for the Lords
sake: we term it submission because it must be voluntary otherwise it is
slavery and not obedience; and in this Circumstance obedience to God and man
agree, as also they do in some others that follow; for obedience to man as
well as to God, extends both to doing and suffering, and to both these for
Conscience sake as the Apostle tells us, To. 13.5. That is, Conscience of the
power of the Commander, as being established by God the Lord of the Conscience;
although not Conscience of the Commandment, which we are not obliged always
to approve as holy and good, and thereupon to Judge our selves unholy and
unclean persons in swarving from it, when it appears to be a breach of Gods
Law. In other Circumstances obedience to God and man differ both in the ground
and the foundation thereof: for we obey God for himself, and man for God; and
in the measure of our obedience, to God, as our love to him does require the
uttermost strength of all our affections, obedience to man, as our love to man
requires sincerity of the heart but within certain limits and within degrees
of moderation. Lastly, Obedience to God and man differ in the extent obedience
to God reaches to all that he Commands, obedience to man in as much as man
Commands according to Gods w^ll, or at least not against it, for where the will
of God and man stand in opposition one against another, there the Apostle has
resolved the Case, whether it be meet to obey God or man Judge ye, Acts 4.19.
A resolution notwithstanding which must be wisely applied, lest whilst we
refuse a total obedience, we slip into a total disobedience, and so became
Sons of Belial, phanaticall Anabaptists, who can bear no yoke. For the
preventing of that mischief, it will not be amiss to attend unto these
Ensuing rules, of which some give direction for the right ordering of the mind
and Judgment, and others for the guiding of the practice: First, Therefore for
the prescribing of limits to the Judgment, Wheresoever any humane Law tends
apparently to the prescribing of peace, and public utility (for which humane
authority was ordained) there a man is bound to approve the Law as expedient,
in relation to that state, although not as simply Just in the nature of the Law
it self, that is to allow it as a rule, although not of absolute, yet of
respective Justice, and by Consequent a man's own heart must censure the neglect
of such a Law as disobedience to authority, disrespect to the State and
disreguard to the public good, and himself a sinner against God mediately and
respectively, if not immediately and directly. Secondly, When it is doubtful
whether the Command of authority, Conduce to public peace or no, there a man
is bound to guide his opinion by the Judgment of those that give the Command,
against his own Conjectures, unless they be grounded upon very pregnant
evidences, as well, because the ground and end of such Commands, being best
known to those that give them, may have relation to public utility, known to
them though they appear not so to others; as also because good Governors are
presumed to have, though not a certain and Infallible,
yet a more constant assistance of the spirit of wisdom and Judgment in
prescribing, then other private men can ordinarily be assured of, in censuring
and Judging of those things that are prescribed; these two rules are needful
for the direction of the Judgment in approving or Condemning orders and
directions given by such as are in authority: Concerning the Conforming of the
practice to their orders and Laws, we may do well to take notice of these
three rules that follow. First, Whenever humane Law requires any thing to be
done, which is Correspondent to the preservation of peace, and furthering of
public welfare, that every subject is bound not only not to oppose or neglect,
but to submit to such penalty as the Law Inflicts on such as observe it not, as
also to do and perform what the Law requires to be done, according to the
true Intention of the Law, and that Conscionably without any careless neglect
or wilful omission; seeing the relation which such a Commandment has to
public good (which Gods Law Injoynes us to further to our power) binds the
very Conscience it self to the choice of every way,
and to the use of every set means tending thereunto; much more of those means
which are prescribed unto us by such an Ordinance of God, as the Law of the
Magistrates, the Primary Intention whereof is to bring a man to Conformity to
the order prescribed, and not to subjection to the punishment in case of
transgression. Secondly, Where the Magistrates direction proves some way
inconvenient, either particularly to ones self, or generally to the public,
notwithstanding if the Inconvenience be not greater then the hazard of
Infringing public peace, or of Incurring the Scandal and Contempt of
authority, or of Encouraging the Careless or the froward, to neglect or oppose
Government, there the less evil must be chosen according to that received
maxim, Salus populi suprema lex, and to the Apostles rule, If it be possible
as much as in you lies have peace with all men, Romans 12.18. One of these
considerations (even the avoiding of offense) moved our Savior to pay tribute
though unjustly demanded of him, Ma. 17.27. Lastly,
Where obedience to the will of God discharges a man from performing the will
of the ruler; there it binds him to a modest and respectfull refusal, which
may testify his reservation of due reguard to the power that Commands, where
he cannot allow the Commandment it self. Secondly,
A quiet submission to whatsoever authority lays upon him, although for his
just refusal. Looking to Gods equity in man's Iniquity, as the nobles of J^dah
did in Shishacks oppression, 2 Chro. 12.6. This is to Endure grief for
Conscience sake toward God. 1 Pet. 2.19. To these rules let me add this
Caution: Seeing God Injoynes obedience in doing the Rulers will in all things
wherein he gives us not a discharge by a Countermand of his own,
Let every man advisedly Consider, whether his discharge from doing be as
clear and evident, as his charge is to that which is required, doubt in this
Case is no sufficient plea against obedience: and that rule quod dubitas ne
feceris, that which you doubt of forbear to do, must be limited to such
things only as are in our free choice, wherein our forbearance is without
danger, and our performance carries with it the hazard of offending; and this
is that obedience which is due to authority,

The last duty wherewith we stand charged to Rulers, is supply of maintenance,
which also seems to be appendent to their honors and dignities. Sure the
Apostle reckons it among their dues, Romans 13.7. Hence it was that such as
brought Saul no present at his first entrance into his Kingdom, even before
the means of his maintenance were settled by Law, are as well marked out for that
refusal of theirs for Sons of Belial, as they are for despising him, 1 Sa.
10.27. as denying him two duties of service and honor entayled to his Crown.
Whteher this supply of maintenance be Gods portion as Ministers Tiths are, and
therefore to be received by such as have authority as his due, I will not
dispute. Sure the Apostle seems to imply that we ought to pay Custom for
Conscience sake, Romans 13.5. And this is out of Controversy, that the duty of
supporting Governors by a supply of maintenance, proportionable to their
places and dignities, is built upon a double foundation. The first is Justice
and equity, not so much distributive as Commutative, whereby we are bound to
recompense the wasting of the Rulers Spirits, the wearing out of their bodies,
and the neglect of their private affairs, for public service, among other
Encouragements with a public retribution; besides the profits which acrew to
the body of a State by the Governors care and provident direction, by which
every man without fear or disturbance, eats the fruits of his own labors,
requires the Countervayling of so large benefits by a public acknowledgement,
wherein we render unto Magistrates a portion of that abundance and plenty which
we Enjoy by their providence, as we render unto God the first of that Increase
which is multiplied by his blessing. The Second foundation of this supply of
maintenance unto Governors is necessity, seeing neither the Majesty of the
rulers place, nor his ability to support the public, Can possibly stand to be
upheld without such a supply from the body of the State; The measure whereof
Reason proportions, at least to the quality, Eminency, and Importance of the
Rulers place, and to the necessity of the occasions Intervenient. As for the
means of rasing this maintenance, reason again Informs us, that seeing it is
retribution for a Common benefit, and supply for the furthering of a Common
service, it must be raised out of a Common purse, whether by yearly revenues
as Customs or Tributes (which for the antiquity and universallity may seem to
have some foundation in the Law of nature) or by any other way, I leave to be
discussed by them whom it concerns.

We have passed over the chief duties which Subjects owe unto their
Governors, the manner how it must be performed seems to be pointed at in the
Title given them, they are Called Gods, and threfore must be honored as Gods,
though not with that kind of honor, which must be Civil, not Religious; Yet
in diverse circumstances of the manner of performance, many particulars whereof
the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.5.6.7. sets down distinctly. For requiring Servants to
perform their duty to their Masters, as unto the Lord, he directs them to
serve them, First in obedience to God, Secondly, and therefore with fear,
Thirdly, and yet with sincerity and singleness of heart, and Lastly with
Cheerfulness, as they love a Cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7. Let this direction
of the Apostle be a pattern of our service and obedience to our Governors,
what they Command, Let us perform, not because we will, but because they will
it, not because it pleases us, but because it is good in their eyes. Let all
our performances to them be tempered with fear and trembling at the Majesty of
their person, at the authority of their Commands, and the terror of their
Indignation, which cannot but make us careful in observation of their
directions, in our own Carriage, speedy in undertaking, and sedulous in
execution. Unto fear add sincerity, Let the heart stoop when the knee bows
in their presence, Let the heart and affections ^oyne when the outward man
executes their directions, Let us as well reverence them in the Closet, as bow
to them in the Congregation, Give them awful thoughts, as well as honorable
Titles, speak as well of them behind their backs as to their faces. Let not
fear but Conscience urge us to the reverence of their persons, execution of
their Commands, and rendering them due respects. Let Conscience Inquire into our
failings, and tax us for our neglect, occultum quatiente animo tortore
flagellum, with sincerity Join heartinesse, and good will as the Apostle calls
it; Let not so much fear Compel us, as Love Constrain us, as it did the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.14. to perform all service willingly without gaine-saying or
disputing, cheerfully without murmuring or grudging and fully without scanting
or defaulting;
Undertaking it out of desire and free choice, performing it with pleasure and
delight, and recounting what we have done with Comfort and content. Let it be
bound up in a due relation and respect unto God all that we do, remembering and
representing unto our selves the Infiniteness of his Love, absoluteness of
his Sovereignty, and omnipresence of his Majesty, holiness of his nature,
overflowing of his bounty in rewards, to those that fear and love him, and of
his Indignation in plagues and vengeance on those that hate him, and Rebel
against him. I make no question if men could be persuaded to Judge themselves
Impartially according to all these rules, concerning the kinds and manner of
performing of duties to Governors, the Consideration of men's Infinite defects,
either in total neglects, or in Insufficient and lame performances, must needs
affect the heart, or cast shame upon the faces of the most. To speak nothing
of such Sons of Beliall, who have cast off both the yoke of Gods fear and
obedience to men; nor much of some formal observers, who under color of
advancing authority further their own ends, Lifting up Magistrates unto heaven
that they may mount upon their wings, and strengthening their power in show, but
Indeed establish their own. But to come to our own Souls, Let the
Consideration of all these circumstances laid together, move every one of us
unto a through examination of our actions and Carriage thereby; and I make no
question but it will seriously affect the hearts of all Godly persons, as for
want of attending to these rules in the Course of their practice, may easily
discover their own slips into many Irreverent thoughts of the persons of men in
authority; more frequent observation of their failings and defects, then of
their deserts and abilities; Censures of their errors,
then Commendation of their uprightness; Indignation at their evils, then
Compassionate bearing of their Infirmities; Complaints for their pressures,
then thankfulness for their protection, agravation of their misgovernance,
then bewayling of the sins that cause it, and a more ready Inclination to
desire their removal, then to pray for their reformation. Let the knowledge of
all these failings. Lead us further into the Consideration of the dangerous
Consequence of such evils, which provoke many times distaste and Jealousy in
Governors, perhaps Encouragements and Countenance to rebellious spirits, and
occasion scandal to Religion.
Let it quicken us to watchfulness for time to come, and be a bridell to all
our thoughts, that whenever the pride of our Rebellious spirits begin to lift
up our hearts, we may keep them down with that serious restraint of Solomon,
Curse not the King, no not in thy thoughts Ecclesiastes 10.20. And if any man
reply in his heart, that he easily approves the yielding of all due respect to
all well deserving Governors; but Cannot prevail upon his own spirit to stoop
unto the evil. Let him answer his own soul with that of our Savior, Ma. 5.46.
What singular thing does he in this and Consquently what reward has he, do not
the Publicans likewise. This reason nature teaches wherein does grace prevail,
thus far self respect carries us to entertain them kindly that does us
good, what does Love and reverence to God win at our hands? The Apostle tells
us it is never thank worthy, till for Conscience sake toward God, we endure
grief, submitting our selves not only to the gentle but also to the froward, 1
Peter 2.18.19. And although men are conceived to draw on new wrongs, by bearing
the old,
yet the Apostle tells us on the other side, that doing of good is away to
overcome and not to Increase evil, so it be done in singleness of heart, with
such rules of Christian wisdom and direction as Religion it self admits,
Romans 12.21. If any man seem to be Jealous of hardening another man in sin,
conceiving that his patient bearing of wrongs Justifies the evil in the eyes
of the wrong doer,
who may perhaps Imagine he does nothing amiss, in that which no man opposes
or revengeth, he may be Informed that the ill use of our patience, by such, as
do what we can shall wax worse and worse, should no more turn us back from
our way, then it does God from his, when men by occasion of his forbearance,
treasure up to themselves wrath, against the day of wrath, Romans 2.4.5. we must
indeed tremble to be the Cause of sin in any person, but to such as turn all
things to their destruction, our well doing may be an occasion of sin without
any fault of ours. Lastly it may be objected that the oppression of Governors
may Infringe public liberty, which men by bearing and submitting unto them may
betray, and so not only suffer their own wrongs, but occasion public Injuries
to the State, the welfare whereof should be dearer to them then their own
lives. To this exception let me crave leave to answer. First that no man denies
unto any one liberty, out of true zeal and affection to public good, within
the respective limits of his place, modestly to plead his own and the public
right, yea a further too (so he Infringe not public peace, or deny or withold
due respects and undoubled duties to authority) Constantly to oppose himself
to such Injuryes as may wound the State through his sides. Secondly no man can
or will Justify the mixture of Carnal affections, as too often thrust in with
Godly zeal, in such Commendable Endeavors, and carry on even good men
sometimes in over earnest prosecutions beyond the bounds of Christian duty and
moderation, and thereby draw on Jealousies and ill Constructions upon
Justifiable actions and Intentions, from such as want either will or knowledge
to distinguish betwixt the body of an action and the Circumstances that
accompany the performances. Thirdly I utterly abhor the hypocrisy of such
as (like the Jews adversaries) Ezra 4.2. Closing in with zealous and Godly
Patriots, in their Endeavors for public State notwithstanding Indeed seedeth
the humors of their own turbulent spirits by factious oppositions, or at the
best further their own private ends, under color of advancing the public
good. Of this by respect I cannot acquit some of our Merchants who taking
advantage of the Contestation concerning payment of Custom, under the pretext
of Joining in the maintaining and preserving of State Liberties,
notwithstanding follow the ways of their own private gain, as may be more
then probably Conceived, as well because we find not in them, that fair show
of zeal for the public good, answered with suitable Endeavors in such other
ways as have no relation to private advantages, as also because it is easy to
observe, that notwithstanding the show of saving to the State; Yet whatsoever
is gained thereby is put the account of private Cash, which gives great cause
of suspicion, that it was from the beginning Intended that way to which it is
Converted. I had forborne to touch upon this Instance, but that Religion
suffers by this means, and we particularly and above all men that are
Ministers of the Gospel, as being conceived to be abetters, or Connivers at
their Courses, and all that is acted by them therein. Concerning their ways
therefore (without undertaking to set out the bounds of Right between the
Prince and State, which neither my Calling nor Commission warrant,) let me
crave leave to speak as muchin this public and solemn auditory, as I have
whispered into some private ears, and delivered in part more then once in this
place. I say then, and have always thought that this Course of shifting away
Custom by secret and by Conveyances (which is the way that many use) is
unwarrantable and mixed with much Injustice and that in two respects. First the
manner of this Conveyance which is by Cunning and secret Interverting of that
which they make show of satisfying and allowing (which they are forced also to
blanch over many times with manifest untruths at least to say no more) Cannot
be maintained to be Just and Equal: Seeing right Loves to be preserved by
truth and open Justifications, and not by any kind of fashood or secret shifts.
Secondly the Conversion of those sums of money (which Merchants under the the
style of Custom allow themselves and demand of such as they trade withal)
unto their private gain is as little or less Justifiable then the former as
is evident. For if Custom be due at all, then must they be the Princes due to
whom they were originally Intended, and Consequently they neither can nor ought
to be withheld from him,
by whom soever they be paid and received, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, Math. 22.21. If Customs be not due then are they unjustly cast up in
the accounts of our Charges, demanded in the prices of our ways, and required
and received of such as buy them of us. Surely the valuing of our wares in the
sale of them, according to the Charge of paying Custom, and the pursing up
unto our selves that which is so gained, Cannot but be acknowledged, to be the
wronging of the Prince or State, Let men choose which they please. An Injury in
it self, and yet made worse by coloring it over with pretext of standing for
the liberty of the State; but of this unpleasing argument although by way of
necessary Apology, too much.

To come back then to that exhortation which we had in hand, Do men in
sincerity and truth desire to carry themselves toward such as are Called Gods
as becomes them, rendering to them their dues, every way as the Apostle directs,
Romans 13.10. Let them then in the fear of God lay near to heart these Ensuing
Considerations. First Consider not in Governors so much their parts or
carriage as their places and dignit^es. Such as rule well are worthy of double
honor says the Apostle, 1 Tin. 5.17. that is both the honor of their places,
and the honor of their worth in themselves by their deserts, the one due to
them for God, and the other for their personal value, as Coin has its
estimation both by the metal and stamp; now then where we Cannot yield unto
the Governor double, Let us be Careful to Confer upon him at least single
honor, such as is appendent to his place and Title. Secondly in their places,
Let Magistrates be honored not with absolute, but with respective honor; not
so much yielded unto them as to the Image of God Imprinted in them, and
Consequently referred to God by them. So that the honor is not determined in
them but in God, as the rent of the tenant is not paid unto the Batlife but by
his hand unto his Lord, this observation is of especial use, for a man may
wrangle with man; but who dares Contend with God? a man may think himself
worthy of as good a place as another man, but who dares deny God a room above
him? a man may adventure to dissemble with man: But it would or at least wise
should make a man tremble to lie unto God, that searches the heart, one may
presume to withhold his neighbors right; but will a man adventure to Rob God
says the Prophet Malachi Mal. 3.8. nothing will make the spirit of a man
stoop or tremble till he set God before his eyes and Consider the relation
which he has to God which both obliges the man to the performance of his
duty, and God to the rewarding of his obedience. Thirdly seeing Magistrates be
Gods, Let them be allowed Gods measure in all the duties we perform unto them,
even the measure of the Sanctuary which was double to the Common measure, Let
our observance and Love unto them be in a double proportion to that which we
allow to private persons, and let it appear in all those effects of Love
mentioned by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.3.4.5. Patience, kindness, meekness,
respective behavior, good Constructions of their actions and Intentions,
and to which we add fervency of prayers, desires of their prosperity, zeal
in defense of their Innocence of person and Courage against their opposers and
detractors. Fourthly, observe Governors are not over us, so much for their own
as for the common good, Romans 13.4. leaving their own sweetness, and fatness,
their ease, pleasure, and profit, for the assuring of all these unto their
subjects. So that a good King is the greatest servant attending on a multitude
for their good, in cherishing the godly, and scattering and crushing the wicked
by distributing impartial rewards and punishments according to men's deserts
for the general good to the body of the State, they are the breath of the
Commonwealth, the life of the Law, the soader of the public society, and for
the particular good of every several Member of the State:
for they cast a comfortable influence into every private man's affairs, by
them we walk in peace; buy, sell, ear, sow, and reap, eat and drink in
assurance and safety, sitting every man under his own Vine, and enjoying and
rejoicing in the fruit of his own labors for these good things which God
conveys unto us by their hands in well ordered governments, or in some
proportion in the worst let their feet be beautiful unto us, their names
honorable,
their service pleasant, and their burdens light. Let all men lay this down
for a ground of infallible truth, that every man by nature is impatient of
government and subjection, whether by the ungodliness, which is naturally in
all (which as the Apostle affirms carries us so far, that we become haters
of God, Romans 1.30.
and consequently of his Image in such as represent his person) or by our pride
which is now become another nature to all men, makes us desire to be above and
not below) or rather by both it is not easy to say; this is clear which the
Apostle tells us, that natural men are so prone unto rebellion, that they grow
disobedient even unto their own parents, Romans 1.30. and 2 Timothy 3.2. and
consequently much more to other Governors to whom they seem not to have so
near relation: this consideration of all men's natural Inclination to
disobedience cannot but make us jealous of the counsels and thoughts of our
own hearts,
fearful of our own passions and affections, and observant of our words and
behavior every way, especially in Meetings and Conferences, wherein commonly
we take more liberty, not only in censuring our equals, but our betters then
will well stand with Christian Charity, a seasonable Item for this present time
and occasion, wherein authority and the actions thereof being represented as it
were upon a stage in public view, the persons and carriage of Magistrates are
diversely censured, and too often according to men's private Interests and
dispositions: so that we shall find just cause at the breaking up of this
solemn meeting, when our hearts shall smight us, that instead of our prayers
to God, for the execution of Justice, charitable Censures upon such passages in
Judgment, as are Capable of good Constructions, and not bewayling of our own
sins which is it that causes the turning of Judgment into wormwood, many
times we take up swelling thoughts, rash censures, and bitter speeches against
such as we ought to think and speak of with reverence, we shall find Just
cause I say after Jobs example in the feasts of his Children, every man a part
by himself to offer up a sin offering unto God for his own soul. In the 6.
place remember the heathen Philosophers maxim, of singular use in all duties
between man and man, much more between man and his God, there is more evil in
doing then in receiving wrong, the latter being at the worst but an outward and
temporary evil, the former Inwards and perpetual; In a cause therefore of
such Importance, Let every man offend in the safest part, rather trespassing
upon his own ease, profit, or liberty, then upon the rights and services due
unto Governors, rather suffer his own loss then hazard the doing of them
wrong; rather limite and Cross his own will, then Cross and withstand theirs,
so that in the mean time we swerve not from the will of God. Seventhly,
remember that of reciprocal duties that pass between man and man, some are
founded upon an Ordinance of God, and others upon agreement and mutual
stipulation between men themselves; the duties of the latter sort are like the
Couples of a house, as they stand one by another, so they fall one with
another, as if one party refuse to stand to the bargain, the other is at
liberty. But the duties established by an Ordinance of God, cease not by the
failing of reciprocal performances, as for example, I must Love mine enemy
though he Love not me, and do him good though he do me hurt. So it is in all
duties between Parents and Children, Magistrate and Subject, Husband and Wife,
Master and Servant; the reason is plain, because the obligation to that duty
is more to God that Commands it, then to the person to whom it is enjoined to
be performed, in which respect the obligation to duty, which these several
relations casts upon a man by Gods Ordinance, may be termed a Covenant of God
in some sort, as Marriage is called, Pro. 2.17. upon this ground Solomon gives
a Caveat, that if the spirit of the Rulers rise up against a man, he must not
leave his place, Eccles.
10.4. as if he had said, although the Magistrate leave his place, it is no
warrant for thee to leave thine or to neglect thy duty, because he has
neglected his it was an Ill speech or that Roman Senator, ne ego quidem illum
ut Consulam quando neque ille me ut Consularem, I did not respect him according
to his office because he reguarded not me according to my degree. Lastly,
remember that though the Rulers duty in Governing, cease not by the peoples
neglect of duty in obeying, notwithstanding thereby he cease to be a debtor
unto them, though his Engagement unto God continue still; to this purpose we
must know, that reciprocal duties which God Injoynes, may become due by a
double Title, First, by Gods Command, which makes the duty a debt unto God.
Secondly, they may grow further due, by the performance of some duty by the one
party which may deserve requital to him that performs it, from him to whom
it is performed, and so becomes a debt in equity and Justice unto man,
wherefore where one deserves nothing at another hand, because he perform; not
unto him that office and service which he is bound unto, there that man can
challenge nothing of his neighbors to whom he neglects his duty, as his own
debt by desert because nothing can in equity be demanded by him, that has not
deserved that which he demands, thus where the people fail in obedience to
Rulers, there they cannot demand any duty to them from the Rulers hand, as
their debt; though God may demand it as a duty and service of obedience to him,
and punish the neglect of it if it be not performed. Hence it must needs
follow, that the Conscionable performance of our duty even to undeserving
Governors is the only sure foundation of all our prayers and Complaints unto
God,
as our suits and requests unto men, and of all our hopes and expectations of a
better condition in time to come. The observation of men's frequent failing in
these duties toward such as are in anthority, and the Ill consequence which
follows thereupon, has occasioned the Enlarging of my meditations upon this
argument, beyond my Intended purpose; a sew words of such reciprocal duties,
as these high honors and dignities unto which Magistrates are advanced that
are called Gods bind them unto that Injoyes them, as well by the condition of
the places themselves, which they possess, as by the will of them that sets
him there. In the opening whereof I must crave leave to renew my former
Intimation, that I Intend this exhortation only to this present auditory; and
therein as many as it may concern, from the reverent Judges that sit on the
throne of Judgment, even to the lowest Constable.

In the first place therefore are Magistrates Gods, then what manner of persons
ought they to be in all manner of Conversation, as the Apostle speaks in
another Case? names although they be given by Imposition, yet are either
unanswerable unto the end for which they were given (which is to make things
known and so to distinguish between one thing and another) when they are
Incongruous to the nature of such things as they should express, or much more
when they are given to things of contrary natures; in such case they are either
Titles of scorn, or cloakes of error and false hood, as to Call evil good, or
light darkness, against which the Prophet denounces a fearful woe, Esaias,
4.20. Magistrates therefore must be answerable in their natures to that which
they seem to promise, by their honorable Compellation whereby they are
Commended unto men, when they are called Gods, a Title to which they must de
Correspondent in three things. First, in their personal graces and
dispositions. Secondly, in their abillities for their honorable and weighty
Callings. Thirdly, in their Carriage answerable to them both, of these three in
erder a word or two.

And First for their personal graces, the Seraphius, Esaias 6.3. when they
proclanie the name of God in the Temple, give him the Title of holy, thrice
repeated, holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hoasts and Moses tells Aaron Levit.
10.3. that the Lord will be sanctified in all those that come near him, so
that Moses himself is warned to put off his shoes, and the Isralises to wash
their Clothes when they stand before. God, therefore speaking of the Temple
whether men usually resorted unto God, the Prophet David tells us that
holiness becomes his house for ever, Psalm 93.5. now then, they that stand
continually in Gods presence (for God stands in the assembly of the Gods as in
the first verse of this Psalm) they that so often inquire at Gods mouth, as
good Rulers should do, receive directions from God, and know his mind
concerning every Law they make, every cause they scan, and every sentence they
pronounce, they that are set apart to handle the holy things of God, among
which his Judgments have not the lowest place; they that must represent Gods
person and be taken and accounted for Gods among his people, they that must be
a means of preserving purity by their Laws and edicts, to be Patterns and
Presidents in Gods Church upon earth, what a fountain of holiness ought to
spring in their hearts? what manner of persons ought they to be? written within
and without, in their breasts and foreheads, in their hearts and mind, with
holiness to the Lord. For if the Lord will be sanctified in all that come near
him; much more will he be hollowed in all that represents him, there neither is
nor can be any fouler monster in the world then an unholy God.

Secondly, for the Abilities of their Callings; are Magistrates Gods? then must
they be furnished with gifts and parts answerable to their Title, wisdom,
truth, courage, constancy and goodness, to begin with wisdom, it was that
Moses had especial respect unto in the choice of his Judges, Deuteronomy. 1.15.
advising the people to look out for themselves men of wisdom and
understanding, that is not only such as were wise, but had approved themselves
to be so, and were known and reputed for such persons, such a one was David, a
man chosen to that place by God himself, of whom it is testified that he
behaved himself wisely in all his ways, 1 Samuel 18.14. this wisdom was that
which won Solomon fear and reverence from his own people, and reputation from
strangers, that they observed the wisdom of God was in him to do Judgment, 1
Kings 3.28. Indeed the Ruler had need of the wisdom of God. First, to
understand Judgment and equity, that is the rule of Judgment, which being
founded upon Gods will, cannot be understood but by his spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11.
Secondly, it reveals the hidden things of darkness, as God does, 1 Cor. 4.5.
even the secret paths of evill-Doers, who Cover themselves and all their works
under the mantle of the night, nay more then that not only to find out their
ways and works, but besides to dive into their secret Counsels, which being
hidden in their hearts, are like deep waters not to be drawue out but by a man
of understanding, Pro. 20.15. to discover such secrets is the Kings glory, Pro.
25.2. it requires more then a humane spirit. Thirdly, Magistrates need the
wisdom of God to enable them to proportion rewards and punishments to men's
deserts, and to measure out to every man his right; the trying of exact
portions of recompense to men's actions, and chalking out the bounds of right
between man and man, requires a curious and piercing eye, a steady hand, and a
perfect balance of a discerning Judgment, and the rather because things of so
great Importance concerning men's estates and persons, even as far as their
Lives and being, are not only Judged and desided by the Rulers sentence, but
are so resolved and concluded, that their Judgment stands for the most part as
final and Irrevocable determinations.

Lastly, Magistrates need the wisdom of God in spresceing, ordering, and
directing not the affairs of a private family (which yet need discretion to
guide them aright, Psalm 121.5.) but the weighty businesses of whole States
and Kingdoms, which consisting of so many and almost Infinite parts and
members, and requiring for the mannaging of them Instruments of such various
and different natures, and being varied and altered by so many and diverse, and
sometimes contrary occurrences, necessarily requires the wisdom and spirit of
God, to observe and consider, to prescribe and order, to dispose and apply all
these in such agreeing harmony and correspondency, as is required for the
establishing and conserving of public peace and utility. It is hard to
determine whether the Magistrates wisdom be any way useful to a State,
unless it be seconded with truth and with a virtuous habit, which Jethro
required in his Governors as a special grace needful for all such as are
elegible to that dignity. Truth we know is of three sorts, In things, it is the
answerablenesse of things to their appearance; In thoughts or Judgments, it is
the answerablenesse of our Judgment or opinion to things; In words, it is the
answerablenesse of words to the thought or conceit of the mind; these two
latter kinds of truth, namely a right Judgment or opinion of all things, and a
true expression or manifestation of that Judgment in all the words of a
Governor or Judge especially there wherein he pronounces sentence in causes
that comes before him, are in a sort essential to a Governor, so that without
them he seems to be a Judge (which is a special branch of his power) in name
and not Indeed; a Magistrate is the balance of a State, one man brings show of
right on his side, and his adversary opposes him with the appearance of right
on the other side, and both cast their evidences in the Magistrates breast,
like wares into a pair of scales, and he by the standard of the Law, weighing
and trying them one after another, shows which is weighty and which is light;
now what an evil in it self and abomination to the Lord, a false balance is,
Solomon testifies, Pro. 11.1. how much more is a false Magistrate an
abomination both to God and man? whether false or unjust by nature, or apt to
be made so by fear or reward; both dangerous enemies to truth; the latter
blinds the very eyes and Judgment, and both of them pervert the words, Exo.
23.8. this falsehood and untruth in Magistrates, especially through bribery,
Alexander the Emperor, son of Mamma, is reported to abhor with such an
utter detestation, that upon the sight of a corrupt Judge, his color used to
rise, his eyes to sparkle, and his choler so to abound, that it hindered his
speech for a good space, and moved him to prepare his nails to scratch out his
eyes; if this evil were so hateful to a mortal man, what vengeance on the
actors thereof, do we conceive shall be taken by him, with whom there is no
respect of persons, nor taking rewards? 2 Chro. 19.7. A third ability required
in a Ruler is Courage, unto which Fear and Covetousness are as great enemies,
as they are to Truth; of Fear it is evident, and of Covetousness, the most
elegant of all historians affirms, that it does corpus animamque vir^lem
effemmare, it effeminates and softens the temper both of the body and mind; and
of both of them it is true that they perplexe the thoughts, hinder the
Judgment, prevail upon the affections, and consequently pervert all a man's
ways, by forcing, and alluring him unto crooked and by paths. Now, how far
this Courage that we have mentioned is requisite unto a Governor, will appear
not only by the consideration of his place, for it becomes a God to be
undaunted, and fearlesse himself, that must make others tremble, which made
Nehemiah with scorn reject Shemaiahs Counsel of taking Sanctuary in the
Temple as dishonorable to his place, Nehemiah 6.11. should such a man as I fly.
But besides is further evident by the observation of the persons with whom he
has to do, he need be a man of resolution, that must take down so many stout
hoarts, pull down so many high looks, and with Job break the Jaws of the
wicked, and pluck the prey out of their teeth, Job. 29.7. who must enter into
the lists against wild beasts, in the shape of men, Enraged and set on fire by
their own lusts, and backed too often by strong Abetters; this courage is
cherished by nothing more then by Gods fear (for he that fears him can sear
nothing else) and by the contempt of the world, he that neither reguards the
good, nor is affected with the evil which the world can do unto him, will not
easily be put from his resolution by respect to either.

Truth and Courage Joined together must be established by Constancy a fourth
virtuous disposition required in a Governor; truth indeed is in it self
unchangeable, always like it self, unto all persons, and at all times, and so
is the Law which is founded upon truth, of which the Roman complained that it
was, Rex inexorabilis a King not to be Entreated, a golden and not a leaden
Rule to be bowed up and down, and so altered and changed at men's pleasures;
now as the Law is so must the Magistrate be, who is the soul of the Law, or as
others call him a speaking Law. Like a spring of steel which if it be bowed
comes to its place again, not like a door turning upon the hindges, and
standing where one setts it, made to let in one, and shut out another at man's
pleasure, and that according to personal respects. God forbid there should be
found such a changeable disposition in our Governors, as to be stern upon the
bench, and mild in the Closet; quick in a passion, and calm and flat when the
humor is over; hot to day, and cold to morrow; Rough and sharp to the poor,
and mild and gentle to the rich and mighty bitter to an enemy, and pleasant to
a friend, and all in causes of the same nature. Such unstaidnesse in a
Governors heart, and Inequality in his carriage, must necessarily work in the
peoples mind Contempt of his place and person, Insolency and boldness in
offenders, and at last by necessary consequence, ruin and confusion in the
whole State.

The last of the Rulers virtues is goodness, not only in himself but to
others which we call benignity or kindness, wherein as the Magistrate best
resembles God who is good to all, Psalm 145.9. so does he best answer the
place of dignity, and power which he possesses, the end and scope whereof is
the public good, by preserving peace for the cherishing of godliness and
honesty. This sweet Inclination of the Governors disposition, to the
furthering and supporting of the peoples welfare, is employed in the title of a
shepherd often given by the heathen to their Princes, and by the Psalmist to
God himself, Psalm 80.1. of an (...) or benefactor, Luke 22.25. of the father
of a State (Titles ambitiously sought after, and assured and conferred by
flatterers sometimes on such as ill deserved them) But above all others that
goodness is most significantly Enforced in the name of nursing fathers, Esaias
44.23. a care and duty that Moses complains of as too heavy for his
shoulders, to bear the people alone and carry them in his bosom, Number. 11.12.
This goodness of the Governor so sweetens and tempers the yoke of
subjection, which authority has put on the peoples neck, that it makes the
Governors person lovely, his directions pleasant, and his burden light; by
this means Mordecai became great, because he sought the wealth of the people,
and spoke peace to his seed, Hester 10.3. for this goodness of disposition
Titus a Roman Emperor was honored with the title of delitiae humani generis,
the darling of mankind, and renowned to all posterity for that worthy speech
of his, concerning a day wherein he could not remember wherein he had done any
man good, Amici diem perdidi, Oh my friends I have lost a day. To speak no
more of men, it is the honor and happiness of Christ's own Government, that he
comes down like Rain upon the earth, as showers that water the earth, so that
in his days the righteous flourish, Psalm 72.6.7. nay of Gods manner of
ruling over the world, it is said that he gives food to the Hungry, he loses
the Prisoners, opens the eyes of the blind, raises them that are bowed drwn,
loves the righteous, Psalm 146.7.8. in a word that he does good to all.

In these graces of virtuous dispositions, Magistrates who carry Gods name must
resemble his nature, proportionable to all these must be their carriage and
behavior, they that represent unto men Gods person, must do all, So as
becomes a God. First, therefore a Magistrate must speak like a God, open his
mouth in wisdom, seasoning his words with gravity, truth, and holiness; vain
words and railing speeches, filthy Communications, scoffing and Jesting, most
of all prohane discourses, savowring of Athersine or ungodliness, in the mouth
of a Magistrate, are foul blemishes to his honor, and dangerous Presidents to
his hearers; vain Jangling as the Apostle terms it 1 Timothy 1.6. railing
sentence which Michael forbear to the devil himself, Jude 9. nay, Jesting it
self unless it be used with great sobriety, and moderation, hardly befits a
Rulers gravity. A grave Historian relating a Jest which Philip father of
Persius King of Macedon broke upon the Aetolians Ambassador, leaves with all
his censure upon him. et erat Dicacior quam Begem de^^b^^, he was given more to
Jesting then became a King. Nay, if it be possible, a Magistrates words should
be like Solomon's Proverbs, worthy to be recorded to posterity. Like Jobs
speeches for which men waited as for the rain, and after which they replied
not, 29. Job 22.23. especially upon the seat of Judgment, a divine sentence
should be found in the mouth of a King, Pro. 16.20. So that when men here a
Judges sentence from the bench, they should conceive they heard God speaking
from Heaven in Justice, Majesty, and power. Surely the very form and nature of
delivering a sentence by such persons, from such a place, cannot but work
deep Impression in the hearts of such as hear them.

Next unto their words there is nothing more observable in persons of Eminent
place then their Company and Society, by which men gaze on their Inward
dispositions, and accordingly raise unto themselves hopes or fears of good or
evil by their Government. God himself that should be a Pattern for Imitation
to all that are called Gods, Invirons his Throne with Innumerable Companies of
Angels, and with the spirits of Just men made perfect, and suffers none to
behold his face, but such as have clean hands and a pure heart, Psalm 24.2.4.
In Imitation of him the Prophet David both a man and a King after Gods own
heart, vowed that a deceiver should not dwell in his sight, nor a liar come in
his presence, Psalm 101.7. and Job denies a base varlet a room with the dogs
of his flock, Job 30.1. what a shame were it for a Ruler to have a Gehazi in
his Chamber, a Doeg of his privy Counsel, a ^ayling Shemei at his Table, to be
compassed about with Ruffing-like swaggarers, debauched drunkards, Blasphemers,
swearers, profane scoffers, who may make him glad with their wickedness, and
rejoice him with their lies? Hosea 7.3. far be it from our Gods to dishonor
themselves, and their places with the society of such persons as God shall one
day cast out of his presence, to be the overlasting Companions of the Devil
and his Angels, in the ever-burning flame of hell fire. God forbid that a
Christian Magistrate who should chase away evil with his eyes, Pro. 20.8.
should give so much countenance to a wicked wretch, as may harden him to look
him in the face with confidence. Blessed is the Land where the Rulers godly
zeal chaseth away wicked persons, as Job did from amongst men, Job 30.5. to
dwell in the Clifts of the valleys, and in the Caves of the earth.

To Run through all the particulars of a Magistrates Carriage, would tire out
your patience; in a word therefore a Magistrate behaves himself like a God,
when he carries himself with that difference toward the precious and the
vild, that his countenance, words, and rewards, revive the spirit of the godly,
and a pale the faces of the wicked. It was rather kindly then advisedly and
Judiciously spoken of Tullius that Roman Emperor, non oportet quenquam a
facie Imperatoris tristem Discedere, that it is not fit that any man should
depart from the Governors presence with a sad countenance; nay it is hapy when
the Magistrates countenance is like the shadow of death to a wicked wretch, for
whose reformation by milder correction, or cutting off by the stroke of
Justice, he bears the sword and that for the terror of those that do ill, by
executing the vengeance and wrath of God upon them, Romans 13.4. unto which
notwithstanding, he comes Enforced by necessity with much compassion, haud
aliter quam viscera secans sua, as the Roman General spoke of himself,
having before his eyes the Apostles scope, that the spirit may be saved in the
destruction of the flesh, 1 Cor. 5.5. but miserable is that State and near
unto Ruin, in which Governors so carry themselves, that the weeds flourish,
and the Corn starves, that good men depart from the Throne of Judgment with
mourning hearts, and the wicked have recourse unto it, as unto a Sanctuary and
place of assurance.

Thus much I have made bold to Intimate, rather then to open at large, or
press at full, concerning the duties of Subjects and Magistrates, Enforced by
their Titles, they are called Gods; as for my conditional promise of
prosecuting the two points that follow, arising out of the two next
circumstances; that it is God that makes Rulers Gods; And that it is Gods word
by which their honors and Dignities are assured unto them; I had rather
presume to leave my self a debtor, then to trespass to much upon your
patience, only I refer it to your private meditations to consider at your
leisure, that if God set Magistrates upon their Thrones, it is not in the power
of men to pluck them down at their pleasure. Therefore that he can be no
better then Antichrist, whose Character it is to lift up himself above all
that is called God,
that spurns off the Crowns of Princes with his feet, which God has set
upon their heads with his own hand. Secondly, if Gods word be a Commission by
which Magistrates hold their places, it concerns them both to Rule according
to the directions of that word, and besides to countenance, advance, and
propagate, the sacred Ordinances of God, by which they set up their Thrones,
wear their Crowns, and Enjoy their Honors in peace, and with assurance;
Then not by the People by Master White his own confession.
without suppressing whereof that man of sin, could never have so far
advanced his usurped power, trampled upon the Scepters of Princes, bestowed
their Kingdoms and Dominions, at his pleasure, discharged Subjects of their
oaths and Allegiance to their own Lords, and armed them with sundry sorts of
Instruments of death to shed their Sacred Blood.

FINIS.

