THE Christian Doctrine AND SOCIETY OF THE People called Quakers; Cleared from
The Reproach of the late Division of a few in some Part of America, as not
being justly chargeable upon the Body of the said People there or elsewhere.

Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them diligently which cause Division and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, Romans
16.17.

Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking be
put away from you, with all Malice. And be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God, for Christ's sake, has
forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.31, 32.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in Georgeyard in Lombard Street. 1693.

WHereas diverse Accounts have been lately published, in Print, of some late
Division and Disputes between some Persons under the Name of Quakers in
Pensilvania, about several fundamental Doctrins of the Christian Faith (as is
pretended by one Party) which being particularly mentioned, and thereupon
occasion very unduly taken by our Adversaries, to reproach both the Christian
Ministry, and whole Body of the People commonly called Quakers, and their Holy
and Christian Profession, both in England and elsewhere, though no ways concerned
in the said Division or Matters charged, but rather grieved and troubled at it,
and at the indiscreet and reproachful management thereof in Print, to the
amusing and troubling the World therewith, and giving occasion to the Loose,
Ignorant and Profane, to slight and contemn the Truth and the Interest of the
tender Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ.

We are, therefore, tenderly concerned for Truth's sake in behalf of the said
People (as to the Body of them, and for all of them who are sincere to God, and
faithful to their Christian Principle and Profession) to use our Just
Endeavors to remove the Reproach, and all causeless Jealousies concerning us,
touching those Doctrins of Christianity, or any of them pretended (or supposed)
to be in question in the said Division: in Relation whereunto We do, in the
fear of God and in simplicity and plainness of his Truth received, solemnly and
sincerely declare what our Christian Belief and Profession has been, and still
is, in respect to Jesus Christ the only begotten Son of God, his Suffering,
Death, Resurrection, Glory, Light, Power, Great Day of Judgment, etc.

We sincerely profess Faith in God by his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, as
being our Light and Life, our only way to the Father, and also our only
Mediator and Advocate with the Father. (a)

(a) Heb. 12.2. 1 Pet. 1.21. Joh. 14.6. 1 Timothy 2.5.

That God created all things, he made the Worlds, by his Son Jesus Christ, he
being that powerful and living Word of God by whom all things were made, (b)
And that the Father, the Word and the holy Spirit are one, in divine Being
inseparable; one true, living and eternal God, blessed for ever, (c)

(b) Ephesians. 3.9. Joh. 1.1, 2, 3. Heb. 1.2. (c) 1 John 5, 7.

Yet that this Word, or Son of God in the fullness of time, took Flesh, became
perfect Man, according to the Flesh, descended and came of the Seed of Abraham
and David, (d) but was miraculously conceived by the Holy Ghost, and born of
the Virgin Mary. And also further, declared powerfully to be the Son of God,
according to the Spirit of Sanctification, by the Resurrection from the Dead.

(d) Romans 1.3.4. (e) Mat. 1.23. (f) Romans 1.3, 4.

That in the Word (or Son of God) was Life, and the same Life was the Light of
Men; and that he was that true Light which enlightens every Man coming into the
World, (g) And therefore, that Men are to believe in the Light, that they may
become Children of the Light, (h) Hereby we believe in Christ the Son of God,
as he is the Light and Life within us; and wherein we must needs have sincere
respect and honor to (and belief in) Christ; as in his own unapproachable, and
incomprehensible Glory and Fullness, (i) as he is the Fountain of Life and
Light, and Giver thereof unto us; Christ, as in himself, and as in us, being
not divided. And that as Man, Christ dyed for our Sins, rose again and was
received up into Glory in the Heavens. (k) He having, in his dying for all,
been that one great universal Offering and Sacrifice for Peace, Atonement and
Reconciliation between God and Man, (l) and he is the Propitiation not for our
Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World. (m) We were reconcied by his
Death, but saved by his Life.

(g) Joh. 1.4.9. (h) Joh. 12.36. Isa. 2.5. (i) Tim. 6.16. (k) 1 Pet. 3.18. 1 Timothy 3.16. Mat. 19.28. and 25.31. Luke 9.26. and 24.26. (l) Romans 5.10, 11. Heb.
2.17, 18. Ephesians. 2.16, 17. Col. 1.20, 21, 22. (m) 1 John 2.2. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.
Heb. 2.9.

That Jesus Christ who sits at the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty
in the Heavens, yet is he our King, High Priest and Prophet, (n) in his Church,
a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched,
and not Man. (o) He is Intercessor and Advocate with the Father in Heaven, and
there appearing in the Presence of God for us, (p) being touched with the
feeling of our Infirmities, Sufferings and Sorrows. And also by his Spirit in
our Hearts, he makes Intercession according to the Will of God, crying, Abba,
Father. (q)

(n) Zech. 9.9. Luke 19.38. Joh. 12.15. Heb. 3.1.6. Deuteronomy. 18.15, 18. Act. 3.22.
and 7.37. (o) Heb. 8.1, 2. (p) Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24. (q) Romans 8.26, 27, 34.
Gal. 4.6.

For any whom God has gifted (r) and called sincerely to Preach Faith in the
same Christ, both as within and without us, cannot be to Preach two Christ's,
but one and the same Lord Jesus Christ, (s) having respect to those degrees of
our spiritual knowledge of Christ Jesus in us, (t) and to his own unspeakable
fullness and glory, (u) as in himself, in his own entire being, wherein Christ
himself and the least measure of his Light or Life, as in us or in Mankind, are
not divided nor separable, no more than the Sun is from its light. And as he
ascended far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, (x) his fullness
cannot be comprehended, or contained in any finite Creature, (y) but in some
measure known and experienced in us, as we are capable to receive the same, as
of his fullness we have received Grace for Grace. Christ our Mediator, received
the Spirit, not by measure, (z) but in fullness; but to every one of us is given
Grace, according to the Measure of his Gift. (a)

(r) Ephesians. 3.7. 1 Pet. 4.10. (s) 1 Cor. 8.6. chapter 15.3, 8. (t) Joh. 15.26. and
chapter 16.13, 14, 15. (u) Joh. 1.16. (x) Ephesians. 4.10. (y) Coloss. 1.19. and 2.9.
(z) Joh. 3.34. (a) Ephesians. 4.7.

That the Gospel of the Grace of God should be preached in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, (b) being one, (c) in Power, Wisdom, and Goodness,
and indivisible, (or not to be divided) in the great Work of Man's Salvation.

(b) Matthew. 28.19. (c) Joh. 1.1, 2, 3, 4.

We sincerely confess (and believe in) Jesus Christ, both as he is true God,
and perfect Man, (d) and that he is the Author of our living Faith in the Power
and Goodness of God, as manifest in his Son Jesus Christ, and by his own
blessed Spirit (or Divine Unction) revealed in us, (e) whereby we inwardly feel
and taste of his goodness, (f) life and virtue; so as our Souls live and
prosper by and in him: And the inward Sense of this Divine Power of Christ, and
Faith in the same and this inward Experience is absolutely necessary to make a
true sincere and perfect Christian in Spirit and Life.

(d) Joh. 1.1, 2. Romans 9.5. 1 Jo. 5.20. 1 Timothy 2.5. (e) 1 John 2.20, 27. and
chapter 1.1. (f) 1 Pet. 2.3. Joh. 6.33, 35, 51, 57, 58.

That Divine Honor and Worship is due to the Son of God (c); and that he is,
in true Faith to be prayed unto, and the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ called
upon (as the Primitive Christians did) (d) because of the glorious Union or
Oneness of the Father and the Son (e), and that we cannot acceptably offer up
Prayers or Praises to God, nor receive a gracious Answer or Blessing from God,
but in and through his dear Son Christ.

(c) Joh. 5 23. Heb. 1.6. (d) 1 Cor. 1.2. Acts 7.59. (e) Joh. 10.30. 1 John 5.7.

That Christ's Body that was crucified, was not the Godhead, yet by the Power
of God was raised from the Dead; and that the same Christ that was therein
crucified, ascended into Heaven and Glory (f), is not questioned by us. His
Flesh saw no Corruption (g), it did not corrupt, but yet doubtless his Body was
changed into a more glorious (h) and heavenly Condition than 'twas in when
subject to diverse Sufferings on Earth; but how and what manner of Change it met
withal after 'twas raised from the Dead, so as to become such a glorious Body
(as it is declared to be) is too wonderful for Mortals to conceive, apprehend or
pry into (and more meet for Angels to see); the Scripture is silent therein, as
to the manner thereof, and we are not curious to enquire or dispute it; nor do
we esteem it necessary to make ourselves wise above (i) what is written as to
the manner or condition of Christ's glorious Body, as in Heaven, no more than
to enquire how Christ appeared in diverse manners or forms (k), or how he came
in among his Disciples, the Doors being shut (l) or how he vanished out of
their Sight, after he was risen. However, we have cause to believe his Body, as
in Heaven, is changed into a most glorious Condition, far transcending what
'twas in on Earth, otherwise how should our Low Body be changed, so as to be
made like unto his Glorious Body (m); for when he was on Earth, and attended
with Sufferings, he was said to be like unto us in all Things, Sin only
excepted (n); which may not be so said of him as now in a state of Glory, as he
prayed for (o), otherwise where would be the Change both in him and in us?

(f) Luke 24 26. (g) Psalm. 16.10. Acts 2.31. and 13.35, 37. (h) Phil. 3.21. (i)
1 Cor. 4.6. (k) Mark 16.12. Jo. 20.15. (l) Joh. 20.19. Luke 24.36, 37. and chapter
24.31. (m) Phil. 3.21. (n) Heb. 2.17 and 4.15. (o) Joh. 17.5.

True and living Faith in Christ Jesus the Son of the living God (p), has
respect to his entire Being and Fullness, to him entirely as in himself, and as
all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him (q), and also an Eye and
Respect to the same Son of God (r) as inwardly making himself known in the
Soul, in every degree of his Light, Life, Spirit, Grace and Truth, and as he is
both the Word of Faith, and a quickening Spirit in us (s), whereby he is the
immediate Cause, Author, Object and Strenth of our living Faith in his Name and
Power, and of the Work of our Salvation from Sin, and Bondage of Corruption;
and the Son of God cannot be divided from the least or lowest Appearance of his
own Divine Light (or Life in us or in Mankind) no more than the Sun from its
own Light; nor is the sufficiency of his Light within by us set up in
opposition to him the Man Christ or his fullness considered as in himself, or
without us; nor can any measure or degree of Light, received from Christ (as
such) be properly called the Fullness of Christ, or Christ as in Fullness, nor
exclude him (so considered) from being our complete Savior, for Christ himself
to be our Light, our Life and Savior (t) is so consistent that without his
Light we could not know Life nor him to save us from Sin or deliver us from
Darkness, Condemnation or Wrath to come: And where the least degree or measure
of this Light and Life of Christ within is sincerely waited in, followed and
obeyed; There Is a blessed increase of Light and Grace known and felt, as the
Path of the Just it shines more and more, until the Perfect Day (u), and
thereby a growing in Grace, and in the knowledge of God, and of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, has been, and is truly experienced. And this Light, Life
or Spirit of Christ within (for they are one Divine Principle) is sufficient to
lead into all Truth, having in it the diverse Ministrations both of Judgment and
Mercy, both of Law and Gospel (even that Gospel which is preached in every
intelligent Creature under Heaven). It does not only, as in its first
Ministration manifest Sin, and reprove and condemn for Sin, but also excites
and leads them that believe in it to true Repentance, and thereupon to receive
that Mercy, Pardon and Redemption in Christ Jesus, which he has obtained for
Mankind on those Gospel-terms of Faith (in his Name) true Repentance and
Conversion to Christ thereby required.

(p) Jo. 14.1. (q) Matt. 28.18. chapter 11.27. John 17.2. Heb. 1.4. chapter 2.8. (r)
John 14.23. and 17.21, 22, 23, 24, 26. ver. (s) 1 Cor. 15.45. Romans 10.7, 8. (o)
Jo. 1.4.9. and chapter 3.19, 20. and chapter 12.35, 36, 46. and chapter 8.12. (u) Prove.
4.18. Ps. 36.9.

So that the Light and Life of the Son of God within, truly obeyed and
followed, as being the Principle of the second or new Covenant, as Christ the
Light is confessed to be (even as he is the Seed or Word of Faith in all Men)
this does not leave Men or Women (who believe in the Light) under the first
Covenant, nor as Sons of the Bondwoman, as the litteral Jews were, when gone
from the Spirit of God, and his Christ in them) but it naturally leads them
into the new Covenant, into the new and living way, and to the Adoption of
Sons, to be Children and Sons of the Freewoman, of Jerusalem from above.

It Is true, that we ought not to lay aside, nor any to undervalue (but highly
to esteem) true Preaching and the Holy Scriptures, and the sincere Belief and
Faith of Christ, as he died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justification,
together with Christ's Inward and Spiritual Appearance, and work of Grace in
the Soul, livingly to open the Mystery of his Death, and perfectly to effect
both our Reconciliation, Sanctification and Justification; and wherever
Christ qualifies and calls any to Preach and Demonstrate the Mystery of his
Coming. Death and Resurrection, etc. even among the Gentiles Christ ought
accordingly to be both Preached, Believed and Received.

Yet supposing there have been, or are such Pious and Conscientious Gentiles,
in whom Christ was and is as the Seed or Principle of the Second or new
Covenant, the Light, the Word of Faith (as is granted) and that such live
uprightly and faithfully to that Light they have, or to what is made known of
God in them, and who therefore in that State cannot perish (but shall be saved)
as is also confessed; and supposing these have not the outward Advantage of
Preaching, Scripture, or thence the Knowledge of Christ's outward coming, being
outwardly crucified and risen from the Dead, can such (thus considered) be
justly excluded Christianity or the Covenant of Grace (as to the virtue, life
and nature thereof) or truly deemed no Christians, or void of any Christian
Faith in the Life and Power of the Son of God within, or be only Sons of the
first Covenant, and Bondwoman, like the litteral outside Jews? Or must all be
excluded any true Knowledge or Faith of Christ within them, unless they have the
Knowledge of Christ as without them? No sure, for that would imply insufficiency
in Christ and his Light, as within them, and to frustrate God's good End and
Promise of Christ, and his free and universal Love and Grace to Mankind, in
sending his Son. We charitably believe the contrary, that they must have some
true Faith and Interest in Christ and his Mediation, because of God's free Love
in Christ to all Mankind, and Christ's dying for all Men (w), and being given
for a Light of the Gentiles, and for Salvation to the Ends of the Earth (x).
And because of their living up sincerely and faithfully to his Light in them,
their being Pious, Conscientious, accepted and saved (as is granted) we cannot
reasonably think a sincere pious or godly Man, wholly void of Christianity (of
what Nation soever he be) because none can come to God or Godliness but by
Christ (y), by his Light and Grace in them: Yet grant if there be such pious
sincere Men or Women as have not the Scripture or knowledge of Christ, as
outwardly crucified, etc. they are not perfect Christians in all Perfections,
as in all Knowledge and Understanding, all Points of Doctrine, outward Profession
of Christ; so that they are better than they profess or pretend to be, they are
more Jews inward, and Christians inward than in outward Show or Profession.
There are Christians sincere and perfect in Kind or Nature, in Life and
Substance, though not in Knowledge and Understanding. A Man or Woman having the
Life and Fruits of true Christianity, the Fruits of the Spirit of Christ in
them that can talk little thereof, or of Creeds, Points or Articles of Faith
(yea many that cannot read Letters) yet may be true Christians in Spirit and
Life; and some could die for Christ that could not dispute for him; and even
Infants that die in Innocence are not excluded the Grace of God or Salvation in
and by Christ Jesus, the Image and Nature of the Son of God being in some
Measure in them, and they under God's Care and special Providence. See Matt.
18.2.10.

(w) 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. (x) Isa. 49.6. Luke 2.32. Acts 13.47. (y) Joh. 14.6.

And though we had the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, and a
Belief of Christ crucified and risen, etc. we never truly knew the Mystery
thereof, until we were turned to the Light of his Grace and Spirit within us,
we knew not what it was to be reconciled by his Death, and saved by his Life,
or what 'twas to know the Felloship of his Sufferings, the Power of his
Resurrection, or to be made conformable unto his Death, we knew not, until he
opened our Eyes and turned our Minds from Darkness unto his own Divine Light
and Life within us.

Notwithstanding, we do so sincerely and greatly esteem and value the Holy
Scriptures, preaching and teaching of Faithful, divinely Inspired, Gifted and
Qualified Persons and Ministers of Jesus Christ, as being great outward Helps,
and instrumental in his Hand, and by his Spirit for Conversion, where God is
pleased to afford those outward Helps and Means, as that we neither do nor may
oppose the sufficiency of the Light or Spirit of Christ within to such outward
Helps or Means so as to reject, disesteem, or undervalue them, for they all
proceed from the same Light and Spirit, and tend to turn Men's Minds thereunto,
and all center therein.

Nor can the Holy Scriptures or true Preaching without be justly set in
opposition to the Light or Spirit of God or Christ within, for his faithful
Messengers, are Ministers thereof, being sent to turn People to the same Light
and Spirit in them. Acts 26.18. Romans 13.2. 2 Cor. 4.6. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Jo. 2.8.

It Is certain, That great is the Mystery of Godliness in itself, in its own
Being and Excellency, namely that God should be, and was manifest in the Flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World and received up into Glory.

And it is a great and precious Mystery of Godliness and Christianity also that
Christ should be spiritually and effectually in men's Hearts, to save and
deliver them from Sin, Satan and Bondage of Corruption, Christ being thus
revealed in true Believers, and dwelling in their Hearts by Faith, Christ
within the Hope of Glory, our Light and Life, who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. And
therefore this Mystery of Godliness, both as in its own Being and Glory, and
also as in Men (in many hid and in some revealed) has been and must be
Testified, Preached and Believed, where God is pleased to give Commission (and
prepare People's Hearts for the same) and not in Man's Will.

Concerning the Resurrection of the Dead, and the great Day of Judgment, yet to
come, beyond the Grave or after Death, and Christ's coming without us, to Judge
the Quick and the Dead (as diverse Questions are put in such Terms.) What the
Holy Scriptures plainly declare and testify in these Matters we have great
reason to credit and not to question, and have been always ready to embrace,
with respect to Christ and his Apostle's own Testimony and Prophecies.

1. For the Doctrine of the Resurrection; If in this Life only we have Hope in
Christ, we are of all Men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. We sincerely believe,
not only a Resurrection in Christ from the fallen sinful State here, but a
Rising and Ascending into Glory with him hereafter, that when he at last
appears we may appear with him in Glory, Col. 3.4. 1 John 3.2.

But that all the Wicked, who live in Rebellion against the Light of Grace, and
die finally impenitent, shall come forth to the Resurrection of Condemnation.

And that the Soul or Spirit of every Man and Woman shall be reserved in its
own distinct and proper Being, (so as there shall be as many Souls in the World
to come as in this) and every Seed (vea every Soul) shall have its proper Body,
as God is pleased to give it, 1 Cor. 15. A Natural Body is sown, a Spiritual
Body is raised; that being first which is Natural and afterward that which is
spiritual. And though it is said this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and
this mortal shall put on Immortality; the change shall be such as Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption inherit
Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. Chapter We shall be raised out of all Corruption and
Corruptibility, out of all Mortality; and the Children of God and of the
Resurrection shall be Equal to the Angels of God in Heaven.

(z) Mat. 22.30. Mark. 12.25. Luke 20.36.

And as the Celestial Bodies do far excel Terrestrial; so we expect our
Spiritual Bodies in the Resurrection shall far excel what our Bodies now are:
and we hope none can justly blame us for thus expecting better Bodies than now
they are. Howbeit we esteem it very unnecessary to dispute or question how the
Dead are raised, or with what Body they come? But rather submit that to the
wisdom and pleasure of Almighty God.

2ly. For the Doctrine of Eternal Judgment.

God has committed all Judgment unto his Son Jesus Christ and he is both Judge
of quick and Dead, and of the states and ends of all Mankind, Jo. 5.22.27. Act.
10.42. 2 Timothy 4.1. 1 Pes. 4.5.

That there shall be hereafter a great Harvest. Which is the End of the World,
a great day of Judgment, and the Judgment of that great day the Holy Scripture
is clear, (a) Mat. 13.39, 40, 41, Chapter 10.15. and 11.24. Jude 6. When the Son of
Man comes in his Glory and all the Holy Angels with him; then shall he sit
upon the Throne of his Glory and before him shall be gathered all Nations, etc.
Mat. 25.31, 32. to the end, compared with Chap. 22.31. Mark 8.38. Luke 9.26.
and 1 Cor 15.52. 2 These. 1.7, 8. to the end, and 1 These. 4.16. Rev. 20.12, 13,
14, 15.

That this Blessed Heavenly Man this Son of Man who has so deeply suffered and
endured so many great Indignities and persecutions from his Adversaries (both
to himself and his Members and Brethren) should at last even in the last and
great day signally and manifestly appear in Glory and Triumph; attended with
all his glorious Heavenly Host, and Retinue, before all Nations, before all his
Enemies, and those that have denied him, this will be to their great terror and
amazement; that this most glorious Heavenly Man and his Brethren that have bin
so much contemned and set at naught, should be thus exalted over their Enemies
and persecutors in glory and Triumph is a righteous thing with God; and that
they that suffer with him should appear with him in glory and dignity when he
thus appears at last. Christ was Judge of the World and the Prince thereof when
on Earth, Joh. 9.39. and 12.31. He is still Judge of the World, the wickedness
and Prince thereof by his Light, Spirit and Gospel in Men's Hearts and
Consciences, Joh. 16.8, 11. Matt. 12.18, 20. Isa. 42.1. Romans 2.16. 1 Pet. 4.6.
And he will be the Judge and final determiner thereof in that great Day
appointed; God having appointed a Day wherein he will Judge the World in
Righteousness by that Man whom he has ordained. Christ foretold, it shall be
more tolerable for them of the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of
Judgment, than for that City or People that would not receive his Messengers or
Ministers, etc. Matthew. 10.15. and see Chap. 11.24. and Mark 6.11. Luke 10.12,
14. It Is certain that God knows how to deliver the Godly out of all their
Trials and Afflictions, and at last to bring them forth and raise them up into
Glory with Christ; so he knows also how to reserve the unjust and finally
Impenitent unto the Day of Judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. He will bring
them forth unto the Day of Destruction, Job 21.30. The Lord can and will
reserve such Impenitent presumptuous and Rebellious Criminals as bound under
Chains of Darkness (as were the sallen Angels) unto the Judgment of the great
day, Jude 6. Mat. 25.30. It Is not for us to determine or dispute the manner how
they shall be so reserved; but leave it to God, he knows how.

Touching the Opinion of the Revolution or Transmigration of Humane Souls, or
their passing out of one Body into another, etc. as it is deemed originally to
have sprung from the Heathen and received among Jews and some others by
Tradition, and said to be the Opinion of our Empedocles, Pythagoras and
Egyptians, and partly of Julian the Apostate when he dreamed that the Soul of
Alexander the Great was crept into his Carcass, or rather that he was Alexander
himself in another Body. And thereupon Rejecting the suit of the Persians for
peace; presumtuously Proceeded in the War and to Bloodshed against them, until
at unawares he got his Deaths wound; according as is more fully related in
History; particularly Socrates's Scholasticus, Lib. 1. Chapter 17. and lib. 3. Chapter
18. Eccles. Chron. fo. 577. See also Dr. Hammond's Annotations on Joh. 9.1, 2,
3. We are not concerned in any such notion, but (as a People) wholly clear of
it. We deem it neither necessary to Faith nor safe to receive or defend, as
either held by those Heathen Egyptians or Jews aforesaid, nor as it is
insinuated in a Late Pamphlet of 200 queries Concerning the Doctrine of the
Revolution of Humane Souls, Supposing twelve Revolutions or twelve distinct
Intervals of Life to every Man, as being twelve several times born into the
World for each one to live (or consummate) the space of 1000 years on Earth.
Though this opinion of such Revolution appears not to be a point in present
Controversy in the Book aforesaid (or in Pensilvania) nor maintained as any
Divine opening, Revelation or necessary Article of Faith, but rather Evaded
from being publicly controverted, yet in as much as there appears some Ground
of suspicion in the Case, and as it seems to be favored implicitly by some:
Therefore that we as a People may not be suspected about it, we sincerely
declare our Clearness from the said opinion, as really esteeming it not safe to
propagate or maintain, or trouble Peoples Heads or Minds with it, but all to
improve their present time and mercies; and we are the less concerned about the
aforesaid Queries and Doctrine, because we find not any known person or persons
of credible Authority that will adventure to assert that opinion, either as
divinely Revealed or opened, or as necessary to be believed or received as an
Article of Faith, or that will undertake to demonstrate how many times or
Intervals of life they themselves have lived on Earth, and what transactions or
remarkable passages (or things good or bad,) they have done or passed thorough
in those their supposed past Intervals of Life.

The CONCLUSION.
TO conclude; as we are persuaded want of walking in the true Light, and want
of Christian Charity is the great cause of Divisions, in professed Christian
Societies of all sorts, and of this difference among a few persons in America
professing the same Light and Truth with us: We are ashamed of (and surprised
at) the bitter language and severe Consequences and Treatment in some of the
Printed Books from one party, and exposing the weaknesses and unwarrantable
expressions of some of the other to the open Enemies of both, and of Religion
it self; all which (as also to make any public Rent in a Religious society on
personal offenses or Private Occasions) are greatly unbecoming our Christian
Profession, Charity, or Society. And we pray God rebuke and stop this
troublesome Spirit of Enmity, and Division wherever it is; for it makes great
Disturbance and Trouble in the Creation, and where it enters in Church or
State, yet it is ill work, is no new thing: 'twas the same Spirit that infested
and troubled the Primitive Christian Churches, causing Divisions and Offenses
contrary to the Gospel of Peace, at first received, and whereby parties and
Schisms were made; and one to say I am of Paul, another of Apollo, another of
Cephas which Carnality, the Apostle reproved, as knowing and testifying that
Christ (whom they all professed) is not divided; and if Christian Tenderness and
Charity might Influence all parties, we see no real cause for these few persons
aforesaid to divide or separate outwardly, especially about Doctrine, seeing
both profess one Light, one Spirit one God, and one Lord Jesus Christ, and
Faith in him, and sincerely to believe the holy Scriptures, and (even the
person charging the other in Print) to own the Body of the People called
Quakers, and seems to approve of our ancient faithful and generally approved
Friends, Writers or Publishers of our Doctrins and Principles, and Preachers
among us generally owned and approved by us, as Men of sound Judgment and
understanding, and as owning the fundamental Articles of the Christian and
Protestant Faith. Thus far the Person charging, in his serious Appeal, p. 6. As
also the same person further openly signified at the other Friends meeting,
that he (and his Friends) had unity with the most there as to the main. As also
withal faithful Friends every where, excepting only some in their meeting that
were unsound, etc. Reason and Causes, p. 26. and therefore if most on both
sides have Unity as to the Main, we may charitably suppose they do not differ
in the Main or substance of Christian Faith or Doctrine before cited (and
sincerely owned and confessed by us) if tenderly and duly considered by both
sides, as Men seeking Peace, Love and Concor'd. Wherefore the difference was
very indiscreetly managed, aggravated, and exposed to separation, Printing, and
Reproach, seeing 'twas not in the Main -- We wholly dislike of such rending and
tearing, such dividing and aggravating proceedings and bitter Treatment, and
have no Unity therewith -- But desire the Lord in Mercy to Repair Breaches, and
heal Backslidings among them, and all esteemed Christian Professions and
Societies, and incline all to the Main, to the True Light, to the substance and
Life of Christianity, to true Love, fervent Charity and Tender-heartedness and
Forgiveness toward one another, and to follow Peace with all Men, and
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord.

A POSTSCRIPT relating to the Doctrine of the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment.
AT the last trump of God, and Voice of the Archangel, the Dead shall be raised
Incorruptible, the Dead in Christ shall rise first, 1 Cor. 15.52. 1 These. 4.16.
compared with Mat. 24.31.

Many are often alarmed, in Conscience here by the Word and Voice of God, who
stop their Pars, and slight those Warnings; but the great and final Alarm of
the laft Trumpet, they cannot stop their Ears against nor escape, it will
unavoidably seize upon, and further awaken them finally to Judgment. They that
will not be alarmed in their Consciences unto Repentance, nor out of their
Sins here, must certainly be alarmed to Judgment hereafter.

Whosoever do now wilfully shut their Eyes, hate, contem or shun the Light of
Christ, or his Appearance within, shall, at last, be made to see, and not be
able to shun or hide themselves from his glorious and dreadful. Appearance from
Heaven with his mighty Angels, as with Lightning and in flaming Fire, to render
Vengeance on all them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, 1 These. 7.8. Mat. 24.27. Luke 17.24. Dan. 10.6. Job 37.3.

And though many now evade and reject the Inward Convictions and Judgment of
the Light, and shut up the Records or Books thereof in their own Consciences,
they shall all be at last opened and every one judged of these things, recorded
therein, according to their Works, Rev. 20.12, 13, 14, 15.

Signed in behalf of our Christian Profession and People aforesaid,

George Whitehead, Ambrose Rigg, William Fallowfield James Park, Charles
Marshall, John Bowater, John Vaughton, William Bingley.


FINIS.

