A RICH CABINET, WITH Variety of Inventions; Unlocked and opened, for the
recreation of Ingenious Spirits at their vacant hours.

Being Receipts and Conceits of several Natures, and fit for those who are
lovers of Natural and Artificial Conclusions.

Whereunto is added variety of Recreative Fireworks, both for Land, Air, and
Water.

ALSO Fireworks of Service, for Sea and Shore, very fitting for these Warlike
times of Action.

Collected by J. W. a lover of Artificial Conclusions.

Printed for William Gilbertson at the sign of the Bible without Newgate in
Giltspur-street. 1651.

TO ALL LOVERS of Ingenious and Artificial Conclusions.
COurteous Reader, (you know, and I know, that) the Wits of this Age are acute
and various, therefore how to please all men's fancies is a Task too ponderous
for my undertaking. I have here unlock't and opened to your view a rich Cabinet
of varieties; If there be any thing therein contained that may yield you
profit, solace of the mind, recreation of the spirits, or content, I shall
think my labor well bestowed, and be glad; If it be otherwise, I shall be
sorry that I have nothing therein to please your mind, entreating you to shut
down the lid again, and then I hope there is no hurt done.

This may be compared to a Garden composed of sundry varieties, wherein you may
pick and cull out those Flowers which best pleases you, and are fittest for
your pleasure or profit: For the laborious Be gathers her cordial Honey,
and the venomous Spider her corroding poison many times from one Flower. And I
know that there are some envious Critics that will snarle at me for publishing
many things contained herein; But I care the less, because I aim at the
public and no private end; And no Man (I think) should be borne only to
himself, and hide his Talent: And therefore these few Receipts which I have
collected, with diverse of mine own, (gentle Reader) I dedicate freely to thy
use; Knowing that Art imitating Nature, glories always in the variety of
things which she produces, to satisfy the minds of curious Inquisitors of
Natural and Artificial Conclusions. Therefore I doubt not but there are many
things contained in this small Volume that will give satisfaction to the
Ingenious, for whose sakes I have compiled it: So taking leave, I will ever
remain

An Artists Friend, JOHN WHITE.

A Table for the ready finding of each several Receipt in this BOOK.
1 Receipt, How to make a glorious Light with a Candle, like the Sunshine. 2
Receipt, How to cleave a thin Groat in sunder like two Groats. 3 How to hang a
Payle of water upon a stick, and nothing to support it. 4 How to make dainty
sport with a C^t. 5 How to make very pretty sport with Ducks, or Poultry. 6 To
have pretty sport at Cock-fighting with a single Cock. 7 To know the hour of
the day by a Ring and a Glass. 8 An other, to know the hour of the day or
night at any time. 9 To have three Capons upon a Spit at one s^^e, and one
shall be Raw, an other Boiled, and the other Roasted. 10 To make two Knives to
hang upon a Glass without falling. 11 A speedy way to make a Horse fat, plump
and lusty. 12 How to keep a Horse from tyring, and to make him foam at the Bit.
13 To put ones finger, or to wash in melted Lead. 14 A ready way to teach
Children their A B C in manner of play. 15 An excellent way to teach one to
read speedily and truly. 16 Diverse rare conceited motions performed by a
Magnet, or Lodestone. 17 The making of a Weather-Glasse, whereby to know the
change of weather. 18 How to catch Kites, Ravens, Crows, or the like alive. 19
A ready way to catch Pigeons, or other Foul. 20 A merry Receipt, showing how to
catch a Pick-pocket. 21 How to make Birds or Foul drunk, that you may take
them. 22 A way to take Fish in a dark night, with a Candle under water. 23 An
excellent Bayte to catch Fish with an Angle. 24 To make one Watching-Candle
outlast three Watching-Candles. 25 How to write a name upon a paper, and burn
it, yet afterward it may plainly be read. 26 How to see plainly into a dark
Room at a great distance. 27 How to view the back part of your Head by
Glasses. 28 A Trick to tell or name all the Spots, or Coate-cards, yet never
see them. 29 How to preserve and keep sweet all kind of Flesh for a month
together. 30 How to make a present drink for Travelers, that cannot relish
strange drink. 31 A good drink for Soldiers, Mariners, or poor People. 32 A
profitable way to harden Leather, to last a long time. 33 To make a dainty
Walking-Staffe to have Knobs where you please. 34 A secret way to write Love
Letters, or other, that cannot be discovered. 35 How to know when the Moon is
just at the full by a Glass of water. 36 How to know the Moons age at her
increase. 37 How to know both the Increase and Decrease of the Moon. 38 How to
fetch Oil or Grease out of Books, Writings, Papers, or Garments. 39 How to
refresh old Pictures, and make them look as if they were new. 40 To keep
Swords, Halberts, Edge tools, etc. seven years from rusting. 41 An excellent
Cement for broken Glasses, China Dishes, or the like. 42 How to grave Arms,
Posies, or Names upon an Egg. 43 How to make Wax, either Red, or Green. 44 A
pretty way how to cast flowers in Wax of diverse colors. 45 How to make a bunch
of Grapes in Wax, which will seem natural. 46 How to Inlay colors in Metal,
that will show like Ammell. 47 How to Inlay Boxes, Cabinets, or the like, with
hard Wax. 48 To harden the white of an Egg into an Artificial Gum, for diverse
uses. 49 How to make a true South Sundyall, for a wall. 50 How to make an
Horozontall, or flat Dyall, for a poast. 51 How to make a Sun Dyall upon the
Seeling of a Room. 52 To make a Candle Dyall, to know the time of night. 53
How to keep Cherries, Pears, Nuts, etc. fresh all the year. 54 To make
Grapes, and other Fruit to have no stones or kernels. 55 How to make Yellow
Roses grow; and make things Green all the year. 56 How to color Fruit, and to
make them taste of Spices. 57 How to know which way the wind blows on the
seeling, at all times. 58 How to keep Drink quick and fresh, that begins to
be sour and dead. 59 An excellent way for baking of Bread, without a hard
crust. 60 A dainty glistering plastering for Seelings, or for Walls.
Some few, (but choice) Physical Receipts, etc.
61 OF the great virtues of Crocum Martis, fit to be used at this present in
the Army. 62 Of the rare virtue of the Quintessence of Honey and Wax, for many
diseases. 63 Of the manifold operations of the Oil of Cinnamon. 64 How to
distill and make Oil of Rosemary Flowers; with its virtue. 65 How to help
Deafness, and to expel wind from the Head. 66 How to help the Toothache,
without drawing. 67 A dainty Receipt for curious Artists, or others, for
comforting the Eyes. 68 Of Fractures or broken Bones, or Joints displaced, with
their cure. 69 A precious Salve for all those that have had any member out of
Joint. 70 How to order and dress a wound when it is first hurt. 71 An
excellent Unguent or Liniment for Green Wounds. 72 A sovereign Oil or Balm
for several Wounds. 73 An excellent Emplaster for all Wounds or Ulcers. 74 An
other excellent Plaster for wounds in the Breast, or other parts. 75 Of the
general significations of Sicknesses, either present, or near hand. 76 Of the
signification of the several colors of some Urines.
A Table or heads of the several sorts of Fire Works both for Land and Sea
service, contained in this ensuing Treatise.
1 THe order and making in a true proportion, all sorts of Moulds for
Fireworks. 2 The making of Roulers, Rammers, and other things for Coffins. 3
How to order and make the Coffins of paper. 4 The order and manner how you
shall choke a Rocket. 5 The manner of driving a Rocket, with the Instruments
belonging thereto. 6 Of the composition and Receipts for your Rockets. 7 The
manner of heading a Rocket, and order of capping it. 8 The manner of finishing
a Rocket. 9 The manner of firing Rockets, with the descriptton of a Staff for
the same. 10 Several Compositions for the ordering of Stars of several
colors. 11 The order and manner of making the best sort of Stars. 12 The
order and making of several Fireworks for the Rocket, as Serpents or Fisgigs,
Reports, Gold and Silver rain, etc. 13 How to make your Fireworks to run upon
a Line, backward and forward. 14 How to make a wheel of Firework to run
forward and backward on the ground. 15 An other way, for a single wheel to be
placed on a post, to turn both ways. 16 The order to make a sixed wheel,
standing upon a post, giving diverse Reports. 17 An other fixed wheel, which
will cast forth many Rockets into the air. 18 An other wheel, which will cast
forth diverse Serpents, and as many Reports. 19 Of night Combatants, with
Faulchions and Targets, Clubbes, Maces, etc. 20 An other dainty one with
Fisgigs, called Jack in a Box. 21 Of Bolts of fire for the ground, which will
make the air rebound with their reports. 22 The making of a Fire-ball for the
ground, which will be in continual motion. 23 The making of a Ball for the
water, which will burn with great violence. 24 An other dainty Water-ball,
which will shoot forth many Reports. 25 How to make a Dragon, or the like, to
run on in the line, spitting of fire. 26 The manner to represent S. George
fighting with a Dragon. 27 How to make a Whale, or Mermaide, or other, to play
upon the water. 28 Of diverse other rare works, which are to be performed on the
water. 29 The composing of a Ship of fireworks, with several Motions. 30 Of
Lances of Fire for pleasure, and for Service. 31 How to Arm a Dart or Javelin
with Wildfire, for the Sails or sides of Ships. 32 How to enter up a pair of
Stairs, or to defend ones self, being in a narrow Room. 33 How to defend a
Breach, a Ship, or other place of defense. 34 How to shoot Arrows of
Wildfire out of a Cross Bow. 35 How to burn Wodden Bridges, Gates, Houses,
etc. 36 How to cut the Cables, or the Shrouds of Ships at a good distance. 37
Other devices for the cutting of Shrouds, or the like. 38 An other for the same
business. 39 How to do excellent Service against an Enemy, who would enter a
Breach, a Gate, a Bridge, a Ship, etc. 40 How to prevent a train of Powder
laid to blow you up, before you enter a Ship, or other place.
A Rich Cabinet, with variety of Inventions.
RECEIPT. First. How to make a glorious light with a Candle, like the Sunshine.
THis is a rare Conceit, and fit for those Artists or others that perform
curious and fine works by Candlelight, as Jewellers, Ingravers, or the like,
or those which are weak sighted to read by, never dazeling the Eye.

Go to the Glasse-house, or Glasse-shop, and let them blow you a thin round
Globe-glasse, bigger then a penny Loaf, (the bigger the better) with a short
neck like a Bottle, they know how to make them. When you have this Glass, with
Glue or Wax bind a piece of Tape or Packthread about the neck or top, making a
little loope therewith to hang by; Then fill your Glass with the purest
Conduit or Spring Water you can get, (putting some Aqua-vitae therein to keep
it from freezing) stopping it close to keep the dust out; having thus done, if
you will use it at a Table or Bench, knock a Tenter-hooke or Nail into the
Seeling or Shelfe, and with a Tape or Packthread fasten it to the loope and
hang it up; (but a round stick were better to hang it on, putting it into a
poast or hole in the wall, that you may let it higher or lower at your pleasure
in turning the stick:) Then behind your Glass set a Candle lighted upon the
Table, and you shall have a glorious light through the Glass, and water for
your purpose; behold the Figure following.

a man looking at a book on a table in front of a glass bulb and a candle

Some use to place a sheet of oyled paper betwixt them and a candle, and this
will cause a good light.

RECEIPT II. How (for a wager) to cleave a thin Groat or other piece of Silver
in sunder like two Groats.
THis to many will seem impossible, yet may thus be done. Take three small
Pins, and prick them down upon a board, or table triangular-wise, and then
take a thin whole Groat and lay it level on the heads of the three Pins, as
you seee in this same Figure; having a table with pins on it thus done, take a
piece of Brimstone and bruise or beat it to powder, covering the Groat therewith
all over in a pretty thickness, and then with a lighted piece of paper or a
candle, set the Brimstone on fire until it be consumed; when this is done and
the fire out, you shall see the edges to open a little like a dry Oyster, then
take a Knife and put into it, and it will easily cleave in sunder, having the
impression on both sides very perfect.

RECEIPT III. To lay one end of a Staff or Stick upon a Stool or Table, and to
hang a Paile full of water at the other end, having nothing to hold on the
stick, nor nothing under the Payle.
TO perform this conceit, do thus; Lay one end of a Staff or Stick a pretty
way upon a Table or Stool (so that it roale not off) letting the other end
hang over the Table likewise; (as you may see in this Figure here expressed;) a
bench with a stick attached to it and bucket hanging from the stick then take a
Pale full of water and hang the bayl or handle upon the same; but you must have
an other short stick that will reach just from the inside of the bottom of the
Pale to the long stick on the Table, placing the short stick just under the
bail very stiff; and then shall the Payle of water hang from the ground upon
the long staves end on the Table without falling, seeming very strange; but
this is something difficult at first, till you hit just in the center of
gravitie, yet I have often done it.

RECEIPT IV. How to make dainty sport with a Cat.
IF you will have some sport with a Cat, then get a little Bell, such as the
tame Hawks have at their legs, and tie the Bell something hard at the end of
the Cats tail, and let her go; the feeling of her tail smart, and hearing of
the bell to ingle, she will run up and down as if she were mad, flying against
the walls and windows; then if she can she will get into some hole to hide her
self, but when she wags her tail never so little, then out she comes, and is
as mad as before, and never will rest in quiet till it be taken off, or she can
get it off her self.

Another.
Some have shod a Cat round, with putting melted pitch into four Walnut-shels,
and placing her feet therein, and she will make pretty sport.

Another.
I was told of a merry Fellow that came into an Alehouse in cold weather, and
finding but a reasonable fire, said, he would make the Cat piss it out; and
watching his opportunity, he gets his Hostis Cat, putting her head betwixt
his thighs, and holding her four feet fast in one hand, and with the other
hand held up her tail near the fire, and she did piss such abundance that
she quite quenched the same.

RECEIPT V. How to make very pretty sport with Ducks, or Poultry.
ONe Summers day my self and two or three Friends, walked into the Fields for
our recreation, and being dry and hungry, we went to a Victualling-house in a
Country Village, where we could get nothing to eat but Bread and Cheese; and
sitting in an Arbor, the Woman's Ducks being near us, we flung them our
parings of Cheese; the Ducks were very greedy of the same; (then quoth one of
our company,) I will show you some sport.

Presently he gets about a yard of strong thread, and finding a little rag
of red cloth, tyeth it to one end of the thread; and at the other end tyeth a
piece of Cheese (somewhat less then a Bean) with part of the rind on, and
throws it amongst the parings to the Foul; presently one of them swallowed
it down; now the rest of the Thread and the Rag dragged behind her, and she
wadling up and down, perceived the red Rag to follow her, of which she was sore
afraid; then she did run from place to place, not knowing what to do; at
length she took wing and flew into a Pond of water, and there she quackt, but
presently she spied the rag to to swim after her, then down she dived, then up
again, then down, then up; at length out of the Pond again in her former
posture; at which the Woman was amazed, and thought her Duck was bewitched: But
at the length the thread was tangled at some bush or other, and so broke, or
pulled the Cheese out of her belly, and then she was quiet.

The like sport you may have with other Poultry, by tying a long white
Goose-quill, (or a light stick with a rag on the top) upright at their Tail.

RECEIPT VI. How to have pretty sport at Cock-fighting, with a single Cock.
TAke a pretty big Looking-glass, and set it against a wall on the ground in
any Room or other place (not full upright) tying the string of the Glass with
a nail to keep it from falling: then put a Cock into the Room, and throw
some crumbs near the Glass, and when he sees his picture therein, you shall
have dainty sport with him, for he will fight vehemently with his own shadow,
supposing there is another Cock, for as he moves, so does his shadow:
sometimes with his motion he loses it, and then he will look behind the
Glass for the other Cock, and not finding him, he will clap his wings and crow
as though he had got the victory; but spying it again, he will begin a fresh
battle.

If you please, you may hold the Glass in your hand, moving it up and down,
and he will do the like.

RECEIPT VII. How to know the hour of the day or night at any time, by a Ring
and a Glass, being a dainty Clock.
TAke a small Thread, and put it through a Gold Ring, or other like Ring, and
doubling the Thread, tie a pretty big knot at the end and cut it off, let the
doubled Thread be seven or eight inches long, then take a Bole-glasse, and set
it on a Table, and hold the knot of the thread something hard bewixt the ends
of your foure-finger and your thumb, as you see here in the figure, which will
cause the Pulses a hand holding a string with a ring hanging from it over a cup
of your wrist to beat; let the Ring hang in the middle of the Glass, a little
within the rim, then the working of your pulses will make the Ring to move
striking upon the fides of the Glass the hour of the day or night, and then
the Ring will (...) again.

RECEIPT VIII. An other excellent Rule, to know the hour of the day or night at
any time.
IF any two (or more) Parties be in company together, let one of them take
something from the ground, (what they please,) and give it to another party
standing by.

Now, if the thing taken up has grown, and may grow again, as Seeds, Herbs,
or the like, it is then 1.4.7. or 10. of the clock, or very near.

If it did never grow, nor never shall, as Stones, Metals, Pot-shards, Glass,
or the like, it is then 2.5.8. or 11. of the clock, or very near.

But if it has grown, and never will grow again, as Sticks, Chips, Shells, or
such like, it is then 3.6.9. or 12. of the clock, or very near.

But remember this Caution.
That both they that gives judgment, and they that takes up the thing, does
not know what hour it is before they try the Conceit.

RECEIPT IX. How to spit three Capons upon one Spit at once, and to have an
equal fire at them all, yet one shall still be quite raw, the other be well
boiled, and the third thoroughly roasted.
I Have heard that this Conceit was performed by a Noblemans Cook upon a wager,
and thus he did it. To tend the first Capon he had a Boy that continually
basted and powered cold water on the same, and so kept it raw.

To the second he had another like attendant to bast and power continually
seething and scalding water, and that was well boiled.

The third he tended himself, basting it with Butter, and that was thoroughly
roasted; and so he won the wager.

RECEIPT X. How to make two Knives (with a short stick) to hang upon the brim of
a Glass without falling.
TAke a little stick, some four inches long, and make it sharp at one end
like a butchers Scure; and then get two knivs, somewhat of an equal poise, and
price the points of them toward the bigger end of the stick, on each side
slope-wise, as you may see here in the Figure; then put the small end of the
stick upon the rim a stick with two knives stuck in it hanging from the rim of
a cup of a Glass of wine or beer and you may take up the Glass and drink, and
they will not fall off.

RECEIPT XI. A speedy way how to make a Horse Fat, Plump. and Lusty.
TAke Comminseed, Annis-seeds, Enulae campana, and Turmerick, a pennyworth of
each, sees them well with three heads of Garlic in a Gallon of Ale, then
streine it and press out as much of the substance as you can well wring out,
and give it your Horse to drink blood-warm, a full quart at once; then ride him
till he be hot; then afterward stable him, curry and litter him well until he be
cold; do this two or three mornings together, and then turn him to grass, and
he will thrive wonderfully in a short time: If there were a handful of
Groundsell sodden with the aforesaid ingrediences it would do well.

Now if you will not put him to Grass, but keep him in the Stable, give him
to eat with his Provender some of the roots of Enula-campana, with some
Comminseeds beaten together, or the Enula-campana shred small, shred for
fourteen days together; This will make a lean Horse to thrive and grow fat in
one month, more then he would otherwise have done in a quarter of a Year.

RECEIPT XII. How to keep a Horse from tyring by the way, and to make him foam
at the Bit.
WHen you are to ride, and fear that your horse may tire, carry with you (in
some lethern Bag) a good quantity of the powder of Enula-campana; and when
others do bait their Horses in their ordinary manner, your Horse being first
well walked, rubbed, and littered, then give him a good handful of your powder
in a quart of strong Ale or Beer, with a horn; tying his head high to the
rack; and you need to give him no other provender (or very little) till night;
then let him be well meated, and give him in the morning two pennie-worth of
Bread and his Ale and powder, but remember to water at night.

RECEIPT XIII. How one may put his finger, or wash his hands in molten Lead,
without danger or burning.
TAke an ounce of Quicksilver, two ounces of good Bole Armoniack, half an
ounce of Camphire, and two ounces of Aqua vita; then mingle them together, and
put them into a brazen Mortar, and beat them with a Pestle; having thus done,
annoint your hands all over thoroughly well with this ointment, and then you may
put your finger into molten Lead, or you may wash your hands therewith, if one
pour the Lead upon them, and it will neither scaled nor burn you.

RECEIPT XIIII. A very pretty and ready way to teach Children or others,
suddenly to learn their A. B. C. in manner of play.
CAuse four pieces of Bone or Wood to be cut into six square like Dice, and
upon every side or square let one of the Letters of the Alphabet be engraven
or writ; As, A. B. C. D. E. F. upon one of them, then G. H. I. K. L. M. on the
other, and so of the rest, in order, as you see here in the figure.

Now the Child four dice with letters on each shown face taking delight and
using to play with them (amongst other Children) and being told what Letters
are uppermost, will soon learn their Alphabet, as it were by the way of sport
and pastime.

Also, you may cause one piece of bone or wood to be made into six long square
sides, about an inch and a half of length, and let each side be engraven or
written with four Letters, as, a. b. c. d. and so of the rest of the sides;
and let them throw it, and name those Letters which are uppermost; and when
they have learned the great Letters, a hexagonal block with a row of letters on
each face you may write the small Letters on, as it is here on the Figure.

RECEIPT XV. An excellent way to teach one to read speedily and truly, that
beforo could not distinguish their Syllables.
LEt a Scholar, or one that can read well, take any Book of small value, and
at every Syllables end underneath, or at the top, with a small pen of Ink, let
them make a little speck or mark; But if the speck or mark were made with red
Ink it were the better; Or if it be in a Book that you would not deface, then
take a small Pin or Needle, and prick little holes at each Syllable, which will
hardly be perceived. This experiment is best to be made with hard words of many
Syllables, as in the example following.

Abraham, Achitophel, Bartholomew, Christopher, Demetrius, Annabaptist,
Mathematitian, Nebuchadnezzar, Quotidan, Patrimony, etc.

These to the Ingenious will suffice, for I have known those which by no means
could be brought to read, yet in a short time by this method they have learned
to read perfectly.

RECEIPT XVI. Of diverse rare and dainty conceited motions, performed by the
operation of the Magnet or Lodestone.
MAny and wonderful Mathematical Conclusions are performed by the Magnet or
Lodestone; only I will give a touch at some few for recreation.

These Stons are to be had at the Iron-mongers, but they ought to be polished
and made fit by a cunning Artist. This Stone has his two Poles, one North, the
other South, answerable to the Poles of the World; For if you take a piece of
Wyre of four or five inches long, and touch one end thereof with a Lodestone,
and then thrust it through a piece of Cork, putting it to swim in a Basin of
water, presently you shall see one end of the Wyre will turn full North, and the
other full South.

This Receipt is profitable for some Travelers, who having a Sowing-needle
about them that is touched with this Stone, may prick it in some little light
piece of Wood or Cork, and place it in the water, and it will set out the North
and South in stead of a compass.

If for recreation you take two Wyres, and put each Wyre into a Cork, touch one
Wyres end with the North end of the Stone, and the other Wyres end with the
South end of the Stone, and then put them both into a Basin of water a pretty
way asunder; yet they will begin to move and stir, and draw nearer and nearer
together, and on the sudden join and meet: Now if upon those Wyres or Corks
there were placed little paper Tilters on Horseback, they would run their
courses at one an other in the water very prettily.

Also, if this Stone or Magnet be enclosed in a box of Wood, Stone, Silver, or
Brass, yet it will extend its operation and working in many pretty and
ingenious practices, admirable to behold.

As for example; If you will make the forms and pourtraitures of diverse things
in thin Pastboard, as Horsemen, Footmen, Ships, Boats, Beasts, Birds, Flies,
Worms, Serpents, or the like; you may closely convey into them a short piece
of Wyre, and then place them upon a Board, Trencher, or Pastboard; and if you
will have them move or walk, then hold the Lodestone close in your hand,
under the board, and that way which you move your hand underneath, that way the
Images will move and creep on the Top.

Also, if you place the Lodestone privately to or near the Seeling, or over a
Door, and then hold a pecce of Iron near to it (tying a thread to the Iron)
that it touch not the Stone, which will attract it, and then the Iron will
seem to hang in the Air. If you touch an Iron Ring with this Stone, it will
take up a dozen or more Rings together, hanging one to the other like a Chain.
Also, if a Knives point be touched therewith, it will take up Needles or Wyre,
and by it you may know the counterfeit or Newgate halfepenny as some call them.

Many other rare conclusions may be performed by this stone, which I forbear
to write of. Fire, Garlic, or Onions, spoyleth the virtue of this Stone;
therefore let it not touch or come near them.

RECEIPT. XVII. The making of the Thermometer, or Weather-Glasse, whereby you
may certainly foretell the alteration and change of the Weather a good many
hours before it comes to pass.
THis Weather-Glasse is composed of a quantity of Water and Air Artificially
enclosed therein; the water being subject to a continual motion (either upward
or downward) as the weather changes: The Glasses you may have ready made at
the Glasseshops, but be sure to choose the longest and slenderest shanked
glasses, with a small head, for they are best: You must also have another glass
for a Cestern at the bottom to receive the water; the framing of it is thus.

Make a frame taperwise of some fine light Deal or other Wood, (only let the
bottom board be somewhat thick and heavy to make it stand the stedier,) and
let the head or uppermost board be lesser then the bottom, having a hole in
the middle to put the glass thorough, as you may see in the Figure. a
thermometer in a stand with marked one through twelve on the shaft

Your Frame should be about a quarter of an inch longer then the shank of the
Glass, because the lower end of the shank should almost reach to the bottom
of the Cestern: Now before you put in your glass, you must divide the shank
into certain degrees, from 1 to 12. or more, beginning from the rim of the
Cestern upwards, placing figures thereon: having thus done, turn the head of
your long glass downward, and with a Funnell fill it almost full of water;
then put the Cestern on the bottom board, and holding the Frame sloping, put
the shanke of the Glass (through the hole at the head) into the Cestern, and
then set it upright. Now you must know at what degree to set your water,
according to the season of the year, for if it be in Summer, and very hot
weather, then to set it at 1. or 2. degrees are best, if the weather be
temperate, then 3. or 4. but in cold or frost set it at 9. or 10. To hit these
degrees, (if your water be not low enough) you must pull up your Glass a very
little way from the bottom of the Costern, and very suddenly put it down
again: If yet it be not at the right degree, pull it up again, and quickly
down, (as before) till you have your desire.

But take heed, for if your water be fallen too low in the Cestern, then you
must take them out, and begin your work again. When it is thus done, wax or
cement your Glass and Cestern together; and then you may cover and make a Rock
about your Cestern, with Pastbord or the like, glewing or pasting pecces of
mother of Pearl shells, smiths Cinders pieces of Glass, Antimony, or other
shining things what best pleases your fancy; or you may cover it with Moss,
or the like, and it is finished.

The quality of the water in this Glass, is to ascend by degrees with cold and
to descend with heat; for in the Winter the Water will be at the top of the
Glass, and in Summer down to the Rock. The water ought to be very clear, and
colored by Art, both for ornament, and the plainer to distinguish it from the
Glass: If you would have it green, use Vertdigrease; if yellow, use Saffron
or, Turmerick; if red, use Brasill or Turnsoile.

The use and property of the Glass.
By the uncertain motion of the water in this Glass, it is a certain sign
of fickle and unconstant weather; But contrary, the continuance of the water at
any one degree, is a sure token that the weather will continue at that stay it
is then at, whether it be fair or foul, frost or snow. But when the water
either rises or falls, the weather will then presently change: Also, the
sudden falling of the water is a sure token of wet weather.

RECEIPT XVIII. A pretty way to eatch Kites, Ravens, Crows, mag-pies, or the
like, alive.
Go to the Apothecaries, and bestow two pence in Nux vomica; then beat it to
powder, or slice it as you do Ginger; This being done, take raw Flesh or
Liver, and cut it into little pieces or gobbets, that the Foul may swallow
them whole, then cut holes in the same, and put your powder or slices therein,
and then lay these pieces where they haunt; But as soon as they have swallowed
down the same they will fly to the next high Tree they can come at, and this
presently makes them so drunk or sick, that they straight will fall down from
the top of the Tree to the ground, that you may take them up alive with your
hand: But you must be sure to watch them, and run presently to the Tree, for
they will soon recover and fly away.

I believe if it were sodden with other Grain, it would have the like
operation with other Foul.

RECEIPT XIX. A ready way to catch Pigeons, or other Foul.
TAke pieces of brown Paper, and roll them round, making Coffins of them,
such as the Grocers make to put their Fruit in, let them not be above a finger
long, past the fides and ends of them with some starch, clip the upper part of
them round with a pair of Sheeres, then annoint the inside of the uppermost
skirts of them round about with Birdlime, or some stuff that will but cling to
the Feathers: But you must (a day or two before you use it,) lay or strew some
Pease or other Grain to make them haunt the place, and they will be the less
fearful; then if you please make a hole in the ground a little way and put
your Coffins upright or sloping therein, putting a few peason or Corn in them,
strewing here and there Peason near them; And when she pecketh into the Coffin
she is immediately hooded and blindfolded, not seeing which way to fly, and
thus you may take them easily.

RECEIPT XX. A merry Receipt, being a ready and sure way how to catch a
Pick-pocket.
AS I was writing the former Receipt, it put me in mind of a pretty Conceit that
a Friend once related to me, which was thus. A Gentleman being in a throng in a
Fair, had his Purse picked out of his pocket; He missing it was some what vexed,
but could not mend it, but studied how (if he could) to be revenged: presently
he buyeth two pennyworth of Fish-hookes, and causes a Tailor to sow them round
about toward the upper part of his pockets, with the points of them downwards;
and so the next day away he goes to the Fair again amongst the throng,
throwing his Cloak on one shoulder, seeming careless of his pocket, wherein he
had store of money: Presently there was a Dyver nibling at the bait, and
nimbly had his hand in his pocket: The Gentleman being wary (perceived the Fish
had swallowed the hook,) gives a jerk aside, which caused the hooks to catch
good hold in his hand, and then he had him sure: Then said the Gentleman,
Fellow, what makes thy hand in my pocket? Oh good Sir, (replied the
Pick-pocket,) pardon me, I cannot pull it out: Come, (says the Gentleman
softly to him, because no body should take notice,) go along with me; So
cheek by jole they walked together, with his hand fast in the pocket, (but
covered with his Cloak) and to a Tavern lovingly they go together, where the
Gentleman told him of the loss he had sustained the day before, and making of
him to restore back his Money, he cut out his pocket, and let him go. Surely
this Pick-pocket had good store of picking work to get the hooks out of his
hand again.

RECEIPT XXI. How to make Fowls and other small Birds drunk that you may take
them with your hands.
YOu must observe what meat they love or use to eat, as Wheat, Barley, or
other Grain, and lay the same to steep^ in the Lees of Wine, or in Aquavita,
or in the juice of Hemlock, and strew the same Grain in the places where the
Birds do haunt.

Another.
Take Tormentil, and boil it with strong Wine, Wheat, Barley, or other
Grain, then strew this in those places where you intend to take them, or where
they use to haunt, and the Birds will eat the pieces amongst the Grain, which
will make them so drunk that they cannot fly away.

Another.
Make Past with Barley meal, Onion blades, and Henbane seeds; and put or throw
it where the Birds do haunt.

These experiments are best to be done in Winter in a deep Snow.

RECEIPT XXII. A dainty way to catch Fish in a dark night, with a Candle
underwater.
GEt an Urinall, and put pretty soft clay therein, and with something that is
flat at the end press the clay gently to the bottom of the glass, smoothing
it as well as you can; then take a stick and shape it about the bigness of a
Candles end, wet the stick, and put it into the neck of the glass, making a
hole in the middle of the clay, as you make clay candlesticks; Then make a
little hoope of a willow stick, and tie pieces of Cork in four places of the
hoope equally distant, and get a thin light round piece of Board, and with
four little sticks of an equal length tie one end of them to the Corks, and
the other ends fasten to the board to support it, as you may see here in this
Figure.

In the board a candle inside a glass beaker in a frame half submerged in water
held up from sinking by a stick you must make a hole in the middle to put the
neck of the Glass through and there tie it, and make a loope with a string to
the board that you may with a long pole put it into the water: when you will
use it, put your Candle into the Glass in the clay socket, a little below the
brim, that the wind blow not the light out. If you please, you may with wax or
glue put little pieces of Looking glasses, or other glass under the board, on
that side next the water; and this light will shine a great compass in the
water, that the Fish will straight resort to the same, where you may very
easily take them with a Net.

This might be done with the Glass alone, by tying Corks about the neck of the
Glass, to keep the mouth above water.

RECEIPT XXIII. An excellent Bait to catch Fish with an Angle.
MAke Past with fine Wheat Flower, tempered with a little Saffron and Sugar,
and bait your hook therewith, and they will bite apace: This is a good bait
for Roach, Dace, and such like.

Another.
Take the crum of a new penny Whiteloafe, and an ounce of Coculus India, and an
ounce of Henbane-seed finely powdered, temper the same well with good Aquavita
into a Past, and divide them into small pieces, bigger then grains of wheat,
and then cast handfuls in at once into the water where is store of Fish, and
you shall presently see the operation of the same.

RECEIPT XXIV. How to make one Watching-Candle, that shall out-last three
Watching-Candles.
TAke a Pale or Bucket, and fill it full of water, and set it in the place
where you intend that your light shall stand; then take your Candle and warm
it at the lower end, and there stick a brass farthing token, or such like; and
when you will light your Candle put it gently down into the middle of the
water, (but be sure that the bottom of the Candle do not touch the bottom of
the Pale) and then it will swim upright to the very edge near the light. The
reason that the Candle will last so long, is caused by the coldness of the
water: And this is a safe way that no Rat can run away with the Candle lighted,
as I have heard that they have done, by endangering the house with Fire.

RECEIPT XXV. How to write any name or mark upon a Paper, and then burn it to
ashes, yet afterward it may be read plainly.
TAke a new clean Pen that was never written withal, and dip it in your own
water, as you do in Ink; then strip up your Shirt sleeve above your wrist, and
upon your arm write your name, or any name, or any mark, and then let it dry
on your skin, and nothing will be seen; then put down your sleeve, and button
your wrist. (Do this privately and it will cause some to wonder:) Then take a
piece of white Paper and write your name or the mark thereon, with another Pen
of black Ink; (but let it be written as like the other as you can;) Then take
the paper and burn it, and lay the ashes on a Table, and stripping up your
sleeve, rub the ashes hard with your finger, where you had written with your
water, then blow off the ashes, and the name or mark will plainly be read on
your arm in black Letters.

RECEIPT XXVI. How to see plainly any thing in a dark Room, in at a Door or
Window, standing a great distance off.
IF there be never so dark a Room, with a Door or Window open; Take a
Looking-glass in your hand, and hold it against the Sun, at a great distance
from the Door or Window, and moving the Glass up and down, till the
reflection of the Sun be upon your object, and then you may perfectly behold
any thing in the Room, or see to read a Letter.

Some unhappie Boys use to dazzle peoples eyes with a Glass in this order, as
they walk the streets.

RECEIPT XXVI. How to view the back part of your head by Glasses.
IF you would behold the back part or shadow of your head (for a wound or the
like) take a Looking-glass, and hold it behind your head; and then take
another Looking-glass and hold it before you; and from the Glass behind, you
may see the shadow in the Glass before you.

RECEIPT XXVIII. A pretty trick to tell or name all the spots or coat Cards in
the pack, and yet never see them.
YOu must privately drop a drop of water or drink (about the bigness of a
twopence) on a Table before you where you sit, and let any body shuffle the
pack of Cards; and then taking them into your hand, place a Candle on the Table
before you (for this trick is best to be done by Candlelight) and holding
down your head, (as you may see in the Figure) lift the Cards above the brim
of your Hat, close to your head, that the light of the Candle may shine on the
Cards; then in the drop of water (like a Looking-glass) you shall see every
speck of each Card before you draw them, which you may name; or putting your
finger upon the spots, you may say that you feel them out; then lay man
holding a deck of cards to his forehead in front of a table with a lit candle
on it down your first Card, and name the next, as your first Card was the
deuce of Clubs, the next is the five of Spads, and so of the rest.

RECEIPT XXIX. How to keep or preserve any Foul, Venison, or other pieces of
Flesh sound and sweet for three weeks or a month together, althe weather be
never so hot.
MAke a strong Brine with Bay Salt and white mingled together, so as the water
be over-glutted with Salt, and being scalding hot, purpoile therein the Foul
or Flesh which you intend to keep for some reasonable time, (that is to say,
according to the greatness and greasiness thereof; (then hang it up in a
convenient cool place, and it will last a sufficient time, without any bad or
over-saltish taste.

This is a good way for Seamen, and others in hot Countries, who are enforced
sometimes to victual themselves in such intemperate Climates, where no flesh
will last sweet four and twenty hours together, by reason that they have no
means to make the same to take Salt, which without all question will enter
this way, and make penetration very speedily, by reason of the hot and fiery
spirit of Salt thus prepared.

RECEIPT XXX. How to make a speedy or present drink that Travelers may brew
for themselves, when they cannot relish their Beer or Ale at their Innes.
TAke a quart of good water, put therein five or six spoonfulls of good
Aquavita, and an ounce of Sugar, with a brand of Rosemary, brew them a pretty
while out of one pot into an other, and then is you^ drink prepared.

RECEIPT XXXI. How to make on the sudden good drink for Mariners, Soldiers,
or for poor people, when Beer is seant, and Malt dear.
IN time of extremity, these Drinks following will serve to suffice nature (as
has bin often proved;) Put to a good quantity of wholesome fair water, a small
portion or few drops of the Oil of Sulphur, incorporating them well together,
and it is ready.

Another.
One drop or two of the Oil of Vitriall added to a good quantity of fair
water, and well stirred together, it performs the like.

Some mingle Vinegar with good water, and it serves very well to quench the
thirst.

Others will carry a piece of Alom in their pocket if they are to travel, and
know not how to get drink or water; and when they are a dry they put a piece of
that in their mouth, and it will fetch up moisture, which will assuage the
thirst.

RECEIPT XXXII. A profitable way to harden Leather, that it shall out-last other
Leather a long time.
THis is a good and profitable Receipt for many poor laboring men; and is thus
performed: Take and lay such Leather as is well tanned to soake in water
wherein there has bin some store of fylings of Iron a long time, or else in
the water that has long lain under a Grinding-stone, into which such Iron as
has bin from time to time ground away, and there settled.

This is good also to harden Leather for the Cuckers or Pumps of Ships, or
others, to make them last long.

RECEIPT XXXIII. An excellent Receipt to make a dainty straight Walking-staffe to
have knobs where you please.
GEt a straight piece of Wood (of your desired length,) of Holly Ash,
Servicetree, Walnut-tree, or Peare-tree, let it be free from knots or shakes,
then plain it into six or eight sides, a good deal bigger then your Staff
shall be: This being done, get a short Punch of Iron and let the small end be
fyled about the bigness that you intend your knobs shall be; then lay your
Staff down upon a Bench or Table, and where you will make the knobs, with a
hammer punch holes therein, and so do on every fide: Then plain it over
again till you have made your staff smooth that there be no dents seen
thereou^: when you have thus done, put it into some Caldron of boiling water
for a good space; and when you take it out again you shall see that it will be
full of knobs, for with the heat of the water it forces the bruises (which
were made with the Punch) to swell out of the Wood again.

You may fyle your Punch like a star, or other work; and it will show very
pretty. I once saw a Partizan, or Captains Leadingstaffe, which was done in
this manner, and being put into a Dyers Caldron when he dyed blacks, and being
dried, and rubbed well with Linseed-oyle, it showed like Ebonie.

RECEIPT XXXIV. How to write Love Letters secretly, or from one Friend to
another, that cannot be discovered.
TAke a sheet of white paper, and double it in the middle, then cut holes
through both the half sheets, let the holes be cut like the panes of
Glasse-windowes, or other forms what you best fancy, and then with a Pin prick
two little holes at each end, and cut your paper in two halfes give one half
to your Friend (to whom you intend to write) the other half keep to your
self: Now when you do write, lay your cut paper on a half sheet of writing
paper, and stick two Pins through the two holes that it stir not; then
through those holes that you did cut, write your mind to your friend; when you
have done, take off your paper with the holes again, and then write some other
idle words both before and after your lines, but if they were written to make
some little sense it would carry the less suspicion; then seal it up and send
it.

When your Friend has received it, he must lay his cut paper on the same,
putting pinnes into the pinholes, and then he can read nothing but your mind
which you writ, for all the rest of the Lines are covered; observe the Figure,
and it is easily apprehended.

Where the Letter A is placed, that does signify the half sheet of cut paper
with holes. Where the Letter B is placed, does signify the substance of the
Letter which you write: And where the Letter C is, does signify the Letter
filled up with Lines to join to the other words. Now when your Friend writes
to you he must do the like.

three sheets of paper marked A, B, and C, showing how cut out sections plpaced
over a text reveal only a part of it

Another.
Write a Letter (what you please) on one side of Paper with common lnke; then
turn your paper and write on the other side with Milk, (that which you would
have secret) and let it dry; (but this must be written with a clean Pen;) Now
when you would read it, hold that side which is written with Ink to the fire,
and the milkie Letters will then show bluish on the other side, which may be
perfectly discerned.

RECEIPT XXXV. How to know when the Moon is just at the full by a Glass of
water.
TAke an ordinary drinking-glasse, and fill it full of water up to the very
brim, so that it does not run over; let this be done a little before that the
Moon be at full; and then at the very instant that the Moon is at the full,
the water will presently boil over.

RECEIPT XXXVI. How to know the Moons age at her increase.
I Have bin told, that a thin piece of Cypress, such as they had wont to make
Hatbands of, if you hold it before your eyes in an evening at the increase of
the Moon, you shall know how many days old she is: As when she is one day old
you shall see but one Moon: At two days old two Moons: At three days old
three Moons: But afterward you shall see but one again.

RECEIPT XXXVII. An other showing how to know both the Increase and Decrease of
the Moon.
THe Moon gives such virtue to a Stone which is found in Arabia called the
Selenite, of which Pliny and others do write, that within the body of this
Stone the Moon shows her self, and increases and decreaseth according to
the course of the Heaven.

Another.
Our common house Cats also have this property by the subjection that the
Moon has over them; that their Eie-browes do increase, or decrease each day,
according to the course of the Moon and her aspects; which thing is daily
seen to him that pleases to note the experience thereof.

RECEIPT XXXVIII. A dainty way how to fetch Oil, or Grease, out of Books,
Writings, Papers, or Garments.
Go to the Apothecaries or Grocers, and buy a pennyworth or two of the Oil
of Turpentine, and put a drop or two upon the place which is Oily or Greasy,
rubbing it on, and then you shall see how it will drink up the Oil or Grease,
and be presently dry and fair: For this Oil of Turpentine is a great dryer,
and is good to put amongst Oyle-coulors, to make them dry speedily.

RECEIPT XXXIX. How to refresh and scour old Pictures that are wrought in Oil,
making them to look almost as fresh as if they were new done.
TAke the Picture out of the Frame, then wipe or brush off the dust very
clean, and then lay it level upon a board or table, pouring good sharp
Vinegar all over the same, and there let it lie and soak for three or four
hours; if the Vinegar be dried up then pour on more, continually keeping it
wet: Then beat a piece of dry brick very fine to powder (and see there be no
lumps or stones therein, for they will raze and scratch the Picture,) and then
put the powder into a course linen Rag, and tie it, and then dip it well in a
porrenger of Vinegar, and with your rag and powder, rub, and scour your
Picture all over very hard; and then with fair water or a wet clout wash the
filth away: But if you see any spots or filth remain, then scour it again,
and wash it; then dry it very well with a cloth, and when you have dried it,
put it again into the frame, and set it in the Sun for a day or two, (for
the Sun refreshes the Colors very much,) and then rub it hard with a dry
woollen cloth till you make it shine, and then hang it up. This will cause it
to look almost as fresh as when it was new.

Some use to wash them in Soape, and then Oil or Varnish them over, but that
is not good, because that the Oil or Varnish will turn Yellow, and gather
dust.

RECEIPT XL. How to keep Sword blades, Halberts, Pistols, Knives, Edge-tooles,
or other things free from rusting for seven years or more in a dry house.
TAke Fish glue or Ising-glasse, and cut it in pieces, then with a hammer beat
or bruise it upon an Anvile or a Stone, and then put it into a little Skellet
or such like with water, and let it dissolve over a gentle Fire, still stirring
it as you do your common Glue: Then when it is well boiled take it off, and
with a pencill or small hair brush, lay the same while it is hot all over your
Sword-blade as thin as may be, and then lay it to dry, and it is done. This
thin coat keepeeth the moistness of the Air from the Mettle, that it cannot
rust; but when you are to wear it or use it, take a blunt knife, and you may
easily scale off the thin substance, and then it will be as bright as any
Silver.

I verily believe, that our common Glue will do the like, keeping of it in a dry
room.

RECEIPT. XLI. An excellent Cement for broken Glasses, China Dishes, or Cups,
and such like.
TAke one part of Virgin-wax, and two parts of the tears or clear drops of
Mastick, melt them together, and Cement therewith. But the better is, if you
beat the whitest Fish-glew or Ising-glasse with a hammer till it begin to be
clear, and then cut the same into very small and short pieces, and dissolve and
melt the same over a gentle Fire with Aqua-vita: Then let one that stands by,
hold both the pieces that are to be Cemented over a Chasing-dish of coals till
they be warm, and during their heat, lay on the dissolved Glue with a fine
Pencill; then bind the Glass with Wyre or Packthread to keep it steadie, and
so let it remain till it be cold and dry.

Another.
Take a little quantity of unslakt Lime, Wheat Flower, and the white of an
Egg, and incorporate them together, Mastick, Aquavita, and White-lead is good:
So is Ising-glasse, being dissolved and melted with Rhenish-Wine.

RECEIPT XLII. How to grave Arms, Posies, or other devises upon Eggs, which
may be served at a Table.
MElt Suet pretty warm, and dip in your Eggs in this manner; hold the Egg
between your Thumb and your Fore-singer, and quickly dip one half therein,
and hold it in your hand till it be cold, and then dip in the other end that it
be thinly covered all over; then take a little Bodkin or Needle, and grave in
the Suet what Letters or Words you please; Then lay the Egg thus engraven in
good Wine-Vinegar, or other Vinegar in some stone Pot or Vessel for the space
of six or eight hours, or more, or less, according to the strength or
sharpness of the same, then take out the Eggs, and in hot water dissolve the
Suet from the Shells; then lay the Egg to cool, and the work will appear to
be graven in the shell of a Russet color. And if the Egg lie long enough in
the Vinegar after it is so graven, the Letters or Works will appear upon the
Egg it self being boiled, and so you may serve them up at the Table. And if
you care not to loose the meat, you may pick out the same, when the shell is
through graven, and you shall have a strange piece or work performed on the
same.

RECEIPT XLIII. How to make Wax, either Red or Green.
TAke to one pound of Wax in Summer three ounces of the cleerest Turpentine;
but if you make it in Winter, take four ounces of Turpentine, melt these
together over a soft fire, stirring them with a stick, and when they are well
melted together, take it off and let it cool a little: And then mix with the
same the red root of Anchusa, or Vermilion ground an ounce, and an ounce of
sweet Oil; stir these well together again over the fire, then take it off to
cool, and pour it into cold water, and then upon a wet board and your hands
wet, you may roale it into what form you please. Instead of Vermilion, you may
take three times as much Red-lead, but that is not so good.

If you will make Green Wax (instead of Vermilion) take the like quantity of
Verdigrease.

RECEIPT XLIV. A pretty way how to cast off Flowers in Wax, of diverse colors.
CAuse a Stick to be turned round at one end, (somewhat Taperwise) like the
fashion of a Poking-stick, lesser, or bigger, (according to the bigness of the
Flower you intend to cast) and at the smaller end thereof, with your knife, cut
dents or nicks in the same, long-wise as you see here in the Figure: a conical
stick marked A beside a flower marked B The letter A, signifies the Stick, the
letter B, signifies the Flower: Then take a little panikin, and in the same
melt your Wax with a gentle fire; and when it is melted take it off; and then
take your Stick (having a Porrenger of fair water by you) and dip the end into
the water, and then shake off the water, or suck it off, and then dip the stick
into the Wax, and suddenly put it out again, dipping it into the water again
to cool it; and then you may take off your Flower and lay it by; and in this
sort you may make as many as you please. For Yellow Flowers, melt Yellow Wax;
for Red, Red Wax; for White, White Wax; for Green, Green Wax: Now for stalks
for your Flowers, you may stick in a small Wyre, or a Bent of a Raison-fraile,
or the like. You may have the colored wax ready made at any of the
VVax-Chandlers.

RECEIPT XLV. How to make a Bunch of Grapes with Green Wax, that will seem to
be natural.
YOu must get a little stick turned round at the end, about the bigness of an
Arrow; and then have your Vessel of green wax melted, (as was shown in the
former Receipt,) dipping your stick in the same about the third part of an inch
deep, and it will be almost in the fashion of an Acron-Cup, make a good many
of them. Then take an Egg, and make a little hole in the bigger end of the
shell, less then a penny, and get out the Yolke thereof, and dry the shell:
Then with a piece of your green Wax hold it to the fire, rub or daub the shell
therewith thinly all over; then hold the shell in your left hand, and with your
other hand take up first one cup, holding the same a little near a Candle to
warm, and quickly stick it on your Egg, and so do with all the rest of the
cups, till you have filled it all over; they must be set something close
together. Now when you have thus done, take a little stick, about the bigness
of the tag of a point, and tie a Packthread in the middle thereof, and then put
the stick into the hole of the shel, and so hang it up: You may cut leaves like
Vine leaves in green Paper, and fasten them to the string or stalk above the
Bunch: I have made some Women's teeth to water at this Conceit, they seem so
natural to the eye; and these Grapes will last all the Year.

RECEIPT XLVI. How to Grave and Inlay colors into Gold, Silver, Iron, or
Copper, to show like Ammell.
FIrst cover your Metal with a crust of warm wax, and when it is cold, with
a fine sharp Bodkin draw or cut out the shape or proportion of what you please,
either Letters, Flowers, Borders, or Scutchions, of a reasonable largeness;
then pour upon the same empty places (which you have Engraven upon the Wax)
some few drops of strong water, or Aquafortis, and let them lie awhile; and
when you find them deep enough Graven, mingle Orpiment and Mastick melted
together for a Yellow color; and Vermilion and Mastick for a Red; and Bice and
Mastick for a Blew; and Ceruse for White; and Ivorie burnt for a Black. Now
when your Mastick has bin melted with any of the aforesaid Colors, let it
cool, and then beat the same into powder, and lay the same powder within the
graving, and after lay the Mettle upon a small Charcoale-fire till the Mastick
be melted, and it will remain fast and firm therein a long time.

RECEIPT XLVII. How to Inlay Boxes, Cabinets, or other things with hard Wax.
WIth a Pen draw upon your Box any thing what best pleases your fancy; as
Birds, Beasts, Flies, Flowers, Fruits, Leaves, Trayles, Anticks, Letters, etc.
Then take a little Knife ground sharp at the point, and cut or grave out the
work pretty deep which you have drawn with your Pen upon the wood; when you
have so done, lay upon the same some Red or Green Hard-wax, and with a hot Iron
melt and rub hard the wax al over into the crevices or works which you have cut
out, and so let it cool; then take a knife and scrape away the wax to the
board, and then you shall have your work which you drew to be inlaid very
perfectly in the color of your wax, as though it were drawn with a Pen, and
will never wash nor wear off: When you have scrapt it clean, hold it a little
to the Fire, and it will fetch a gloss on the wax, and make it to show the
pleasanter.

RECEIPT XLVIII. How to harden the white of Eggs into an Artificial Gum, fit
for many uses.
SEparate the whites of Eggs clean from the Yolks, and beat the whites very
well into a clear Oil or Water, and when it is settled, skim off the froath;
then put the same into Bladders, and hang them in a Chimney corner, where fire
is usually kept to dry, and in a few days the same will become as hard as Gum
Arabic: in hot weather you may hang your Bladders in the Sun to dry; This Gum
may be used instead of other Gums; and with it you may varnish Prints, or other
things that are washed in Colors.

RECEIPT XLIX. How to make a true South Sun-dyall, to be placed upright against
a Wall, or on a Poale.
I Intend not to speak of the multiplicity of Geometrical and Artificial
sorts, and making of Sun-dyals, (of which many ingenious Artists have copiously
written;) but only a Mechanic way of two sorts, for the benefit of some who
would be glad to know how the hours of the day pass away.

Take a piece of good writing Paper, and rub it over with Linsed Oil, and hang
it to dry in the Sun; when it is through dry, take and lay it over this Print
of the Dyall (or some other of this nature,) that you may see the hour lines
through it, holding of it safe from stirring, (which may be done by pinning it
to the margent,) then at the Center by the Letter A, stick a Needle or Pin
upright, and laying a straight Ruler close to the Pin, draw all those hour
lines which you see through the Oyled Paper; then take off your Paper, and when
you would mark out a Dyall, do thus; Get a board of what size you please, that
is smooth plained, and will not warp, drawing a straight line just down the
middle thereof, and lay this Paper thereon, and then put your Pin through the
Center hole toward the top of the straight line on the board, and put another
Pin toward the bottom of the line which is your 12 a clock line, (these two
Pins keeps your Paper steadie;) Then with a small Bodking prick a hole
through every hour line of your paper into the board, and then take it off;
Then stick in your Pin into the Center hole of the board again, and laying the
Ruler close to the Pin, and close to each hole in the board, mark and draw your
hour lines; (And note that you may extend these hour lines to what length you
please, according to the bigness of the board;) And then figure it as you see
in this example following.

a square with a border marked A at the center of the top side of the border
with a semicircle just below it inside the border that has ray-like lines
leading out to the numbers 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 along
the sides of the border

Now for the Cock or Style of your Dyal, it must be set in the 12 hour line,
and must be just equal in height from the board, as the triangular Figure
marked with B shows; the line with pricks is but to direct you which side
must be next to the board: The Style may be made of a thin iron Plate, and
Simond in, or of stiff Wire; the upper end of which must be put just to the
Center by A, equal to the 6 hour line: when this is done, you must get some
Painter to paint it in Oil Colors, and so set it up.

a figure marked B of a diagonal line up to the right meets a line that curves
back down to a base of dotted lines

RECEIPT L. How to make an Horizontall or Flat Dyall, to stand upon a Post, or
other place.
THis dyal may be made into sundry forms, either four square, six, or eight
squares, or round, as you please, and it is to be placed on the head of a Post,
either in Garden, Yard, or at the outside of a Glasse-window where the Sun
comes: behold the Form.

a hexagon with a near-completed circular border within it marked with numbers
of hours enclosing a circle with ray lines coming away from it that connect to
each number

You must note, that the hour lines of this Dyal does vary from the former,
and so does the Style in height: But you must work with this as in the other
with your oyled Paper, to draw the hour lines, and to make a line just in the
middle, for your 12 a clock line. The Center of this Dyall is hard by the
letter C, and must be more near the middle then the other, because it
contains more hours thereon, for the other will serve but from 6. to 6. but
this from 4. to 8. You may make this Dial in Stone, Wood, or Metal; And
remember to make the height of this Style or Cock according to this triangle
marked with the Letter D. for it must be higher, a figure marked D of a
diagonal line up to the right meets a line that curves back down to a base of
dotted lines as you may perceive by this sigure. You may make Simmon for to
fasten the Style, with Rozen, powder of Brick, and some. Chalk, mingled
together: and with a hot Iron melt it into the crevise.

RECEIPT LI. A pretty way to make a Sun-dyall on the seeling of a Room or
Chamber, whereby you may know the time of the day as you lie in Bed.
IF you have any Window South-East, or South which is best, and that is for
your turn: In the lower Post or Frame of the inside of your Window, about the
middle, fasten with wax a little round piece of Looking-glass, or other
glass, about the bigness of a twopence; (you may cut it round with an old
pair of Sizers;) But if you place it higher in your Window on a little ledge,
it will be the better;) as you may see here in the Figure;) setting it level
with the Horizon; and the reflection of the Sun in the Glass will show on
the seeling the hour of the day; the Center of the Dyall must be perpendiculer
to the Glass; This Dyall must have no Style, and it must be made like the last
Horizontall Dial: You may draw the Circle, hour lines, and figures with a
Pencill or coal; the black spot is the piece of Looking-glass; The Dyall is
the Seeling.

a semicircle above a window with numbers on it with a smaller semicircle
within and beneath it with ray-like lines coming out from it linking to the
numbers on the larger semicircle

RECEIPT. LII. How to make a Candle-Dyall, whereby you may know the hours of
the night.
ONe Winters evening sitting by the fire, me thought there might be some device
for a Candle-Dyal; At length it came into my head; I made a little four square
frame of Wood, of a piece of a thin Trencher, making the inside thereof fit for
the bottom of a Candle-stick to stand in, which I did ordinarily use; on two
sides of the square I fastened a little piece of Wyre, not a quarter of an inch
long; and just where the Candle-stick should stand, on a Table or Board, I made
two little holes with a Bodkin for the ends of the two Wyres to go into, and
then I set down my Candle and Candle-stick into the square: Having thus done,
I made another long Frame like the Frame of a Picture, and pasted half a
sheet of white Paper therein upon a thin board, and so hung it up against the
wall: Then in the Seeling I fastened a small Pulley, and on that Pulley I had two
little Plummets of Lead, one broader at the bottom then the other, and tied
them to a piece of Packthread at each end, and so hung them in the Pully, (as
you may better apprehend by the Figure;) The broadest Plummet I pulled down
till it gave a shadow on the lower end of the Paper in the Frame on the wall,
(which is now the 1. and 7, a clock line) and where the broad bottom cast a
shadow I made a speck with my Pen, and then turned an Hour -- glass, a bell
hanging from a pully in back of a candle on a table whose light casts a shadow
on a chart of numbers on a wall and when that was run out I made another
specke, which is the 2 and 8 line, and so of the rest; By these divisions, you
may with a pair of Compasses divide the rest of the hour lines upwards: You
must pull down the broad Plummet and set it at any time to the hour you
please, as by this, it shows that it is half an hour past 4 or 10 of the
clock. You must remember to have your Candles always of one size or weight, as
of the eights, or twelves in the pound, or such as you usually burn: You may
take away your Candle and Candlestick out of the square Frame if you have
occasion, and then set it down in its place again which keeps all right. I
have placed the Figures at each end of the hour lines, as from 1. to 7. on the
first side; and then from 7. to 12. on the other side. Note, when it is just 7.
on the first side, then pull down the Plummet to 7. on the other side, which I
hold to be the best way.

RECEIPT LIII. How to keep Cherries, Pears, Nuts, or other fruit a year, as
fresh as they came from the tree.
When they are pretty ripe, cut off the stalks, and put them into an earthen
pot well leaded, and then cover them well with honey; then stop the pot with
pitch or wax, that no air may enter in, and then put the pot in some sellar
or cool place, burying it well in sand, and so let it remain till you use it.

RECEIPT LIVE. How to make Grapes, and other Fruit to have no stones or kernels.
IT is said, that if ye do plant or set the smaller end of the twig of a vine
somewhat deep into the earth (which will take root) that those Grapes that will
grow thereon shall have no stones. The like effect has Peaches, Apricocks,
Damsons, Cherries, and other Stone-fruits, if the small ends of the cyons be
grafted into the stocks. Also, if you bend down both the ends of an Apple or
Peare-tree cyon, and graft them on both sides of the stock; and the next year
when they have grown, cut the Cyon in the middle, and one shall bear fruit
with kernels, and the other none.

RECEIPT LV. How to make yellow Roses grow, and to make Trees and other things
grow green all the year.
I Have been informed, that if you will graft a white Rose upon a Broomstalke,
or on a Furzon bush, that the same will bear yellow Roses, but they will have
no sweet sent.

Also, if you will graft a Rose or other thing upon a Holly-stock, the leaves
of the same will grow green all the year.

RECEIPT LVI. How to make Apples, Pears, and other Fruit of several colors,
and to give them a dainty taste of spices.
IF you will give a pleasant color to your Fruit, do thus: For a red, boil
Brasill, Turnesoyle, or Sanders; and for a yellow, use Saffron, or Turmerick:
Now to give them a dainty taste and smell, you must beat Cloves, Mace, Cinnamon,
and Nutmegs to powder, and mix them with the water of your colors with some
honey. Then with an auger bore a hole in the biggest part of the tree, unto the
middle, something sloping downwards; and then pour your water and spices into
the hole, then with a pin made of the same wood or tree, beat it hard into the
hole, and saw off the end, and wax it about: This must be done in winter before
the spring, because when the sap rises, the color, sent, and taste also
ascends with the same.

RECEIPT LVII. How to know precisely on the Seeling of a Chamber, which way the
wind blows at all times.
THis conceit did I see in King James his Bedchamber at White Hall: the
Chamber was an upper Room, having a Vain or Weathercock of iron placed above
the top or tyles of the house, which had a long stem of iron, which did reach
from thence through the Seeling of the Chamber; upon which Seeling was pointed
a Mariners compass, with the two and thirty winds thereon: Now the lower end
of the stem of the Vain came through the Center of the compass, unto which
was fastened an index or needle (like to those in an ordinary Dyall) which does
presently show how the various wind does shift from place to place, which you
may continually know precisely both night and day.

RECEIPT LVIII. How to keep drink quick and fresh, that begins to be sower
and dead.
IT is good to put a handful or two of ground Malt into your vessel (if it
begin to fail) and stir the drink and the Malt well together, and this will
make it to work afresh, and become good again; likewise if you add new strong
drink to the old, the dead drink is forced for to work again to a new head.
Some do bury their vessel of drink in the ground for four and twenty hours,
and thereby recover it. Others do throw into the vessel a handful of salt:
it is also good to tilt your vessel before your drink behalf out and then it
will draw fresh to the latter end. But the best way is to put a handful, or
more, of Oat-meale into your vessel, when it is first laid into the Seller or
Butterie, whereby it will always carry a quick and lively taste.

RECEIPT. LIX. An excellent way for baking of Bread, that it shall not be hard
crusted, nor yield so many crumbs.
Go to the Plate-worker, (such as makes ordinary Dripping-pans,) and cause
him to make a Pot, or Pots of his latten plate, which may contain half a
peck, or greater, or less, as you please, according as you mean the bigness
of your Loaf shall be; Let this Pot be made with a bottom at the lower end,
and open at the top, almost like a Peaker, as you may see here by this Figure;
a pot for baking bread And when it is done, take a little Butter, and annoint
the insides of the Pot therewith, and when your Dow is molded put it into the
same, (not full to the top,) and thrust it down hard to the bottom, and then
set it into an Oven amongst other bread, with the lesser end downward; and when
it is baked it will easily come out; This Loaf will have no hard crust, nor
crumble as other Loaves do, and will show smooth, standing like a Sugar-loafe
upon the Table, and in a little compass.

RECEIPT LX. A dainty strong and glistering Mortar, or Plaistering, for
Seelings, or for Walls.
IT is said, that in Italy they much use this Conceit for the Plaistering of
their Seelings, Floors, or Walls, which is by mixing and well tempering
together Oxen and Cowes blood with fine Loame or Clay, and it will be very
strong and binding substance, and being well smoothed, it will glister, and
become very hard.

Some few, (but choice Physical Receipts, etc.

RECEIPT LXI. Of the great virtues of Crocum Martis, fit to be used at this
time, for the Bloody Flux, which so much now reigns in the Army.
THis Crocum Martis, is a powder which you may have at the Apothecaries; this
amongst all other Medicines in the world, is the most excellent that can be
found against the Bloody Flux, giving it in this order. Take an ounce of
Conserve of Roses, and one scruple of Crocum Martis, and mix them together;
then let the Patient eat it in the morning, and fast thereon two hours; and
this (by the grace of God) will help him although he had it never so long, or
never so sore. It is also given above all other Medicines, in the latter end of
a Dropsy; and also against the Flux of Menstrue, and against bleeding at the
nose, and all other Fluxes whatsoever; It helps those that spit blood: It is
excellent to stop the Flux in Wounds, and to heal them and dry them, if ye
strew the powder thereon.

RECEIPT LXII. Of the rare virtue and operation of the Quintessence of Honey,
for many Diseases; with the Oil of Wax.
YOu must understand, that Honey is rather a liquor Divine, then Humane,
because it falls from Heaven upon Herbs and Flowers, and is such a sweet
thing that the like cannot be found upon the earth. This Quintessence is of
such virtue, that if any be almost dead, and drink two or three Dramms thereof,
he will presently recover. If you wash any wound therewith, or other sore, it
will quickly heal. It is excellent against the Cough, Catar, or pain of the
Milt, and many other Diseases. It helps the Falling Sickness, the Palsy,
and preserves the body from putrefaction.

The Oil of Wax works in Wounds most miraculously, healing them, be the same
never so big and wide, (being before wide stitched up,) in the space of eleven
or twelve days; But smaller wounds, in three or four days, by anointing the
same therewith, and laying a cloth thereon wet in the same. Moreover, for
inward diseases it is excellent; It provokes Urine which is stopped; it
helps stitches, and pain in the loins; if you drink one dram thereof in
white wind, it helps the cold Gout, or Sciatica, and all other griefs coming
of cold.

RECEIPT. LXIII. Of the manifold Operations of the Oil of Cynamon.
THis Oil is of a miraculous nature, for it pierces through the flesh and
bones, being very hot and dry, and is good against all cold and moist diseases,
being comfortable for the head and heart, working the same operation on a dying
man as the former: To be short, this Oil is of such operation and virtue, that
if a man drink never so little, he shall feel it work to his fingers and toes
end; therefore it pierces through the whole body, helping all diseases that
come of cold and phlegmatic humors: It avayleth much with women in travel: it
drives away the Measels and spots if the face and hands be anointed
therewith: it warmeth the breast, and helps the cold Cough: it consumes al cold
fluxes that proceed from brain and head, and causes quiet sleep. In brief,
this Oil may be used in stead of the natural Balm for many diseases.

RECEIPT. LXIV. How to distill and make Oil of Rosemary flowers, with its
virtue.
TAke Rose-mary flowers and stamp them, then put them into a glass with strong
wine, and stop it close, setting it in the Sun for five or six days, and then
distill it with a soft fire, and you shall have both water and oil, which you
must separate, keeping the oil close in a glass, whose virtues are these.

It helps against all pains in the head, although they have continued seven
years, it comfort the memory, and also preserves the eyes, if you drink now
and then a drop or two, and put another into the eyes: it helps those that
are deaf, if it be put into the ears, and also drunk with good wine: it opens
all stoppings of the liver and milk, and helps against the dropsy, and
yellow Jaundize: it breaks wind, and eases Cholick, and rising of the
mother: it is also excellent against the Pestilence, or those which have drunk
poison, if they drink of this Oil, and lay them down to sweat: It comfort
the heart, and cleanses the blood, and makes a man merry, and causes a good
color: It helps those that have the Canker and Fistula, and such like. And
to be brief, it helps all the diseases of the body that come of cold and
moist humors, although they were never so evil.

RECEIPT. LXV. How to help Deafness, and to expel wind from the Head.
TAke five or six drops, or more, of the Spirit of Wine, or good Aquavita in a
spoone, and holding down your head on one side, let one pour the same into
your Ear; let it continue there about the space of half a quarter of an
hour, still holding your head aside that it run not out; and then you shall
hear a most terrible noise and rumbling in your head, which is the wind; then
turn your head aside, and the water will run all out again very hot: Now when
you have done thus much on one side, you may do as much on the other; but be
sure to keep your head warm after you have done. This I have often proved,
and found ease thereby.

RECEIPT LVI. How to give ease, and to help the raging pain of the teeth,
without drawing
THis is also performed with the spirit of Wine, or good Aquavita (as you have
read in the former Receipt) by pouring it into the ears, especially on that side
where as your pain lies; but after that you have let the water run forth of
your ears, then with more of the same water (against a fire) you must rub and
chafe your cheeks, and under your jaws, and behind your ears, stroking of them
upwards with your hands toward the neck, to drive back the humors; for it is
nothing else but a cold rheum that distilleth from the head into the Gums
which causes the pain: Therefore be sure to keep the head very warm when you
have done.

I have been certified (but how true it is I know not) that three teeth taken
out of a dead man's skul, and sowed it into a clout or part of Leather, and
worn about them, which were much subject to the Toothache, it gave them
present ease, and they never were troubled with the same so long as they had
those Teeth about them.

RECEIPT LXVII. A dainty Receipt for curious Artists, or others, to strengthen
and comfort the eyes.
THis Receipt I had of a curious Ingraver, and my Friend; who every morning,
before he went to work, in the corner of his Handkercher, (or a clean linen
Rag,) did put a few drops of Aqua-vita, and with the same did wipe the corners
of his Eyes, Eyebrowes, and Temples, which did keep back the Rheum, and
greatly did strengthen and comfort the Eyes; of which I have often made trial,
and found much comfort.

RECEIPT LXVIII. Of Fractures, which are Bones broken; and also of Dislocutions,
or Joints displaced, with their cure.
MAny times it happens that Legs, Arms, and Fingers are broken, or out of
joint, and the Party so hurt is void of help; by reason they have no
Surgeon near them; Therefore for the relief of such Persons, I have here
set down some directions by which they may be eased of their pain: But I
would not wish them to trust to too much of their own skill, if they have any
expert Surgeon near hand to do it.

If a Leg or an Arm be broken, then have a care to place the Member in the
same manner as it was before, which you shall do in this manner.

Take a Towell and make it fast above the place where it is broken, and then
take an other Towell and fasten it underneath the place where it is broken;
then cause two men to pull those two Towels, that they may thereby extend or
stretch out the Member; and when the Member is stretched forth at length, place
the broken Bones as they were at the first; and so by little and little let
them slack their pulling: Then have a Cloth ready, so big that it may compass
the whole Member, wet this Cloth in whites of Eggs, and Oil of Roses mingled
together, and lay it on the grieved part; then roll it about with a linen
Rouler, of four fingers broad, and two yards long, wet the Rouler in water and
vinegar mingled together: First, roll it about the fracture three or four
times, then downward, and then upward, and so fasten it: then roll it with
another Rouler, in the same manner; on these place thin splints of light wood,
armed well with tow, one fingers breadth from each other, and bind them on with
tape: then place the member on some soft Pillow for twenty days; but if a pain
full itch do arise, open and foment the place with warm water, and then
anoint it with Vnguentum Album, and roll it up again.

If that a finger be broken, roll it with a convenient Rouler, and splint it,
and use the means aforesaid.

RECEIPT LXIX. A precious Salve for all those that have had any member out of
joint, called Jeremy of Brunswicks Salve.
THis famous Surgeon, with this salve, has healed those that had formerly
their members out of joint, or those that had bin wounded, and could not stir
or bow the member where they had the hurt: For by this Salve did he bring many
stiff and crooked Joints again to their former strength, to the great
admiration of all men, both Chirurgions and others.

How to make the Salve.
Take two ounces of old Hog's Grease, and of Ducks-grease, and Goos-grease, Hens
or Capons-grease of each two ounces: Linseedmeale, Fenetreek-meale, of each two
ounces; Oyle-olive eight ounces; Oppoponax, Mastick and Frankincense, of each
an ounce; dissolve the Gums in white wine (that are to be dissolved) and powder
the other, mingle them all together, and add wax and turpentine to them, then
boil them all together with good stirring.

RECEIPT LXX. How to order and dress a wound when it is first hurt, with their
remedy.
First remove all such things as are in the wound, as clotted blood, wood iron,
or the like; then dry the blood with a cloth or sponge, and wash it with cold
white wine, and apply some unguents or Balmes to the same, and on that a
plaster fit for a wound; then roll it gently, and in good form, for that
helps to hasten the cure.

If the wound be of any length, you may stitch it in three or more places, but
be sure for to leave a place at the lower part thereof for to purge it self
thereby.

RECEIPT LXXI. Au excellent Unguent or Lenament for green wounds, especially
for those in the head
Take of the best Turpentine an ounce and a half, and as much of Gum Elemi, of
Capons grease an ounce; melt these at the fire, and mingle them. When you use
it, melt it, and anoint the edges of the wound, and dip a pledget of lint in
it, and apply it to the wound, and then lay a plaster on the top of the same,
and roll it gently.

RECEIPT LXXII. How to make a sovereign Oil or Balm for all wounds, simple,
or contused.
TAke three pound of common Oil, two pound of turpentine, wheat that is
cleansed five ounces, Saint-Johns wort a pound, Valerian, Cardus-Benedictus, of
each fourteen ounces; bruise the herbs, and infuse them in white wine six or
eight hours, then put thereto the wheat and oil, and boil them on an easy
fire, till the wine be consumed, then strain them, and put the turpentine in,
and then boil them again on a soft fire to perfection.

RECEIPT LXXIII. An excellent Emplaster, which is good for all wounds or Ulcers
TAke Deers suet four ounces, Rosin, and Perrosin of each a pound and a half,
white wax and Frankincense of each four ounces, Mastick an ounce; melt the wax
and suet, and powder the Gums, and put them together; and when they be melted
strain them through a piece of Canvasse; then add to them a pottle of white
wine, and boil them al to the consumption of the wine, with continual
stirring; and then take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold, put
thereto four ounces of turpentine washed in white wine, and of campher
powdered two ounces; then make roules of it, and keep it for your use.

RECEIPT LXXIIII. An other excellent Plaster for wounds in the Breast, or other
parts.
TAke Pine-Rosin that is fresh, clear and sweet a pound, Oil of Bays, and
turpentine, of each two ounces; Gum Elemni sweet and good four ounces; melt
the Rosin and Gum together, and stir them well, then put in the Oil and
Turpentine, and let it boil, with continual stirring, and then strain it,
and reserve it for your use in a close pot.

When you use it, spread it on a piece of leather bigger then the wound by
three fingers breadth, and make a hole in the middle of the leather for the
corruption to run forth: this does it without tent or pledget: Dress it
twice a day in the summer, and once a day in the winter.

This Plaster is good for all wounds in the breast, or other parts, for it
draws the hollow parts of all wounds, and strengthens the parts, clearing
them from unnatural matter, and dries all wounds caused by thrusts.

RECEIPT LXXV. Of the general significations of sicknesses, either present or
near at hand.
THese following Presages and tokens of sicknesses, are worth the observation
of all men; First, to prepare themselves for God, if he be pleased to call
them; otherwise that they may in time before they be too much spent, have the
counsel and help of learned and expert Physicians.

Signs of Sickness are these.
If the body be hotter, colder, moyster, dryer, leaner, or fatter, or the
color more pale, or more swartish, or the eyes more hollow then they were
accustomed to be, and on the sudden change, all these are certain forerunners
and messengers, that the body is disposed to sickness, or already sick.

RECEIPT LXXVI. Of the signification of the several colors of some Vrines.
THe Colors and Symptoms of Vrines are many and various, as are the diseases;
and therefore ought to be judged on by the learned: but thus much in brief.

Red and thick Urine, betokens sanguin.

Red and thin betokens melancholy.

White and thick, signifies phlegm.

White and thin betokens melancholy.

The highness of the color signifies heat, but the pale, black, or green,
betokens cold

Also, the grosnesse or thickness of the Urine signifies moisture; the
clearness or thinness dryth.

Urine of the color of bright Gold, or of the color of Gilt, signifies
perfect digestion or health.

Red as a red Apple or Ch^rry, or base red like role Armonack, or red like
glowing fire, betokens excess of digestion.

Clear and white like water, or gray as a horn, or white like whay; or the
color of a Camels hair, signifies lack of digestion.

Pale like to broth or flesh sodden, betokens the beginning of digestion.

Citrine color or yellow, or subcitrine or paler, signifies the middle of
digestion.

Color of a beasts liver, or of dark wine, or green like to Coleworts, shows
adustion of humors.

Urine of a leady color, or black as ink, or black as horn, or dark above
and clear beneath, betokens feebleness of nature, mortification and death.

FINIS.
THE SCHOOL OF Artificial Fireworks.
First, The Order and making in a true proportion all sorts of Moulds for
Fireworks.
BEfore you proceed to the making of Rockets for Fireworks, it is requisite to
understand how for to order and make your Moulds and other Instruments for the
same; and first for your Moulds: You must provide a piece of good dry Box,
Holly, Walnut-tree, Crab-tree, or some such like tough wood, without shakes or
knots: And when you have thus done, it is fit to know of what length and
breadth you desire to have your Mould; for following this kind of proportion,
all other sorts of Moulds are made great and small; therefore you ought to have
a Turner to turn and bore the same:) As for example; If I would have the hole
of a Mould bored but an inch diameter or wide, then the length of the Mould
must be six times so long as the hole is wide (which is six inches,) and on
each side of the hole half an inch thick: So that when the Mould is turned
round, it is two inches over in breadth. When you have done this, you must have
a bottom made, and is to be fitted in this manner as is described by the
Letters in the Figure following.

A. Is the Foot of the Mould, and must be in height two inches, and must be in
breadth an inch and a quarter, whether it be square or round.

B. Serves only for a stay, and must arise one inch into the Mould; and so
proportional in all other Moulds.

C. Is for the mouth of the Rocket, and is in breadth two third parts of an
inch, and then setting one foot of a pair of Compasses in the middle or
Center, describe the arch, which is the full height required.

D. Is the length and bigness of the Needle, which is two third parts the
length of the Mould; and the bigness of the bottom one sixth part the breadth
of the bore, and taper toward the top.

EE, Serves for the Paper being rouled, and must be one sixth part of the
breadth on each side.

mould for making fireworks

FF. Is the thickness of the Mould, which is half the breadth of the Bore,
that is in this Mould half an inch.

FG. Is the length of the Mould, which is fix times the breadth.

2. The order and making of Rowlers, Rammers, and other things for the Coffins.
HAving provided your Mould, then you are to fit your Rowler, which must be two
third parts of the breadth of the Bore of the Mould, and the length thereof
six inches longer then the Mould, which is for rouling of your Paper, and is
described by the Letter A, in the Figure following, with a hole to be bored in
the bottom to receive a Wire, which must be fastened in another piece of wood
somewhat shorter, to take out at your pleasure, which is described by the
Letter D, the use thereof shall be described when I shall show the order of
making the Coffins.

When you have fitted your Rocket, then proceed to the making of your Rammers,
which must always be two at the least, for each several Mould as they
increase in largeness, so you must be fitted with several Rammers, by reason
of the Taper Needle, the manner and form is described by the Letters, B. C. in
the Figure following.

B. Is the hollow Rammer, and has a hole in it answerable to the length and
bigness of the Taper Needle; It must be a small matter less then the Rowler,
because that otherwise in putting 'it in, you will put down the Paper. The
other Rammer is not half so long, and is sad, that when you have beaten to the
top of the Needle, you may make use of this, which is marked with the Letter C.

four instruments for the making of fireworks

Having fitted your Rammers, provide a piece of Box made after the form as you
see described by the Letter F, which must serve to make your large Coffins, to
put the work which you intend, on the head of your Rockets.

E. E. Shows the breadth, which is the just bigness of the Rocket, and must
be so in all sizes.

G. G. Describes the largeness of the Coffin, and must be twice the breadth.

The Letters H. H. shows the length of the Coffin, which ought to be twice
the breadth of the Rocket; but you are not tied to that so precisely, because
you may alter that according to the work which you put therein.

3. How to order and make the Coffins of Paper.
HAving explained the manner and form of the Moulds, with the other things
belonging to the same; I will now show the use of them in their several
Orders; and first for the use of the Rowler, described by the Letter A, in the
Figure before.

Provide you some good large strong Paper for your work; and to know what
length your Paper must be, let it be always the length of your Mould; so shall
you have one breadth left above the Mould; the use whereof shall be showed
hereafter. Now having provided your Paper in length ready, take your Rowler,
and one length of Paper, and begin to roll; when you have rouled one sheet,
you must have a board with a ^andle to roll it with, (the board is mar^ed in
the Figure following with the Letter (...).) which must be done in this manner:
^ou must hold the Rowler in your left hand, and with your right hand hold the
board by ^he handle, and then lay down your Row^r upon some smooth Chest, or
Table; which when you have done, roll another length of Paper, and so proceed
in rouling between every sheet, until you have rouled on so much as will fill
the Mould very straight: When you have thus done, draw forth the Rowler, about
an inch, and then take the other short Rowler, which is marked with the Letter
D. in the other Figure, and put it in as you see described; and there you shall
have a place left for the choking of the Rocket, of which is next following.

a man using a handled device on a tabletop rendered next to the device itself
marked B

4. The order and manner how you shall choke a Rocket.
When you are to choke a Rocket, you must have an Iron hook or a staple
droven into some post, to which you must fasten your cord, which must be bigger
or less according to the bigness of your Rocket, by reason that a small cord
will not choke a great Rocket for want of strength and a great cord will not
serve for a small one, in regard that it will make too great a choking, so that
you must have a bigger and a less; and when you have so done, you must tie one
end of the cord to the hook or staple, and at the other end, about a yard off,
tie a strong stick, in fashion of a Swing, it must be strong because it bears
the weight of the body, (as you may see in the Figure following marked with the
Letter K.) which when you have provided, put the stick between your legs, and
wind the cord about the Rocket-case in the place appointed, which must be
between the long Rowler and the short; when that is done, girt it by degrees,
ever turning the Rowler, to the end it may come together more close and neat;
and when you have sufficiently choked it, draw forth your short Rowler, and
where the choking is, tie it about with strong Pack-thread; and then draw
forth the Rowler, your Coffin is ready to be filled when occasion serves, the
form whereof follows, by this Letter A.

a man marked K using a roller pulling on a string attached to a standing board
rendered next to a coffin marked A

5. The manner of driving a Rocket, with the Instruments belonging thereto.
YOur Coffin of Paper being finished, take it, and with your hollow Rammer,
force the same down close into the Mould, and when you have done, strike two
or three hard blows to settle the Paper into his right form: Which being
done, then you must fill the Coffin, in doing whereof, you must have a care,
providing a measure, which may contain but the twentieth part of your whole
Rocket; so by that means you shall not fail, but every Rocket shall have a
true proportion alike; as for example; I have a Coffin, which being filled,
will hold an ounce of mixture, or thereabouts; then I take the twentieth part,
and when I find what quantity it is, I make a measure of Horn or Lattin marked
with the Letter F. which shall contain so much; and then I begin to fill my
Coffin with one measure at a time, and putting in my Rammer, I strike four or
five smart blows with a good heavy Mallet; and then I fill another measure,
and strike again; so I continue till I come to the top of the Needle; then I
take the sad Rammer, and so continue with it, till I come to the top of the
Mould: Now the Paper which is above the top of the Mould, must be turned down,
and beaten hard; which being done, the Rocket is finished from the Mould, which
being forced out with as much ease as you can, for the less you fo^ce it,
(being filled, and the Needle taken out,) the better it is, for knocking
loosens the Powder, and so causes the Rocket for to fail. You should have a
Funnell to fill your small Rockets, which is marked with the Letter G.

a man standing at a table next to a standing mortar and pestle hitting a
coffin he is holding in one hand on with a hammer in his other hand flanked by
a rendering of a scoop marked F and a funnel marked G

6. Of the Composition and Receipts for your Rockets.
HAving thus finished your Rockets, it now rests to know the Receipts: For in
the making of them, the chiefest thing to be regarded is the composition that
they ought to be filled withal; for as much as that which is proper to Rockets
which are of a less sort, is very improper to those which are of a greater
size; for the fire being lighted in a great Concave, which is filled with a
quick composition, burns with great violence, and so contrary, a weak
composition being placed into a small Concave, makes no effect: Therefore we
shall here deliver rules and directions, which may serve for the true
composition, or matter wherewith you may charge any Rocket, from Reckets which
are charged but with one ounce of powder, unto greater, which requires for
their charge ten pound of powder: And here follows the Ingrediences for
several Rockets.

First, for Rockets of one ounce.

Unto each pound of good Musket powder beaten, put two ounces of small
Coledust, and with this charge the Rocket.

For Rockets of two or three ounces.

Unto every four ounces and a half of powder-dust, add an ounce of
Saltpeter; or to every four ounces of powder-dust, add an ounce of Cole-dust.

For Rockets of four ounces.

Unto every pound of Powder-dust, add four ounces of Saltpeter, and an ounce
of Cole-dust; but to have it more slow, unto every ten ounces of good
Powder-dust, add three ounces of Saltpeter, and three ounces of Cole-dust.

For Rockets of five or six ounces.

Unto every pound of Powder-dust, add three ounces and a half of Saltpeter,
and two ounces and a half of Cole-dust, and an ounce of Sulphur, and an ounce
of File-dust.

For Rockets of seven or eight ounces.

Unto every pound of Powder-dust, add four ounces of Saltpeter, and three
ounces of Sulphur.

For Rockets of ten or twelve ounces.

Unto the former Ingrediences, add half an ounce of Sulphur, and it will be
sufficient.

For Rockets of Fourteen and Sixteen ounces.

Unto every pound of Powder-dust, add four ounces of Saltpeter; of Coledust
two ounces and a quarter; of Sulphur and Filedust, an ounce and a quarter.

For Rockets of one pound.

Unto every pound of Powder-dust, add three ounces of Cole-dust, and an ounce
of Sulphur.

For Rockets of two pound.

Unto every pound of Powder dust, add nine ounces and a half of Saltpeter, of
Coledust, two ounces and a half; of File-dust, one ounce and a half; and of
Sulphur, three quarters of an ounce.

For Rockets of three pound.

Unto every pound of Saltpeter, add six ounces of Cole-dust; and of Sulphur
four ounces.

For Rockets of four, five, six, or seven pound.

Unto each pound of Saltpeter, add five ounces of Cole-dust; and of Sulphur
two ounces and a half.

For Rockets of eight, nine or ten pound.

Unto every pound of Saltpeter, add five ounces and a half of Cole-dust, and
of Sulphur two ounces and a half.

Here note, that in all great Rockets there is no Powder put, because of the
greatness of the fire, which is lighted at once, which causes too great a
violence, and therefore ought to be filled with a more weak composition.

Now when you have provided your Powder, you must first meal it, and then
searce it so that it may be free from any corn, though never so small.
Likewise, take good dry coal, well burnt, and beat it to dust, searcing it
very fine, which when you have done, mix them according as your occasion
requires, and following your directions.

7. The manner of heading a Rocket, with the order of capping it.
IN the manner of heading a Rocket, you must use the thick Rowler, which you
may see described by the Letter F. in the second Figure; upon which you must
roll some Paper, or fine Past-boord, and past it so that it may be very close,
and then choke it at the length of the thicker part, so that it may come close
to your stick in the lesser part, which will be fit to be tied to the top of
the Rocket; so shall you have a Coffin to put in your works, which must be of
diverse sorts. This being done, you must provide taper Caps, which must be
adjoined to the top of the large Coffin: The use of them is to keep in your
works, and to cause them to pierce the Air more swifter. The manner of making
these caps, is to take a pair of Compasses, and describe a circle in
Pastboord, then cut it out with a pair of Sheers, and that will make two caps,
being cut in the middle, and turned one corner under the other, and so pasted;
and let them so pasted, be put in a Napking-presse till they be dry; and when
they are dry, cut out a half circle in Paper, which shall fit round about the
said cap, and shall serve to past on the cap to the Coffin: So you have all
things ready to the finishing of your Rocket, which must be done in the manner
which follows. R. in the next Figure, is the Crackers fastened to the top of
the Rocket: S. is the cap; T. is the Fisgigs finished; H. is the stick tied to
the Rocket.

8. The manner of finishing a Rocket.
HAving driven your Rocket, as I have showed, with the Paper turned down, you
must first prime it, which must be with Cotten-wick, made for that purpose,
which you must put into the vent, leaving a piece to hang lower then the mouth
of the Rocket, by three or four inches; which being done, tie a piece of Paper
over the Mouth that it may not fall out: Now having primed your Rocket, you may
proceed to the heading of it, and that is done after this manner.

Take your Rocket, and on the head you should turn down the Paper; you must
with a Bodkin pierce two or three holes, that when the Rocket has spent it
self, the works which are in the head may take fire; which holes prime with a
little Powder-dust, and then put on the head, with the choking fitted to your
Rocket, which must come over the same in such manner, that the bottom of the
greater part must come even with the top of the Rocket; which tie fast to the
Rocket, with thread, and then put in your works; But before you put in your
works, whether they be Stars, or any other works, you must put in a little
Cotton-wool, being rouled in Powder dust, to make your stars to take fire, or
likewise may blow out: Having thus done, put in your stars, or other works;
and if you make more then one tire, (as you may do of your stars,) then you
must put more Cotton rouled in Powderdust among them, or between every tire,
that they may all take fire; then take your Cap, and fill the hollow place with
Cotton, because it is light, and likewise will fire quickly: which being
fitted, paste it close to the top of the Coffin, that it may stand upright;
then must you fit your stick, for the peasing of your Rocket, which ought to be
eight times the length of the Rocket without the head: You must get the
smoothest and lightest you can, such as Basket-makers use, and then cut one
side of it flat at the great end, then make two notches on the round side, that
the one be differing from the other, so much as is between the choking of
your Rocket, and the end of the Vent, for if you should tie it upon the Vent,
it would loosen the Powder: causing it to break in the fyring: Be careful
that you tie not the wrong end of the Rocket uppermost, but tie that end
downward which is choked, and with a piece of thread that is strong tie it to
the lower notch about the choking. When you have tied that, then tie the other
higher, and let the stick come even with the top of the Rocket; The manner
whereof is showed in the next Figure, by the Letter G. Then pease your Rocket,
by laying it on your finger two or three inches from the mouth; and if you find
the stick be too heavy, cut it shorter, till you find your Rocket to balance
your stick, for if the stick be too heavy, the Rocket will be slug, and being
too light, the Rocket will fall before it be half up. These things being
provided, you have your Rocket ready to be fired, which must be after this
manner following.

9. The manner of firing Rockets, with the description of a Staff for the same.
YOu must provide a long Staff with a Pike at one end, to be thrust hard into
the ground, with a three legged staff, having a hollow hoope at the top, to
let this long staff slide up and down, to the end, that having Rockets, whose
sticks are longer then the staff, yet by raising it through the said Iron
hoope, you may make it four or five foot longer then it would be, standing on
the ground. Now this long staff must have a sliding piece cut with several
points, which must be near the top; and at the bottom there must be a Ring of
Wire, to let the stick go through; which must be made likewise to slide up and
down; so thrusting the small end through the said Ring, your Rocket will rest
upon that part above, which must be just opposite in a straight line; so open
the mouth of your Rocket, and pull out the end of your Cotton-wick, and with a
piece of Match fastened in a Linstock, give fire to the wicke, and by degrees,
you shall see it fire your Rocket; which ordered well, will mount very straight
and high: Thus having showed the whole order of composing a Rocket, with firing
of the fame; I will in the next place show you the order for making of Stars,
and other works, which are necessary for the heads of your Rockets. The Figure
of the Rocket and the staff are here presented.

The Letter G. is the Rocket with the long stick.

A. The long Staff to rise thorough the Ring.

B. B. B. The three legged Staff.

C. The Ring or Hoope of Iron, for the long staff to slide through.

D. The Screw to fasten to the long staff being raised.

E A piece of Iron filed with notches to hang the Rocket on.

F. The Ring of Wyre to put through the stick, to be raised higher or lower.

G. Is the Rocket. H. The long stick.

parts of a rocket

10. Several compositions for the ordering of Stars of several colors.
IF you will have your Stars of a blew color, with red; then take eight
ounces of Powder mealed, of Saltpeter four ounces, and of Sulphur vive twelve
ounces: Meal these very fine, and mix them together with two ounces of
Aquavita, and half an ounce of the Oil of Spike, and let it be dry before you
use it.

If you will have a beautiful white fire; take four ounces of Powder, twelve
ounces of Saltpeter, six ounces of Sulphur vive, and half an ounce of
Camphire; meal your Ingredients, and mix them: Now to powder your Camphire,
you must use a Brass Mortar and a Pestle, dipping it in Oil of Almonds, so
stirring it by degrees it will powder, and then keep it close from the Air
till you use it, or the Camphire will loose its spirit.

If you will have a white fire, and to last long; then take four ounces of
Powder, one ounce of Saltpeter, eight ounces of Sulphur vive, one ounce of
Camphir, and two ounces of Oil of Peter: Meal those which are to be mealed
very fine, and mix them according to the former directions.

11. The order and manner of making the best sort of Stars.
HAving showed the compositions for Stars; now I will show you how to make
them, which is thus: you must make little square pieces of brown paper, which
fill with your composition, and so double it down, rolling it till you make it
somewhat round, about the bigness of a nut or bigger, according to the size of
the Rocket, you may put in a dozen on the head of a small Rocket, binding them
round with a thread, and then draw a cotton wick thorough it, being prepared
for priming.

Also there is another way, which is thus; take a small Rowler, about the
bigness of an Arrow, and roll a length of paper about it, and past it round,
letting it dry, and then you have a hollow trunk of this paper, fill this with
your ingredience, thrusting it hard till it be at the top; and then cut it into
short pieces, about half an inch long, and then in warm glue dip one of the
ends therein, and let them dry, to the end that both ends of your Star fire
not, and then put the other end into powder dust; you may put them on your
Rocket, in one or two tire, putting in powder dust between every tire, that
they may all take fire.

The priming is thus made; take oil of Camphire, soking cotton wick therein,
and being moist, roll it in fine powder dust, and then hang it up till it be
through dry; and then keep it close from air till you use it, or the spirit of
the Camphire will decay.

12. The order and making of other several Fireworks for the Rocket, as
Serpents, or fisgigs, Reports, golden and silver Rain, etc.
THe Serpents or Fisgigs are made about the bigness of ones little finger, by
rolling a paper upon a small Rowler, (as it was for your stars) and choking the
paper coffin an inch from the end, then fill it three inches with powder dust,
and then choke it, and then put in a little corn powder, that when your
Serpent has played a while to and fro, it may break and give a report: you may
fill it with the Star mixture, and putting diverse of them on the head of a
large Rocket, they will first appear like Stars, and when the Stars are spent,
taking hold of the powder dust, and they will run wrigling to and fro like
Serpents, and at last will give so many reports, very delightful to behold.

The Reports are made in their proper cases as the Serpents are, but the paper
must be somewhat thicker, which will cause it to give the greater report: These
are to be filled with grain powder, or half powder and Star mixture.

To make the golden Rain, you must get store of Goose-quils, and cut them off
next the feathers, and fill these quils hard with the same composition that is
in your Rocket, and must be put on the head of the Rocket with the open end
downwards: If it were possible to put a thousand of these quils upon the head
of a Rocket, it were a dainty sight to see how pleasantly they spread
themselves in the air, and come down like streams of gold, much like the
falling down of Snow, especially if the wind be any thing high.

two renderings of a firework shower emiting from tubes

If you will make silver Rain it is performed as the other, only you must fill
your quils with the same ingredients that you did your white stars.

13. How to make your fireworks to run upon a line backward and forward.
TAke small Rockets, and place the tail of one to the head of the other, tying
a cane to them to run on a line soped; the line may be a hundred yards long, or
longer if you please, being well stretched, and set on stakes, as you may see
in the Figure following; As admit the Line to be A B C D E F G, and if you give
fire to the Rocket at A, it will fly to B, and then come back again to A. Then
fire an other at C, and that will fly to D, and back again to C; and so of the
rest. And at the last (if you please) may be placed a pot of Fireworks, which
being fired, will make good sport, having Serpents and other things in it,
which will variously intermix themselves in the air, and upon the ground, and
every one will extinguish it self with a report.

a serpent on a line run between posts above a zig-zag line on posts that end
with a tube emiting a firework shower

14. How to make a Wheel of Fire-work to run forward and backward upon the
ground.
YOu must get a pair of light Wheels like spinning Wheels, both of a bigness,
which must be fastened to a small light axell tree, in such manner, that they
may not move about the same; and on the middle of the axell tree fasten also a
Fire-wheele (as you may see in the Figure following) which must not be so big
in compass as the two other wheels, because it must not touch the ground, so
that being fast in the middle upon the same axell tree, it cannot run, unless
it carry the other wheels with it; these being set on an even ground, will run
a great way without ceasing: Now that you may make it return back again, when
it has run its course forward, you may make your middle wheel in such manner,
that it may have rockets on both sides, so that when one side is spent, it may
give fire to the other side, the mouths of the Rockets being fastened the
contrary way, will make a return with a swift motion.

A A. Are the two outward wheels fastened to the axell tree.

three wheels on a single axle

C C. Is the Axel-tree, on the which the three wheels are all fastened.

B Is the Fire-wheel in the middle, and carries it not so great a compass as
the other two wheels.

15. An other way for a single Wheel to be placed on a post, to turn both
ways.
THis may be performed with a single Wheel, so that the Rockets may be placed
on each side (as in the other middle Wheel) with a hole from the one side to
the other for a vent; then place your Rockets first upon side (but so, that the
last Rocket be placed over the said hole) and boring a small hole in one side
of the last Rocket, put in a cotton wick for priming, letting it come through
the hole in the Wheel, to the mouth of another Rocket, which shall be turned
the contrary way on the other side; so that the Wheel having finished its
revolution one way, may take fire on the other side, making a retrograde
motion: but if you place the Rockets all one way on both sides it will continue
twice so long as another of the same bigness, the form of which is expressed
in the Figures following.

D. Is the Wheel with Rockets on one side, the last Rocket to have a vent to
pass through to the other side.

a wheel on an axle stuck into a board along with a rendering of the front of
the wheel

E. Represents the said Wheel finished, with Rockets on both sides.

16. The order to make a fixed wheel, standing upon a Poast, giving diverse
reports.
THere must be a Wheel turned two foot wide, and out of the upper side must
be a groofe turned half an inch wide, and half an inch deep, to which groofe
you must have a piece of Wood so fitted, that it may just slide in, which piece
of Wood must have so many small holes bored in it as you will have reports
about it, and be sure you set them not too near together, lest the fire of
one, beat the other down; having thus provided your Wheel, you must make a
conveyance, or hollow Trunk of Paper, which will just fill it, and fill the
same with some of your slow mixtures for Stars, and then putting on the cap
of wood so fitted with holes, being made fast with glue, pierce every hole into
your hollow conveyance, so that putting a quill into every one, they may take
fire, and to the quill fasten a Report; so shall you have a peale of Chambers
placed in a small room, which being once fired, will follow in order, til the
whole train be spent; Behold the Figure marked with A.

a horizontal wheel marked A with rockets upon it atop a post stuck vertically
into a ground

17. Another fixed Wheel upon a Poast, which will cast forth many Rockets into
the Air.
THis Wheel is not much unlike the former, which will give fire to diverse
Rockets standing circular, differing little from the former, only you must make
a hole for every stick to pass through, (as it is in the Figure B.) and
therefore it must be made somewhat broader, which will work the like effect that
the other does, by conveying fire from one Rocket to another, till they be all
spent.

a standing man holding a lever connected to a horizontal wheel marked B with
rockets atop a post stuck vertically into the ground

The mixture for this conveyance must he very slow, therefore use these
Ingredients: Take eight ounces of Roch peter, four ounces of Sulphur vive,
half an ounce of Camphire, two ounces of fine Powder-dust, and meal these
very fine, and mingle them together, adding half a quarter of an ounce of
Linseed Oil, and as much of the Oil of Peter, these Oils must be dropped in
by degrees, and so wrought up, till you find your mixture bound like Dough, and
this is both slow and sure.

18. An other dainty fixed wheel, which will cast forth diverse Fisgigs, or
Serpents, and as many Reports.
YOu must have a Wheel turned with a groofe on the top thereof to put in the
conveyance of paper, then fit one a piece of wood (as was before showed) with
small holes to put in quils, which are for firing your Reports, and must be
placed round about the upper part of your Wheel; and on the side thereof diverse
holes must be made, of the bigness of your Fisgigs, which must be pierced
thorough to the paper conveyance, those Fisgigs that are placed round on the
side, and the Reports on the top, one train will fire them all; and in firing,
you shall see all the Fisgigs flying round about, one after another, as the
fire passes to them; and for every Fisgig which passes out, shall be fired a
Report; so that there shall be a continual motion, until the whole train be
consumed.

a horizontal wheel with rockets atop it and sticking out from its sides atop a
post stuck vertically into the ground

G. Is the Wheel with Reports and Fisgigs R. R. Is the Reports on the upper
part. F F. Is the Fisgigs on the side of the wheel.

19. Of night Combatants with faulchions and Targets, Clubs, Mases, etc.
THis is performed by two men seeming to fight, or to make way in a throng of
people; the Clubs at the great ends are made like a round basket (or other
form) with wicker, or small sticks on a staff, which must be filled with
Rockets in a spiral form, glued, and so placed that they fire but one after
another: The Faulchions are made of wood in a bowing manner, having large backs
to receive many Rockets, the head of one near the neck of another, glued and
fastened well together, so that one being spent, the other may take fire; the
Targets are made of thin boards, which are challenned in spiral Lines, to
contain Primers to fire the Rockets one after another, which is all covered
over with a thin covering of wood or past-board, bored with holes spiral also,
which Rockets must be glued and made fast to the place of the channels: Now if
two men having in each hand a Target and a Faulchion, or a Mase of fire, and
seem to fight, it will appear very pleasant to the Spectators; for by the
motion of fighting, the place will seem to be full of streams of fire: And
there may be adjoined to each Target a Sun or burning Commet, with Lances of
fire, which will make them more beautiful and resplendant in that action.

two men fighting each other with swords and shields

20. An other dainty one with Fisgigs, called Jack in a Box.
THe manner of making the same is in this order cause a box of Plate to be made
about six inches deep, and of what compass you please (with a socket at the
bottom to put in a staff) then puttin in a quantity of corn powder, or powder
dust in the bottom of the box, you may fill it with Fisgigs or Serpents,
leaving a place in the middle for a Cane to go through to the bottom, which
Cane must be filled with a slow receipt, in which you must put a quantity of
Camphir, but no oils, in regard of the narrow passage it has to burn,
without any other vent; then put your Cane down, leaving it an inch above the
box, and take a thick piece of past-board cutting a hole for the Cane to pass
through, and glue it close to the Cane, that the fire pass not through before
its time; this past board must be of sufficient breadth to cover the box quite
over, then put it on a staff, and light your Cane, which will appear only like
a Candle, and after a little space of time you shall hear a sudden noise, and
see all those Fisgigs flying some one way, some another: This has given good
content to the beholders; you may if you please make Clubs or Mases of the same.

21. Of Pots of fire for the ground, which will make the air rebound with
their Reports.
MAny Pots being fired together, do give a fine representation and recreation
to the Spectators; for those pots being filled with bals of fire, or flying
Serpents for the air, will so intermix one within another, in flying here and
there a little above the ground, and giving such a volley of Reports, that the
air will rebound with the noise, and the whole place be filled with sundry
streams of pleasant fire; which Serpents will much trouble those near the place
to defend themselves in their upper parts; and they will be no less busied by
the bals of fire, which will seem to annoy their feet.

six pots for ground-based fireworks

22. The making of a Fire-ball for the ground, which will be in continual
motion.
YOu must get a ball turned of some light wood, and then let it be sawed
through the midst with a thin bow-saw; then make on each side a hollow groofe
to lay in two Rockets (joined together after the manner of the Runners) and
then close up your ball with glue; only in the place where the two Rockets
join shall be a groof, which must be pasted over with paper, that the second
Rocket taking fire may have a vent, otherwise the ball will serve but once,
then fire it, and you shall see the operation with pleasure.

23. The making of a Ball for the water, which shall burn with great violence.
SOw a round case of strong Canvas, in shape of the case for a Football, but
somewhat lesser, and very round; having thus made your case, then proceed to the
filling of it, which must be done in this manner: you must first put in three
or four good spoonfuls of your mixture following, and with a stick made round
at one end, force it close together, and so continue filling it, and between
every filling put in your stick, and force it together, round it continually in
your hand, till you have finished it; which having done, sow it up close, and
then arm it with small cord, which is called marling; after you have thus done
you must coat it with a quantity of rosin, pitch, and tallow dissolved, and dip
your ball al over in the same, provided that you leave two vents to fire it,
which must be pierced a third part into your bal, which must be stopped with
two small sticks, till such time that you come to use them; the form thereof
you shall see in the next Figure by the Letter D; then pulling forth the
sticks, fill the two vents with sine powder dust, and firing it, cast it into
the water, and you shall have your desire; but you must always be sure that
your bal be thoroughly fired before you cast it from you: The receipt for this
bal follows.

Take one pound of Powder, eight ounces of Roch-water, four ounces of Sulphur,
two ounces of Camphir, one ounce of oil of Peter, one ounce of Linseed Oil,
half an ounce of oil of Spike, and two ounces of Colophonia.

24. Another dainty Water-ball, which will shoot forth many Reports.
THis ball must be made of wood (as was showed before) in two pieces, because
you may join it close together at pleasure, having small holes bored round
about it, to put in your quils which justify the Reports; which reports or
breakers must be made of paper, choked at both ends, and primed through the
midst; they must be fastened round with pitch, and so covered round about, that
no water may pass in: you must fill this bal in two halfes, that you may force
it very close together; and when it is filled, glue it fast, and arm it well
with nealed wire then put in your breakers, with a quill which must enter into
the bal, and likewise into the breaker; the form whereof you may see in the
Figure following; for A. is the mouth of the bal where it is to be fired, B. B.
are the reports or breakers, being made of paper, and filled with Corn powder:
C. C. are the Quils, which must be filled with powder dust, and serves for
firing the Reports.

a water ball marked D beside the rendering of a cross-section of the ball
marked A, B, and C

The Receipt for this bal are these: Take one pound of Roch-peter, four ounces
of Powder-dust, three ounces of Sulphur-vive, two ounces of Camphir, one ounce
of Linseed-oyle, two ounces of Rosen, and one ounce of Oil Benedict: you must
powder those things which are to be pondred, and mingle them altogether, and by
little and little sprinkle your Oils til you have wrought it like Past, and
then use it; the Qulls must be filled only with powder dust, because it must
fire suddenly.

25. How to make a Dragon, or the like, to run on the Line, spitting of fire.
THe body of the Dragon must be made either with Past board, or with fine rods
of wicker, being hollow, with a place in the belly to put in two Rockets, and
must be so ordered, that there may come a small Pipe from the tail of one, to
the head of the other: then make a place for the eyes, and mouth, to put into
each hole fire, which must be made up in rouled paper, and thrust in; then on
the top of the back let there be fastened two small Pullies for a Line to run
in, which being done, your Dragon is finished for firing, which must be thus;
first fire it at the eyes and mouth; (always observing that this Receipt must
be some slow mixture, such as your stars) then fire that Rocket which is placed
with his mouth toward the tail of the Dragon, which will make it seem to cast
fire from thence, till he come to the end of his motion; and then on a sudden
(as a creature wounded with some accident) shall return with fire coming forth
of his belly: This being well ordered, will give good content to the beholders
of the same: behold the Figure.

a dragon figure attached to a line by two rollers

26. The manner and form to represent Saint George fighting with a Dragon in
fire, on the Line
WHen you have formed your Figures of Past-bord or Wicker (as aforesaid) you
must make a hollow trunk through the body of each Figure, for a great Line to
pass through, and likewise for a smaller Line to draw them to and fro from
each other, which must be fastened in this manner (as you may see in the Figure
following:) At the breast of the Dragon let one end of one cord be tied, which
must pass through the body of the George, and turning it about a Pulley at the
other end, fasten it to the back of the George, and at the breast of the George
let another cord be tied, which must pass through the body of the Dragon (or
a trunk on the back) and so returning about a Pulley at that end, must be
pulled straight and fastened to the tail of the Dragon, so that as you turn
that Wheel, the George and Dragon will run furiously at each other; and when
you please, you may cause them to make a retreat, and to come on again: But by
all means forget not to soap your line extraordinary well; and likewise have a
care that your work be not too heavy above the line, but that they may hang in
an equal balance, otherwise they will turn their heels upward, which would be
a great disgrace to the work and Workman: And thus much to the ingenious I
suppose will suffice; behold the Figure.

a dragon figure facing a St. George figure both attached to the same line

27. How to make a Whale, a Mermaid, or other to play and swim upon the water.
YOu may make Figures of what shape your fancy best pleases: the body must be
made of light wicker rods, and in the middle of the body let there be placed an
axel tree, having two Wheels coming into the water, yet so as they may not be
seen; these Wheels must be made hollow, to contain a quantity of sand or
water; the use of it is to keep the body of your Figure upright, and able to
sink it so far into the water as is needful, and likewise to make it to swim
more steadie; note that these wheels must be loose, and the axel tree fast; in
the midst of this axel tree place three or four great Rockets, one by another,
with their mouths all one way; yet so provided, that there may be such a
distance between each Rocket, that there may come a vent from the tail of the
first, to the mouth of the second, and from the second to the third; and to the
end that it may continue the longer in motion, you may place diverse Lights
about the body, to make it the more beautiful; every of which Light
extinguishing, shall give a report, and so conclude. There are diverse other fine
Works to be performed on the water, which a judicious Artist may invent.

The Letter B. represents the Mermaid. C. Is the Wheels on the axel tree. D.
Are the Rockets on the axel tree.

a mermaid device with wheels on each side of its tail marked B, C, and D

28. Of diverse other rare works, which are to be performed on the water.
THose places which are situated upon River, or great Ponds, are proper to make
th^se recreative Fires on; therefore if you desire to make some of consequence,
they ought to be built upon Boats, or light Timber, which may be framed like
Beasts, or Fishes spitting fire; upon which may be built Castles, Pageants,
Turrets, or other conceits as you please. As if you would present a Castle, out
of which shall issue a Dragon, which shall swim through the water, and that
Dragon be encountered by a horseman, which is thus performed. Cause a Castle to
be framed, (as is showed) on light Timber, and let the bottom of the door of
the castle, with a ground plat be two foot under the brim of the water, (the
reasons follow) and at a foot high within the Castle let there be a certain
Line tied, which may pass through the body of the Dragon, and may be fastened
near the shore, where must be a float sunk so far under water, that the Line
may not be perceived; then fasten on your Dragon, (as was showed before for the
Line) but so, that the head of this may always be above the Line, whereas the
other was under: then at the appointed time, there must be one ready within the
Castle, to fire those parts of the Dragon which is requisite; which being done
(by the help of the Pulleys) shall pass it through the water, which so soon as
it presents it self, Neptune on a Seahorse shall come and encounter the said
Dragon, and at the last shall overcome it: Or you may order the work so, that
which you please shall have the victory; for that which keeps fire longest,
is supposed to have the best, and that which is soonest spent, to have the
worst.

G. Represents the Castle floating on the water, from whence issues the
Dragon.

E. Is the dragon coming forth of the castle.

D. I^ Neptune riding on the Seahorse, coming to encounter the Dragon.

F. Is the Pully that causes these motions by the Line, to be pulled to and
fro.

a Neptune device on a line facing a dragon device on the same line coming out
of a castle front facade

You may if you please, build upon Boats, or Timber, Turrets, Pagents, or
Castles, as is said, to receive or hold diversity of Fireworks that may be made
within them, which may play out and play diverse fires, as Reports Stars,
Golden Rain, Fisgigs, Granado's, and balls of Fire to burn in the water;
which will give great content to the eyes of the beholders; and in the
conclusion, it may be so ordered, they may fire one another, for which end they
were made.

29. The manner to compose a Ship of fireworks which being once fired, diverse
motions will present themselves.
YOu must cause a Mould, or body of a Ship to be made, that you may take off
the upper deck, to place some works underneath, where you must have a fire
wheel placed with a Screw on the Axeltree; this wheel must be placed in the
Stern, and must turn a Rouler, on which must be two girts placed, that must
pass on each side of the Main Mast, and run on to the Fore-ship; in this
Wheel there must be a hollow Spoke and Axeltree, as I have showed, which must
be so ordered, that the wheel being spent, it may convey fire to a tire of
Guns, lying round about, which must be fired with a close conveyance; and
having passed that, it must take hold of another conveyance, which shall give
fire to certain Rockets, which must be placed in the bodies of some Figures
representing Mariners, and must be so fitted, that they may have a Cane joined
to their body to guide them, that they may run on the ropes from the Deck to
the top of the Masts. This and other the like may be performed with great
facility; the Form of which follows.

B. The Fire-wheele which moves the Rouler, and carries the Girt whereon the
Figures are placed.

C. The Figures placed on the Girt being in motion.

E. E. The Figures which stand ready to run up the cords, some half way, some
at top.

a ship with firework placements

30. Of Lances of Fire, for pleasure and for service.
S'Tanding Lances are commonly made with hollow wood, to contain sundry
Petards or Rockets; these Lances may be fastened to posts, so that they may
not be overthrown in the flying out of the Rockets or Petards: but there are a
lesser sort of Lances, whose cases are of three or four fouldings of paper, of
a foot long, and about the bigness of ones finger: the composition wherewith
these Lances must be filled, is this; unto every four ounces of powder, you
must add two ounces of salt Peter, and unto that, add one ounce of Sulphur;
and then it will make a brick fire red color before it be half spent, if the
Lance be fired and held to it: Now if twenty such Lances were placed about a
great Rocket, and shot to a house or ship, it would produce a mischievous
effect.

Or, if unto the end of the Rocket there were fastened an Arrow (which must not
be too heavy) and in stead of the feathers, it should be of thin white tin
plate; and if you give fire to it being thus prepared, you may see how
serviceable it will prove. To the head of such Rockets may be placed Petards,
bals of fire, Grenades, and the like, and so may be applied to warlike
affairs.

three different kinds of rocket launcher

Here follows necessary and Serviceable Fireworks, both for Land and Sea
Execution; and first for the Pike.
HAving treated of Recreative Fireworks, I hold it convenient to speak
something in brief concerning Works for service (necessary for these times)
both for Land and Sea; which may thus be performed.

If you would make good a Breach, or enter a Ship, then take strong Canvas,
being cut, sowed, and tied hard on a Pike with Marlin-cord, then with this
Receipt following, being compounded and wrought together do thus.

Take Roch-water one-part, and Peter in meal as much, Sulphur mealed two
parts, threeparts of Rosin in roch, Turpentine one part, as much of
Linseed-oyle, one half part of Verdegrease, Bole-armoniack, bay salt,
Colophonia, of these three one third part, and if you think fitting, half a
part of Arsnick: a staff with a firework on it Then coat the same over with
this liquid mixture melted in a pan or pot: take four parts of Pitch, one part
of Linseed oil, one third part of turpentine, sulphurone part, tar one third
part, and one part of Tallow: After that these are melted, and being cold, bore
two holes in each of the same an inch deep with a sharp bodkin or iron,
filling the same with fine bruised powder, and put in each hole a little stick
of two or three inches long, to be taken out when you would fire the same:
(This composition will burn furiously.) If you please you may fasten to the
same receipt on your Pike, diverse light pipes or canes of iron or brass of six
or seven inches long, being pistol or Caliver bore, (as the Figure marked with
B. shows) placing the touchhole thereof close to the canvas, boring the said
canvas through, and priming the same with fine powder, pasting a paper thereon,
and then coat the same over as before said; This being charged with powder and
bullet, will do great execution in a throng, either defer sive or offensive.

How to arm a Dart or Iavelin with Wildfire, for the sails or sides of ships.
YOu may arm a Dart, Javelin, Partizan, or such like weapon, to do excellent
service, being in the hand of a valiant soldier, as you may see by the Letter
C. in the same: The same should be filled with the self like Receipt as before
is showed for the Pikes with wild fire, which will be a very good weapon for to
go into the sides or sails of ships.

Or you may place upon the staff of your Javelin certain Pistol barrels of
one length, about ten or twelve inches, letting the same into the wood round
about the staff a little, as a pistol barrel is into the stock (as the
Figure marked with the Letter D. shows) which staff should have so much
substance at the one end, whereto you may nail the same barrels fast at the
breech; and about the midst of the same put over a hoop of iron as close as
ever you can, the which is to be charged in this manner following: viz. First
charge every barrel with two inches of powder, after put in a bullet a little
lower then the bore of the same piece; then take of this flow Receipt following.

two staffs, one marked C, one marked D, with fireworks on them

Of bruised powder four parts, salt peter in meal, Linseed oil, brimstone,
finely beaten, varnish, and of willow or hazell cole moystned with a little
vinegar: (of all these five last Ingredients one Part;) which ^ust be well
wrought together with the hand in some wooden vessel, till you feel that it
will cling together, of which you must put in after the bullet two inches, and
thrust the same together with a Rammer stick; and then again put in two inches
of powder, and after that a bullet, and lastly two inches of this slow Receipt,
until you have filled every one of the said barrels within half an inch of the
mouth, the which is to be filled up with the said flow Receipt, and powder
bruised and mixed together, that it may the sooner fire: This being done, bind
a paper over the mouths of the same until you will use them; and giving fire
to any one of the same, it will fire all the other, and every one will
discharge three or four shots a piece one after another, to the hurt of the
Enemy, being used in service, either to offend or defend to the pleasure of the
beholders, being used in triumph with bullets of Receipt rolled in tow, and
coated with brimstone.

How to enter up a pair of stairs, or to defend ones self, being in a narrow
Room.
IF you are straightened up in a narrow Room, to defend your self, or would
enter up a pair of stairs, where you cannot use a long weapon, you may make a
Logget, whose staff shall be but three or four foot long, arming the same
with the same Receipt as was showed to arm the Pikes, whereon a staff marked E
with a firework bound around its center you may place certain pipes of brass,
or iron, charged as before is taught: And if you please, you may put into the
end of the staff a Rapier blade with a skrew, to take off and on at your
pleasure, as the Figure marked with the letter E. shows.

How to defend a Breach, a Ship, or other place of defense.
TO perform this, you may arm a Partezan, Javelin, or Forke with Fire-work,
and to shoot every one of them seven or eight pistol or musket bullets, in
nayling a plate of Iron cross the pike or point of the said Javelin, or
between the grains of the fork, piercing certain holes through the same, unto
which with a strong wire you may make fast on either side so many pipes of
Iron, of seven or eight long, as you think convenient to fix upon either, or
any of the said weapons, and charging the same with powder, bullet, and wad,
you may cause the same to fire one after another, in filling a role of canvas
sewed together, (as the Figure F. shows) with slow Receipt, and coated, as
before is showed: And this being placed artificially upon the short barrels or
pipes (as the Figure G. H. shows) and primed with fine powder directly
against the Touch-holes of the barrels, pasting a little paper over the same,
firing the said trains at both the ends, which as they burn shall still
discharge the short Pieces one after another, to the great hurt of the
Adversary.

two staffs, one with an arrow point marked G and with an attachment marked F,
one with two spikes marked H

How to shoot Arrows of wildfire out of a Crosse-bow.
THis is an excellent way to fire the sails of Ships, thatched houses stacks
of corn, or hay, or any such combustible matter apt to burn, which may be done
at a pretty distance off, when you cannot conveniently come near the same:
Therefore it is good to have certain strong Crosse-bowes, to bend either with
a Rack, or Gessel, and to shoot out of the same strong Arrows armed with
Wildfire and headed as the Figure I. shows: or you may shoot these Arrows
out of a Musket if you please: The composition is to be made as is taught in
the Arming of pikes with Fire-work: which Arrows may do great good for diverse
other services.

a crossbow marked I with an arrow with a firework attached

How to burn wooden Bridges, Gates, Houses, etc.
TO perform this and the like military services, if you can come to anoint
the same with some such liquid composition as is before showed for the coating
of Fireworks, melting in the same a good quantity of bruised brimstone, and
sticking in the same Arrows of Wildfire, made in proportion as the Figure K.
does show: The Receipts may be made as the former for pikes with Wildfire,
which will certainly set the same on fire, for the Receipt is so forcible, that
it will burn in the water.

two arrows with fireworks attached both marked K stuck into wood

How to cut the Cables, or the shrouds of ships at a good distance.
FOr Sea-service there is devised out of great Ordnance to shoot certain
bullets that shall open and shut with a joint in the head like a pair of
Compasses, the arms or legs whereof are made in proportion like to to the blade
of a knife taper-wise, and bowing sharp toward the point, as the Figure
shows marked with the Letter O and how the same is to be put into the piece
after the powder and wad; and the other Figure marked with the Letter P. does
show how the same being in its violent motion, flies open thorough the air
like a Sith, cutting the Cables. Shrouds, or any thing in its way, being shot
out of any piece of great Ordnance.

two renderings of a ball with two blades, one marked O with the blades in a
closed position, another marked P with the blades in an open position

Other Devices fer the cutting of Shrouds, or the like.
FOr to cut the Tackle or Shrouds of ships, it is good to cast half bullets of
Iron, or Lead, unto every of which make fast a bar of Iron, wrought either
three or four squart, about the bigness of a man's finger, and cut some
fourteen or sixteen inches long, with a loope at the end; unto which a Ring of
Iron is to be put, that the same may close and shut, as the Figure with the
Letter S. shows, which shows also how you must put the same into the piece;
and the other Figure with the Letter T. does show how the same flies in its
moving through the air: or to the said half bullets you may have bars in
proportion of a knife blade, with a round joint at the end to open and shut,
the which kind of bullets may as well be made to shoot out of Muskets, as out
of great Ordnance, to the great annoyance of the Enemy, especially in sea
service.

two halves of a sliced ball in a closed position marked S and an open position
marked T

An other for the same.
ALso to cut the Tackle of ships, or to do many other good services, either
with Musket or great Ordnance, it is good to chain two bullets together, as
the Figure Y. shows.

two bullets connected by a chain marked Y

Another.
ALso, for the like purpose aforesaid, if you take a small Iron Chain with
good Linkes, rolling the same together round, that it may go easily into the
Piece, close down to the wad; the same being again discharged, will spread it
self at length and do good execution.

How to do excellent service against an Enemy who would enter a Breach, a Gate
a Bridge, a Ship, etc.
IF that the Enemy will enter (and that you intend not to yield) it is
necessary to have in readiness diverse hollow bullets made of two plates of
Iron, or other metal, so as the one may close about the other round like a
box, which being filled with pebble stones, square pieces of Iron, called
Dice-shot, Musket-bullets, or the like, which being discharged out of a
Murdering Piece, it will do great execution; if you will fill cases of wood,
made like unto a Lantern with the same stuff, it will perform the like
service being shot out of a Murdering Piece: Behold both the Figure marked with
the Leteer A.

a separated hollow ball filled with iron pieces along with a hollow box filled
with iron pieces both marked A

How to prevent a train of Powder laid to blow you up, before you enter a
Ship, or other place.
IF you imagine that there is some train laid to blow you up (as it often
happens) you may prevent the same, by making certain purses of canvas, filled
half full of good corne-powder, and with eight or ten fiery bullets of an
inch, or an inch and half in height; and filling the other part of the purse
with slow Receipt, you may when you think good (the Receipt being well fired)
throw the same from you, which will burst in pecces after the lighting on the
ground, and disperse the said enclosed bullets here and there, which bullets
will burn furiously, and if there be any train of powder laid near, it will
presently fire the same. The said purses are very good to throw out of hand, or
may be shot out of a Morter-peece amongst men in battle array, to disorder
them, or into a Town; the Figure B. shows how to fill the purses, and the
Letter C. shows the proportion of it, being made up, filled, and coated over

The Receipt for making these bullets of wild fire following: Take of Sulphur in
meal six parts, of Rozin in meal three parts, melting the same in some pot or
pan over a slow fire; then take of Stone-pitch one part, of hard wax one pound
of Tar one fourth part, of Aqua vitae one half part, of Linseed oil as much,
of Verdegrease one fourth part, and of Camphire one eight part, melting al
these together likewise, and stir into the same two parts of Peter in meal;
and taking the same from the fire, put therein four parts of bruised powder,
working the same well together in your hands, and roll the same round of the
bigness that you would have your bals of, boring two holes thorough the same a
cross, which when you would use, must be primed full of bruised powder; these
bals will be as hard as stone, and needs no coating, and being fired will
burn furiously and cleave to any thing, not diminishing in quantity being
burned to ashes, which ashes will kindle an oaken board: If you please, you may
shoot these bullets out of a Piece of great Ordnance. The Figures for the
purses here follows.

two canvas bags, one marked B without any fire coming out the top, the other
marked C with fire coming out the top

FINIS.

