THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent out of the Netherlands, to a Gentleman in ENGLAND,
touching the present distempers of this KINGDOM, or some particular Relations
how the Affairs go in ENGLAND, observed by the NETHERLANDS.
Noble Sir,
TIED hereunto by the many obligations of friendship received from you, during
my abode in England, in satisfaction of your importunity, to certify you how
we discourse here, of the great distempers of your Kingdom; and what my
opinion is in particular touching the same, according to the measure of my weak
abilities, and the small observations I made of the several passages of State,
which fell out whilst I sojourned with you, and my mean intelligence kept in
that Kingdom since my departure thence unto this present time, I thus proceed:
Our discourse (as it usually falls out in all Republiques so) is it here, very
free and various, but in the general as we favor the cause, so we pity the
case of your Parliament, that is forced to struggle so long with so many great
difficulties, supported only with the tottering foundation of the unsteady
resolutions of the giddy headed multitude: And we are exceedingly transported
with admiration, to hear, that so many thousands, who are so nearly concerned
in their good, in the happy progress, and conclusion of that great Consul,
and in their undoubted ill, both present and future, in the subtle
interruption and fatal dissolution of that great Assembly, should be so
strangly altered (upon no true ground, that we can hear) as to cast
calumnious aspersions upon those, that with so great hazard of their own lives,
and Fortunes, like renowned Patriots, do yet constantly persist, in their
unwearied endeavors, to rid your Nation, from the most grievous burden of an
overgrowne Monarchy, and to suffer themselves to be so far deluded by the
cunning working of the Royalist Hierarchian and Papist, the three great
incendiaries of your Kingdom (and indeed of all Christendom)* as voluntarily
to thrust their necks into the yoke, and to resign up with their own hands
their Religion and Laws unto those, who could never by violence have been
able to have wrested either of the twain from out their possession, and to be
talked into an undoubted slavery, under the spacious show of a royal
protection. To deliver my particular opinion, touching the Original, and the
various, and disguised ways, of advancing your unhappie Iarres, cannot be
comprised within the narrow limits of an Epistle: you see the Scots have made a
volume of theirs, and I recommend it to you as a piece worth your reading, and
whence (I believe) your own ^ngenuity will be able to gather, more
satisfaction in these particulars then I shall ever be able out of my poor
observations to acquaint you with. For though it was the business of another
Kingdom, and is now happily composed, and may therefore seem either not to
concern England at all, or at least not at this time, yet if you parallel the
passages there, with those that have happened with you some years past, and
especially since your Parliament began, you will easily believe, that if not
one man, yet men of the same mind, laid the Machavillian ground work of both
your disturbances, and how many other things soever have in show bin offered as
happy means to maintain Monarchy and Hierarchy, yet there were two other
whites only shot at, the silencing of the Laws, and the alteration of the
Religion in both Kingdoms. The maine block in the way to hinder these
designs, we say is your fixed Parliament, and are therefore persuaded, that
what ever else may be pretended, yet the drift of the plot at present on foot
is this, to cause that great Assembly by little and little of it self, to
languish unto that death, unto which by violence its enemies is not yet able to
bring it, and therein to make good the Proverb, to do that by the Fox which is
not feasible by the Lion. For my own sense of the business thus much in
short, The ambitious Clergy will (never willingly) hearken to any alteration,
(for the better) much less to a perfect Reformation in the Church, and in this
the Papist and Libertine will certainly join hands with them: The Royalist
will hinder (in what he may) the pu^ging of the State, and he will be backed
by David's guard (though in a far greater multitude) mentioned, 1 Samuel 22. Cap.
6. 2. And for the foolish neutrall, that hopes to have his throat last cut, it
is likely, he is not an inconsiderable part of the Kingdom, so that now if you
can conceive that the remainder is a stronger and as resolute a party as these,
there is good hopes of a good Conclusion, else without the omnipotent hand of
Heaven miraculously assisting, I fear that a short lived man may live to
hear, that the bravery of the renowned English walks hand in hand with the
sordid vassalage, of the French and Spanish Nations; And that the Language of
your Magna Charta, and Leges, and consuetudinis Regni be translated into Sic
volo, sic jubeo stat pro ratione voluntas. The Jarre of which string because I
know it must needs grate your ear, I will forbear any more to strike it, and
do heartily wish and pray it may for ever be dumb, as I will be for the
present, after I have only said

Noble Sir I am Your humble Servant Abraham Waersegger.
Vltra traiect. 18. Junii Stilo veteri.
Printed for B. A. in the year, 1642.


