JACOB found in a desert Land: OR, A RECOVERY Of the Lost out of the Loss
(truly manifested;)

Wherein is discovered the work of the Lord in the Creature, and how I
traveled through the night of thick darkness, which has over spread the whole
world; and of my deliverance out of darkness into the true Light and Truth:
Wherein is witness my heavenly Call into the Ministry of the everlasting Truth.

Given forth for the everlasting Name of the Lord sake, and for their sakes,
who desire to know the Truth, and how I came into the Truth; that they that can
believe it may receive some satisfaction, (out of which all despisers and
unbelievers are excluded.)

By a witness of the same in Life and Testimony, who am a sufferer for the pure
Seed sake, who am known to the sons of men by the name of George Whitehead; in
contempt, by the generation of despisers, called, a QUAKER.

With a few words to them who have any desires left in them to know the Truth,
whether they be in forms of profession, or out of forms, that they may see
themselves, and return from their evil.

Also a Voice of the Thunder of the Lord from his holy Temple, uttered forth to
the Inhabitants of the Earth, who are in the Army of the Dragon (whether
Rulers, Teachers or People.)

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Black
Spread-Eagle at the West End of Paul's, 1656.

JACOB found in a desert Land:
Or, a Recovery of the Lost out of the Loss, Deuteronomy. 32.10, 11, 12.
(truly manifested;) wherein is discovered the work of the Lord in the
Creature, and how I traveled through the night of thick darkness, which has
over spread the whole world; and of my deliverance out of darkness into the
true Light and Truth, wherein is witnessed my heavenly Call into the Ministry
of the everlasting Truth.

BEhold the wondrous work of the Lord God, what he has done for me according
to his own purpose, through his eternal love and freegrace to me ward, in
bringing his Seed to Immortality, and my soul from under the powers of death,
hell and the grave, and restoring the Creature into the Covenant of his seed,
and bringing it from under the bondage of corruption; which for several years
together I was under, and subject to vanity, and my heart was led astray from
the living God, and I lived without the fear of God, according to the course of
the world, as the Children of disobedience do, in whom the Prince of the Air
rules, among whom I was a stranger to the Life of God, and under the wrath of
God, a Child of disobedience, who knew not whither I went, for I was a Child of
darkness, and could not comprehend the Light, nor follow the Light, though in
darkness it shined, and did often reprove me for sin and disobedience, and
condemned me for having followship with the unfruitful works of darkness; yet
the Creature being overruled and subjected to vanity, by the power of the
Serpent, and the affections and desires led away from the Light of Christ, with
him who led into wickedness, and there was no power sought truly after, nor
received, whereby to resist the wicked one; but still he prevailed against me
while I was in the corrupt nature, where the Curse had power: and I was brought
up, according to the manner of the world, in the traditions and rudiments of
the world partly, in natural learning, and to that for a time I applied my
mind, according to my parents and kinreds desire; so that for a time I grew and
increased in that learning, though many vain traditions I learned, and in vain
books, and foolish clauses, and verses, as others did, I learned, and did
please my Tutors; and in that learning exceeded many others who learned with
me, and got the praise and estimation of many people of the world, for that
natural knowledge I grew into through learning; whereby for a time the flesh
did glory, and pride got up, and deceit overruled; and that was nourished in
me which was for death and destruction, and oftentimes when I was among other
Children, who minded sporting, and gaming, and playing, who would have enticed
me to the same, and sometimes did fall into playing with them, yet oftentimes I
was troubled in mind, and I was not satisfied, for often I was reproved by the
true Light in me, which I then knew not, and thereby I was restrained sometime
from conforming with other Children in their ludeness, for which I became
sometime a reproach and an object of hatred to some of them: and I was then
made to believe, that God would bring me to judgment for the wickedness and
vanity I had been in, and sometime I was smitten with fear and terror, when I
was but a few years of age, when my wickedness was laid before me, and brought
into my remembrance, by that Light, which I knew not, which condemned for sin,
unto which Light my Conscience also did bear witness, and my thoughts did
accuse me when I thought of what I had done in unrighteousness: But when I
forgot reproof, and hearkened to the wicked, who did always strive to make me
enter into their wickedness, then I suddenly was led into vanities, and
practiced vain mirth and sportings, and so was one with them, who made merry
over the Witness of God, when his grace was turned into wantonness: But as for
many gross and common pollutions of the world, which many others was and are
guilty of, I was kept from acting in, and did strive to keep out of, so that
then I was scoffed at by some of the heathen, who lived in drunkenness, and
excess, and great profaneness, when I could not join with them in their excess
of riot; but the same ground of rebellion was in me then, though not so far got
out into the actions, and oftentimes from my childhood I was afflicted with
sickness, and the hand of the Lord was upon me, whereby I was plagued and
smitten inwardly, and saw then that it was what I deserved for the sin that I
had been acted in, and I desired often that I might come to true Repentance for
my sin, and have endeavored much to find it, yea, with tears, but could not,
while my heart was led away to obey the will of the Devil, and so the desires
in me, which was after Repentance and amendment of Life, they were often
quenched through the deceitfulness of sin and the subtilty of my souls enemy,
and thus was the Creature and the soul held under the power of darkness: And
near about the the age of fourteen years I was put to teaching of Chidren in
natural learning, and taught Children till after I knew the Truth, knowing it
to be serviceable in its place for Children, as there was a necessity for it,
so as that Children be brought up in good nurture, and in the fear of the Lord,
which in his fear, when I came into the Truth, I did strive to bring those
Children up in whom I taught, and with diligence then I did labor in that
calling till I was called from it.

And in the time when I was led away captive to fulfill the will of the wicked
one, I went much after the worlds Teachers, and heard them, and had got a part
in their profession, and spended many times in hearing them day after day, till
I was often weary with following and hearing them teach their own traditions,
and much what they had gotten out of other men's writings, and added their
carnal Inventions to the Saints words, and raised their Uses, and Applications,
and Doctrines, and Arguments, and Propositions, and Motives, as he did, whom
for several times I usually heard in the Steeple-house at Orton in Westmerland,
who had deceived me and others under his Ministry, though he be of great
estimation in the world, and other Priests, in the same nature with him, I
heard several times: But something in me was not satisfied with their Ministry,
for I was always learning there, and could not know the Truth, as many others
under their Ministry are; and often while I was in the hearing of some of the
worlds Teachers, my spirit was troubled, and when they gave people some of
David's Conditions to sing, I could not sometime join with them in singing,
knowing I was short of what they sung in meeter concerning David, what he
passed through, and how it was with him, when he was in sorrow, and affliction,
and joy, and in his deliverance from corruption, which the Priests caused
people to sing, who both themselves and their hearers are short of, when in
their singing they told God, it was so with them as it was with David, which
often I durst not, least I should have told God lies: And when I grew something
weary with those Priests, and that profession which I had gotten under their
Ministry did wax old, then I began to see them to be gross and wicked in their
practices and lives, and I saw that the Scriptures witnessed against them in
many things they practiced, who themselves spoke against pride and
covetousness, and yet lived in them, as their practices and lives made and
makes them manifest,

And then I went to hear some, who were separated from them, who was gotten
into higher forms than the Priests, and were got above the traditions and
carnal Ordinances which the Priests do practice, and had a more true form of
words than they, and yet it was but a little time that I followed such, for my
soul was not satisfied there, and that of God in me was then in prison, and not
ministered unto by them, who were in their notional knowlede, above the Light
and Life of Christ, and what they ministered to was but death, and the carnal
mind by that ministry was fed, and that spoak and got the Saints words to speak
off, which had no right to them, and still the Witness of God in my Conscience
pursued me, that in my mind I could not be quiet, and it often ministered
condemnation to that nature in me, which they, who did run before they were
sent, did promise life and speak peace unto, but here I had no peace, and thus
in the unstable mind I was tossed too and fro with windy doctrines, which for a
time was pleasant to that mind which fed in them; but that pleasure did wither,
and they were as a tinkling Cimbal, or sounding Brass, which passed away, and
that profession which in the forms I had gotten did wax old.

And when I was near about the age of sixteen years, being in the year, as
accounted, 1652, it pleased the Lord God to send some of his Messengers, called
Quakers, through his own free Love to me wards, which in me was and is
witnessed, and received, by his own Seed, whom he has gathered unto himself
(in the North Country) where it was scattered, Jer. 23.8.
which is reproached by the world and called Quakers? But when I first went to
hear these Messengers of the Lord, being then led to hear them by a principle
of God which I knew not then, but through them the Word of the Lord was
ministered unto me, and the Witness of God in me did witness and answer to the
same; which I did really believe, and my understanding was opened by the word
of power, which through them was ministered, and I then saw that they were
Witnesses of the pure Truth of God, and saw that the Scriptures did witness for
them, and for the Truth which they held forth and ministered, which long before
I had sought after, but could not find it, while I was led from the Light of
Christ in me, by blind Guides and Hirelings, who had made a prey upon me, so
that what the Messengers of Christ did minister was effectual in me, whereby I
was turned from darkness to light, and this I received as the Word of the Lord,
Romans 10.8
and not as the word of man, for it was the Word of Faith, and it was nigh me,
even in my heart, which in the love of Christ, wherein it was ministered, I
received, and it through Love did work in me and was effectual, for by it the
vails was rent, and at the appearance thereof light was divided from darkness
in me, and then I knew where my Guide and Teacher was, which comprehended
darkness; by which Light my mind was informed, and I brought to wait on the
teaching of God within, which in the light I received, and through faith was
subject to, and here I saw the war which I had to pass through, and the
strength of the Serpent and his wisdom, wherein I had been acted and seeding
upon the Tree of Knowledge, where I was separated from the Life of God, and had
no right to the Tree of Life, while I fed there; but when the vails was rent,
and I saw the strength of the Enemy of my soul, then I saw the Judgment of God
upon the Prince of the World, and upon those imaginations, and that wiseom,
wherein I had been lead from the simplicity and light of the Gospel, to obey
the Serpent, and to hearken to the voice of strangers; but the Seed of God took
root, and was treasured up in me, and in the power of the Lord it arose in me,
and wrought effectually, and here I received the teaching of God, and heard his
voice, and by his power the earth was shaken, and the foundation of that wisdom
wherein I had been, and to that I became a fool, that I might be wise in the
living Knowledge of God, whose thunders in heaven and voices which did run
through the earth I heard, and saw famine and barrenness in the earth as a
barren wilderness, and in simplicity I was made willing to wait upon God, and
to endure the Cross of Christ, though for a time and times the enmity of the
wicked one was strong against me within and without, seeking to devour that
Seed which through the Word of the Lord was begotten in me; Isa. 57.15. and
66.9.
but the Power of the Lord waxed great in me, whereby I was brought low into
the fear of the Lord, and made often to tremble at his Word, which Power grew
plentiful in me, through the Faith of the Son of God, which waxed strong and
plentiful in me and thus by the faith of the operation of God, the Lord carried
me on in obedience to him from faith to faith, and the mysteries of God and his
Kingdom was revealed in me, who brought me out of darkness through the
wilderness, where the man-child was preserved for a time, and times, and half a
time, from the wrath of the Dragon, who would have slain the man-child: Isa.
9.6.
But now is he arisen in his power and zeal, and the Prince of the world is
cast out, and he is born, which is the everlasting Counselor, the prince of
Peace, who has sent war, and the fire, and the sword into the earth, but has
accomplished the war, and established peace in the earth, and with his glory
fills the earth, and has brought back the captivity of his Seed, and manifested
his good will toward me, Gal. 1.15, 16.
in whom it has pleased the Father to reveal him, who has made manifest his
eternal love in me, and wrought deliverance for my soul, and has brought
salvation and plenteous redemption to me, Luke 4.18.
whereby the captive out of the house of bondage is delivered, and hell is
conquered, Heb. 12.27 28.
and death and the grave overcome, and that which was shaken removed, and the
Kingdom that cannot be removed given me, and the Creature with the Seed of God
is restored into the everlasting Covenant of God, and he is slain who had the
power of death, who did subject the Creature unto vanity in hope.

And this has the Lord done for me, whom he has known and foreseen, for his
Seed sake in me, Romans 8.29.
and for the love of his own Son, who did enlighten me, and conformed me to the
Image of his own Son, who is the firstborn, and my foundation, and a Rock of
defense to me and to all, who believe in him, and receive his testimony, who
can set to my seal that God is true, Joh. 3.3
whose Righteousness has looked down from Heaven, and Mercy and Peace has he
established in the Earth; and now is such called the People of God, Romans 9.25.
who was not his people, and that which was barren brings forth and rejoices,
and this I witness, as one who have obtained mercy through the Redemption of
Christ Jesus, Isal, 54.1.
through whom my Lot is fallen unto me in a pleasant place: and now has the
Lord brought me into the fruitful hill of Sion, where his praise is exalted, in
the Immortality of his own Son, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Mat.
19.29 Mark 10.29.30.
who lives and reigns for ever and ever, whose testimony I am made to
witness; for which cause the Lord has called me from my native Country, and
from my Fathers house, and from outward riches and the honor of the world, and
has redeemed me out of kindreds, tongues and people, and to publish his Name
and Power among the Inhabitants of the earth, and to witness his salvation to
the ends of the earth and to minister good things to the Seed which God is
gathering from the ends of the earth, and to call people out of darkness, and
from among deceivers, who have long made a prey upon them, and to turn them to
the true Light, John 1.9,
which lights every man that comes into the world, that through the Light
they may believe, and be delivered out of deceit, and out of the mouths of dumb
Shepherds, who eat up the sin of the people, and who have made and makes
merchandise of the people through covetousness with feigned words; 2 Pet. 2.
and to my testimony thousands will seal and witness against the changeable
Priests, and Hirelings, and Diviners, and Deceivers, that are in the world, and
to judge the Whore, who has deceived the Nations with her Enchantments, and to
torment the Beast, and plague the false Prophet, whose judgment, and torment,
and misery is now begun, and will never have end, for the word of the Lord is
made manifest, and his testimony is given, which I witness, whom God has set
to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw down, to build, and
to plant; and this is the Covenant of the Lord God unto me, Jer. 1.10.
which is to them that turn from iniquity in Jacob, Isai. 59.21:
his Spirit which is upon me, and his word which he has put in my mouth, Heb.
11.25
shall not depart from me from henceforth and for evermore; Rev. 13.7.
though for the everlasting testimony of God I suffer affliction with the
people of God, and do endure the envy of the Beast for a time, who has power
for a time to overcome the Saints, yet through these sufferings, 2 Cor. 6.4, 5.
and imprisonments, and beatings, and abusings, and cruel mockings, and
despiteful usage, which I endure in the body, I am approved of by God in the
work of his Ministry, for which cause, and for whose sake, I am not only
willing to suffer affliction, but also to lay down my life, and the sufferings
of this present time is not worthy to be compared to the glory that is revealed
in me, and through all these sufferings I am made more than a Conqueror.

Let all the Saints and Righteous ones rejoice with me for evermore, and
witness forth the praise and glory of our God, for his Kingdom, and Glory, and
Dominion is come and Judgment sits, and the great Whore is judged, and Babylon
is come in remembrance before the Lord, who is confounding it, and giving her
double of his fury forher abominations, of which all Nations have drunk, who
gather themselves together against the Lamb and his Tribe, but he shall
overcome them, for they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand
they his Counsel, for he shall gather them as the sheaves into the floor,
therefore arise. O Daughter of Zion, and thresh with thy new sharp threshing
Instrument having teeth, for the Lord is making thine horn iron, and thy hoof
brass, and thou shall beat in pieces many people, and tread down, and reign
over the Nations, O Remnant of Jacob, who art despised of the people, and hated
of the seed of the wicked, plague the Earth, and thresh the false Prophet, and
the Beast; for woe is unto them and all their offspring, and woe unto the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil is cast out unto them,
and has great wrath, because he knows his time is but short; but rejoice ye
heavens, and ye that dwell therein, over Mystery Babylon, and over the great
Whore, for her judgment is begun, and the smoke of her torment shall ascend up
for ever and ever, Allelujah, and Glory to the most high for evermore.

Thus was I moved by the Spirit of the living God to give forth, for the simple
ones sake, who are groping in the dark, whether in forms, or out of forms, who
are not satisfied, but yet have some desires to know the Truth as it is in
Christ Jesus, who is the Way the Truth and the Life, which whosoever follows
shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the Light of Life; and there shall
be no occasion of stumbling, but by the Builders, and by such as live in the
wisdom of the flesh, and are wise in their own eyes, he is rejected, and to
them become a Rock of offense, but to them that believe in him, and follow him,
he is a Rock of defense, and become the head of the Corner, the chief
Cornerstone, and true foundation, and the Author of salvation.

From me, whose desire is for the good of souls, who would not the death of
finners, but rather that they should turn from their wickedness and obtain
remission of sins; I am a sufferer for the everlasting Truth sake, and for the
good Seed sake, by which I am witnessed in my suffering, and for whose sake it
is effectual, and through my suffering the Truth of God is exalted, Rev. 2.10.
though it be contrary to the envy of the wicked one who cast me into prison;
where I have been a sufferer above a year, and have endured exceeding much
abuse by Tyrants, and am not convinced of the breach of any known Law that ever
could be laid to my charge, either at my Imprisonment or since: But the Lord is
my Refuge, though I have no helper in the earth.

The ninth day of the sixth month, in the year, as accounted, 1656. The earthly
name by which the world knows me is George Whitehead, ( Prisoner of the Lord in
Edmonds-Bury common Goal in the County of Suffolk) who a name has written in
heaven, which none knows but they that are redeemed from the earth.

A few words to them who have any desires left in them to know the Truth,
whether they be in forms of profession, or out of forms, that they may see
themselves and return from their evil.
TO you that live without the knowledge of the true God, and know not his
power, neither are come into the life of the Saints in light, you who are
groping in the dark, you go you know not whither, and have long been seeking,
and have not found satisfaction nor rest to your souls, for whose good my
desire is; my message I declared unto you, That God is light, John 1.5.
and in him is no darkness; and he has sent his Son into the world a light to
bring out of darkness, John 1.9.
and out of the deeds of darkness, he is the true light, wherewith he lights
every man that comes into the world, and he is the power of God to salvation
to them that follow him, and believe in him: therefore every one of you return
to the true Light, and with it search your selves, and try your ways, for now
is the Lord visiting you, and now is he calling you out of darkness, and to
cast off the unfruitful works of darkness, and to break off your iniquities by
true repentance, that therein you may not perish but have life in the true
Light; and this is the love of God to the world, which they that refuse, and
choose to go on in stubbornness and enmity against the light, which reproves
them for their wickedness, it is their condemnation, John 3.19.
for they hate the light because their deeds are evil, and they will not bring
their deeds to the light, least it should reprove them; and these want power to
overcome sin, and to slay the enmity, and they go on in darkness they know not
whither, and they are in unbelief, and there they are excluded from the Life of
God, let them profess what they will of the Prophets, or of Christ, or his
Saints, or their words; and here the light has no fellowship with darkness,
nor with them who hate it, and love darkness better than light, and such find
no power over their wills, nor over their lusts, nor vile affections, because
they deny him who is the Power of God; and among such the powers of darkness
have dominion, and destruction is in their ways, and the curse and wrath of
God abides upon them, John 3.36. Isai. 42.6. and 49 6.
who hate the Light, they despise the Covenant of God which Christ the Light is
given for, and such are seduced and kept from the knowledge of the pure God:
and these are without God in the world, which lives in wickedness: therefore
all you, in whom there is any desires remaining after the living God, and to
know his power, return to the Light of Christ within you, and it will let you
see, Ephesians. 4.17.
how you have spent your time, and where your hearts are, and how you have been
tossed to and fro in the dark, and your minds have been exercised in vanity,
and by the subtilty of the Serpent, for his kindom of sin you have been
reasoning, and could not find a way out of it, Romans 8, 20.
and yet the Serpent has put you in hope of mercy and forgiveness of sins,
though you go on in sin in your life time, and do not find the nature of sin
subdued; this is he who beguiled Eve, Gen, 3.4.
and said, ye shall not surely die (though they eat of that which God had
forbidden) but take heed how you hearken to his voice, either within you, or in
his Messengers without you, least you be beguiled with his subtilty, and left
to the eternal wrath of God, in the guilt of your sins, which guilt remains so
long as sin remains, and so here the Covenant of God you reject, and puts of
redemption, and despises the day of healing; and here is presumption, and
self-willedness, and conceitedness, and pride, and covetousness, and
perverseness lived in, and here the grace of God is turned into wantonness,
Jude 4.
and the lust of the flesh rules, and the members are subject to vanity, and
the fear of God you are out of, 2 Timothy 3.13.
and you going on in that nature, contrary to the Light, you wax worse and
worse; and here the will of the Devil you fulfill, who is the Author of sin, and
so you deny Christ and his coming, who is made manifest to destroy the works of
the Devil, and to take away the sins of the world; 1 John 3.5.8.
though you may profess Christ and his doctrine in words, yet your profession
will not hide you, John 1.29. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Timothy 6.3, 4, 5.
nor save you from his judgment and wrath which upon the ungodly must come; and
you that apply your minds to disputings and vain janglings about the Saints
conditions, and what they practiced, who you your selves are out of the Saints
life, and can get no further than the form of godliness in words, and many of
you scarce to the true form; you are in the many opinions, and sects, and vain
contendings, and with that spirit you contend which is out of the truth, and
which is ignorant of the Life that gave forth the Scriptures, and here there
are so many opinions and differences, that poor ignorant people knows not what
way to choose, nor which is the truth; you are the unstable minded, and you are
in your own wills, which are contrary to the Light, and to the Saints conditions
you are strangers, and have nothing to do to talk or dispute about the Saints,
2 Pet. 1, 21.
and what they spoak as they were moved by the Spirit of Truth, and were in the
Life of what they spoak, and knew him, 1 Cor. 14.33.
who is not the Author of confusion, and contention, nor strife, but of peace,
and they knew him to be the life and substance of all figures and types; and he
has abolished in the flesh, Ephesians. 2.15.
the Law contained in Ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man
so making peace: Gal. 4.
but you that are turned from the light, and do live in your carnal
imaginations, and conceivings, and rudiments, and beggarly elements of the
world, Col. 2.20.
and carnally have been imagining to find or meet with Christ there, you are
strangers to the knowledge of God, and his Law within you, you disobey and
reject, so all your profession, and all your duties, and will-worships, the
Lords denies, and the light condemns them, and there you find no peace, for
that light which condemns you, for your erring from the pure Law of God, it
pursues you, and brings trouble upon you, and shows you darkness, and that you
are short in life of what you profess in words, and though you profess that
Christ died for you, and that he has born your iniquities, yet the Light will
let you see, that you are not dead with Christ, as he was to the flesh, the
world and the devil, who entered not into temptation, and so you are alive in
your sins, and the blood of Christ you trample in, Phil. 3.10.
and are enemies to his cross, whose minds are earthly, and so your iniquities
are upon your selves, and Christ is not guilty of them, nor of your blood; but
his death and suffering witnesses against you: and whose sins Christ has
nailed to his cross, they are crucified and blotted out, and neither the action
nor the guilt of sin remains in such, and whose sins Christ takes upon him, and
nails to his Cross, Romans 6.2. 1 Pet. 2.24.
it is, that they being dead unto sin may live no longer therein, and it is
such that have right in the death of Christ, and suffer with him, and take up
the Cross, and deny themselves, and follow him: But thou, who in words
professes Christ and his death, for thee, examine thy self, and see how far
thou obeys his doctrine, and takes up the Cross: He commanded to love thy
neighbor as thy self; Math. 5.
and to his he said, do good to them that hate you, and he said, swear not at
all, and in all your communications, let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay:
see how far thou can own this in life and practices; and if a man smite thee
on the one cheek, turn to him the other also: and if a man sue thee at Law and
take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also: and he that takes away thy
goods, Luke 6.30.
ask them not again; and be ye perfect, as your Father which is in heaven is
perfect. But there is much reasonings against these things by the Children of
disobedience, who disobey Christ, and walk contrary to his doctrine for self
and for self ends, though in words they may profess Christ, and say, they
desire to follow him: but all such are shut out of the Scripture and Life of
Christ, and condemned with the righteous Law, which was added because of
transgression, Gal. 3.19.
which Christ came to fulfill, and not to destroy, and he that transgresses any
of the least of his Commandments is guilty of all: and he that transgresses
and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not God: and he that says he
loves him, 1 John 9.
and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar: and he that says he abides in
Christ, ought also to walk as he walked: so with the Light all the world and
its profession is seen, and judged, and condemned: therefore all you, in whom
there is any desires after the living God, come out of the world to the true
Light, wherewith you are enlightened, and profess nothing but what you live the
life of, least you be found in hypocrisy, and with the hypocrites and
dissemblers you be rewarded in the fierceness of the wrath of God: Now you are
warned, repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance and amendment of
light, for you all have a light from Christ, wherein if you believe and love
it, and as it arises wait in it, and here you will know the way to life, and
know your Teacher to be the Lord, who has given you a light to guide your feet
into the path of life, and rest for your souls, and to know your Redeemer
living, Christ Jesus, and to deny the worlds Teachers and worships and
profession, which are all witnessed against by Christ Jesus, Mat. 25.30 Romans
2.5, 6.
and by them whom he has chosen out of the world, which light if you hate it,
and love darkness better, it will be your condemnation from God, and from his
knowledge, and from his Children, and Saints in Light, and utter darkness will
be upon you, who go on in hatred against the Light, and there your torment and
misery will be exceeding great, and you will know that God is clear when he
Judges you, and executes his fierce wrath upon you, which the wicked cannot
escape:

G. W.

A Voice of the Thunder of the Lord from his holy Temple, uttered forth to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, who are in the Army of the Dragon, (whether Rulers,
Teachers, or People.)
O All ye Inhabitants of the Earth, high and low, rich and poor, great and
small, who lives without the fear of God in the fall, and take pleasure in your
unrighteousness, and will not submit your selves unto the Scepter of
Righteousness, nor come under Christ's government, but set your selves against
the way of Righteousness, in the enmity of the Dragon that old Serpent, and
with the Beast, who has his power and seat from the Dragon, sets your selves
to make war against the Lamb of God, and his elect; the terrible day of the
Lord is proclaimed against you, a day of the Trumpet of the Lord, which is
sounding forth against you; a day of war and controversy with you Inhabitants
of the Earth, who live in carelessness and profaneness, who sport your selves in
the day time, you heady high minded ones, who live in pleasure and riotousness,
who are in the pride of life, and exaltation, and heady high mindedness, who
despise the Truth, and hate reproof, and will not be reformed of your evil
ways, but hates him that rebukes in the gate, and abhors him that speaks
uprightly, and perverts true judgment, and would not be judged for your
wickedness, but rather chooses to go on in the servitude of him who is your
Captain and Leader in unrighteousness, in hatred against the Truth, and the
setvants of it, to mock and reproach and despise them, and to persecute the
truth, and the servants of it, some in in slandering it, and backbiting the
servants of it, and some in persecuting and despitefully! using and imprisoning
the Saints of the most high God, who witness forth his Name among the Children
of men; you are all in the Army of the Dragon, and are fighting again the Lamb,
and striving to suppress his Truth, that you might go on at ease in your
wickedness.

But though the Servants of the Lord suffer, and Christ be imprisoned and
suffer as a Lamb among you for a time, through his long forbearance toward
you, yet will he arise like a Lion, and avenge his quarrel upon you, and he
will tear and devour the wicked, and overthrow the Dragon, and destroy all his
offspring, who are resolved to make war against him, in Righteousness will he
make war, and in wisdom will he plead his cause, and ease him of his enemies.
Behold the day of his war and contraversie is begun already, and his hand will
not spare, nor his eye pity, nor his sword return, till he has accomplished
his Decree, and overthrown his enemies, though he has been slow to anger, and
great in suffering for his Seed sake, which he is gathering out of the world;
yet now is his hand stretched out against Sions oppressors, and he will punish
the world for their sins, and will utterly overthrow the Beast, and the false
Prophet, and the conquest shall be his.

Fear, fear and tremble, O all ye Inhabitants of the earth, who are at enmity
against the pure God, for your Leader will fail you, and you will not be able
to stand before the mighty God in his dreadful presence; now is his Thunders
uttering, and his Trumpet a sounding, and his Arrows are pollished, and his
Sword is furbished, and his Arm is strong, Psalm. 7.13.
and his Wrath is waxing hot against the persecutors, and his Host is mighty,
and Camp is very great, and his Day is exceeding terrible, who can abide it,
all the Powers of the earth will not be able to stand in the day of his Battle,
Jude 14,
he is coming with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon the
world, and to quit himself and his elect of all their Adversaries, and utterly
to overthrow their oppressors, though his elect and chosen and faithful ones
endure great afflictions and long-suffering, Luke 18.7.
yet their prayers is heard, and their cries is entered into the ears of the
Lord of Hosts, who will not at all acquit the wicked, but will render his wrath
with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire. Woe, woe to all you that are set
against him, behold his day comes swiftly with wrath and fury, as a
destruction from on high upon the ungodly: Now is his sanctified ones called,
and an ensign is lifted up to the Nations, and the day of vengeance is
proclaimed, which hastes greatly.

Let all Nations fear and dread before the Lord of Hosts; for they are all as
potters vessels before him, who will dash them to pieces, and rule them with a
rod of Iron, and he will have the uttermost parts of the earth for his
possession, Psalm. 2.
and sweep away all evil doers, and hew down all fruitless trees, and bind the
tares in bundels, and burn them, and there shall none be able to deliver from
the power of the flame of his fiery indignation, which is kindled against the
rebellious and crooked uncircumcised generation.

Consider this all ye Inhabitants of the earth, high and low, great and small,
Rulers, and Teachers, and People, who persecute the Innocent, and hate the
Truth, and among whom many of the innocent Servants of the living God do suffer
cruel usage, and imprisonment, some have suffered till death in prisons for
witnessing forth the Truth and a good Conscience, and many yet suffer in
prisons and holes in this Nation, where their lives are sought to be made a
prey upon by Tyrants. O how will you answer these things before the dreadful
God, who set your selves in the work of the Dragon, to war against the Lambs of
Christ's fold, and against Christ, for the Beast and his Kingdom behold
inquisition will the Lord make for the blood of his Saints among the
bloodthirsty ones, who hate, persecute and imprison his dear Children, who are
as dear unto him as the apple of his eye, who forgets not their sufferings, who
for his sake loves not their lives unto death, who are counted as sheep for the
slaughter, and willingly bears the affliction and reproaches of Christ, Col.
1.24.
till his sufferings be fulfilled in their bodies, though it be to death and
perishing of the outward man, 1 Pet. 5.13.
unto whom this day of the Lords wrath and controversy, which is coming upon
the wicked, will be a day of deliverance, a day of gladness, a day of joy and
rejoicing for evermore; but a day of blackness, Mat. 5.10, 11.12.
and terror, and pain, and anguish to the oppressors of his Seed, who war for
the Beast, and the false Prophet, Rev. 14.9, 10. Rev: 20.10.
who shall be cast into the Lake which burns, and there be tormented for ever
and ever: here is the patience, and faith, and innocence of the Saints, who
follow the Lamb whither ever he goes, through sufferings and tribulations,
blessed are they that are not offended in him.

Let all that follow him, and suffer for his Name, who are faithful through
suffering, whatsoever they endure for his sake, stand in his power, and might,
and zeal, over all the powers of the earth, and over the wrath of the Dragon,
and over the beast, though for a time he has power to wear out the Saints of
the most high, Dan. 7.25.
and think to change times and laws until a time, and times, and the dividing
of time: But the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to
consume and destroy it unto the end, and the kingdom, and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom, under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people
of the Saints of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
all Dominions shall serve and obey him.

Let all the Saints and faithful ones be valiant and of good cheer, whose
travel and war is for the Lamb of God, who shall overcome all the powers of the
Earth, and stand in his might and power and rejoice for evermore, in him who is
getting himself the dominion, whose right it is, for he is worthy to reign and
rule, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Let all the powers of darkness
fall before him, and greatness be ascribed to his Name, who is King over all
the Earth.

G. W.

FINIS.

