A METHOD AND INSTRUCTIONS for the Art of Divine Meditation, WITH Instances of
the several Kinds of Solemn MEDITATION.

By THOMAS WHITE Minister of Gods Word in London.

May 28. 1655.

Imprimatur,

Edm. Calamy.

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for Joseph Cranford at the Sign of the Phoenix in St
Paul's Church yard, near the Little North. Doot, 1655.

To the Reverend and my much Honored BRETHREN and FATHERS the Presbyterian
Ministers Of the GOSPEL within the Province of LONDON.
Brethren and Fathers,
I Have long since seriously considered (since the Church has been so much
divided among us) with whom to close, and where to fix; and I have endeavored
to observe both the public and private actions, the Tenants and conversations
of those Ministers that were of diverse judgments, and I do publicly profess,
that those Ministers which have and still do own Provincial Assemblies, are
for their Piety, Orthodoxness, Christian Simplicity, for their powerful,
spiritual, frequent, practical Preaching eminent: These are the things which
long ago have made me cordially to honor you, though since my intimate
acquaintance with many of you has much increased and confirmed my high
thoughts of you, and I think I may confidently say, that under the whole Heaven
there is not any City or Nation to be found, that may be compared to London and
England, for powerful, spiritual, practical Preaching; And I may say, that
the Ministry of England is the Glory of the world, and that London is the
Paradise of England; yet though I have long honored you, I have not had any
opportunity to testify it, therefore I thought good, having this small
Treatise to publish, with it to publish how much I honor you; Though I am very
sensible how little my judgment can add to the just esteem that the people of
God have of you: My desires and prayers to God are and shall be, that as to
your enemies you may be as John Baptists, that though they love you not they
may fear and reverence you, being awed by the Image of God that appears in the
Majesty and power of your Preaching, and in the holiness of your lives and
conversations, and that all the people of God may more and more highly esteem
you in love for your works sake, and that the Doctrine which you preach from
the word of God, may be delivered with such evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit, that the mouths of gain-saiers may be stopped, and that your lives and
Conversations may more and more abound with such Sincerity, Simplicity,
Meekness, Gravity, Humility, and Christian Prudence, that the faces of those
may be covered with shame that speak evil of you; These are the desires of him
who is,

Your Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Lord, Thomas White.

A METHOD OR INSTRUCTIONS for the Art of Divine Meditation.
CHAP. I. What Meditation is.
FIRST, It differs from occasional Meditation, such as these; If one hears
the clock strike to think with ones self, how many thoughts have I had of God
this hour? 2. I am one hour nearer my grave, and the Lord only knows whether I
may have another hour to live or no.

1. These are far shorter, like ejaculatory prayers, which though they are as
Parenthesises in our worldly employments, yet they signify more then all the
rest of the business we are employed in, but meditation is generally of longer
duration then ordinary solemn prayer.

2. Such occasional Meditations are things that we have in transitu, and this
that I speak of is a solemn set duty.

3. The Subject from which occasional Meditations arise, are very frequently
things artificial, civil or natural, indeed any thing that we see or hear;
but the Subjects of Meditation are only spiritual.

Secondly, It differs from study.

1. In respect of the Subject, Wicked men study, and it may be more then Godly
men; Wicked men study, and Godly men meditate; Nay it is the very
distinguishing sign between Saints and others, Psa. 1.2. and I believe it is a
thing far more rare for a meditating Christian to be an hypocrite, then for a
Christian that spends much time in prayer, especially if it be public.

2. As for the matter of prayer and study they are very different. 1. Study is
of all manner of things, whether natural, civil, mathematical, etc. but
Meditation is only of matters that concern our eternal welfare. 2. The
matters that we most study are those Truths that are most knotty and difficult,
and generally such as afford little spiritual nourishment, as Criticismes,
Chronologies, Controversies, etc. but the matter of Meditation is plain and of
great spiritual advantage. 3. The end of Study is knowledge, the end of
Meditation is holiness: If one sees a Learned man, one may conclude, that that
man has studied much; If one sees a devout holy man, one may conclude, that
that man has meditated much.

Thirdly, It differs from Contemplation.

1. Contemplation is more like the beatificall Vision which they have of God in
Heaven, like the Angels beholding of the face of God; Meditation is like the
kindling of fire, and Contemplation more like the flaming of it when fully
kindled: The one is like the Spouses seeking of Christ, and the other like the
Spouses enjoying of Christ.

2. Contemplation is one effect and end of Meditation.

3. Meditation is like the Bees flying to several flowers, or one smelling to
flowers particularly or severally; and Contemplation is like the smelling of
them all in a Nosegay, or like the water that is distilled from them all. The
Spouse in her description of Christ is like to Meditation, her concluding that
he is altogether lovely is like to Contemplation; Therefore to conclude,
Meditation is a serious solemn thinking and considering of the things of God,
to the end we might understand how much they concern us, and that our hearts
thereby may be raised to some holy affections and resolutions.

Now there are four kinds of solemn Meditation according to the four several
Subjects of it.

1. Some solemn Meditations are on Sermons that we hear, which is a very
useful and necessary practice for Christians; and it is better to hear one
Sermon only, and meditate on it, then to hear two, and meditate of neither; but
for setting down a method for meditating on Sermons, is neither necessary nor
possible, since the method of Sermons are various, and they are to observe in
their Meditation the method of the Sermon they meditate upon; All that I shall
say therefore in this particular, is only this, that the end of such
Meditations is neither only, nor chiefly, that we may the better fix the
Substance and heads of the Sermon in our memory, nor that we may the better
understand and fuller be instructed of the truth of that point that is preached
upon, but especially to work those truths, advices, and motives, etc. upon our
affections that are proposed to us in the Sermon.

2. The second kind of Solemn Meditation is, when upon some providentiall
occasion, or upon spiritual distemper or temptation, or almost any thing of
that nature, we retire our selves, and power out our souls in Prayers,
Soliloquies, etc. which may not but in a very large sense be called prayer,
being mixed of such various and different parts; sometimes speaking to God, and
telling him how we stand affected to him and his Ordinances, sometimes speaking
to our own soul, chiding, encouraging, or instructing of it; Sometimes speaking
to our selves, what we resolve to do, what we intend to say to God, etc. all
these you may find in Psa. 42. and many more of that nature, both in that and
other Psalms, which may not properly be called prayers, but solemn occasional
Meditations, and the occasions of those Meditations are set down ofttimes in
the beginning of the Psalm; and they differ from those occasional Meditations
of which I spoke in the beginning of this Chapter, only in their duration and
solemnity, as solemn prayers do from ejaculatory prayers; and to set down any
method for these is not convenient, because they observe no method, and differ
very little in any thing else from that kind of Meditation for which in this
Treatise Directions and Instances are largely set down; yet I thought good to
set down several Instances of this kind of Meditations, having them by me,
being taken from one who I suppose little thought that any besides God and
himself knew what he said.

3. The third kind of solemn Meditation are those that are upon Scripture, the
directions for that kind of Meditation I have particularly set down in a
little Manual entitled, A Directory to Christian Perfection, and have pursued
those Directions in one instance, set down in this Treatise, and would have set
down more but that I was not willing it should swell above the bigness of a
small Manual.

4. The fourth and last kind of Meditation is upon some practical truth of
Religon, many directions for which, and many instances of which are set down in
this Treatise.

CHAP. II. That Meditation is a Duty.
THat this is a duty is evident, 1. From the practice of Gods people, Genesis
24.63. that this was a solemn Meditation is evident, because he went out into
the fields to perform it, and had no other business there but this; It Is not
said when he was in the field he meditated, as if it were occasional, but to
show that it was a set duty, it is said that he went out to meditate.

2. It Is commanded Josh. 1.8. and this duty of Meditation is set down as a
chief means sanctified of God for the keeping of the Law.

3. It is as a Characteristical difference between a wicked man and a Saint.

4. To consider in Scripture and to meditate are Synonima's, and the necessity
of it appears in this, because that the cause of sin is the want of
consideration and not want of knowledge, Isa. 1.3. and it is not much for us to
hear Sermons, nay, though we be never so attentive, it will not serve the turn,
Psa. 45.10. It is more then to know, for who is there almost in the world that
knows not that he must die, but how few are there that consider it? Deu. 32.29.

5. The necessity of Meditation appears in this, that no man is converted
without Meditation; for every one that is converted, the method is this. 1. He
hears the Truths of God. 2. He is convinced, of them. 3. He considers and
meditates upon them, and sees how much they concern him. 4. He is affected with
them. 5. Being thus affected it raises holy resolutions of better obedience.

But it will be Objected, alas, I am not Book-learned, how shall I perform this
duty of Meditation? This is rather for Ministers, etc.

Ans. I may say of Meditation as it is said of the Mathematics, He that is a
rational man, and does but improve his reason, though he has neither tongues
nor arts to help him, may understand and grow to an extraordinary excellency in
those Arts; So he that has grace, if he do but exercise and improve it, though
he has not learning, will excel the learnedest man in the world that has not
grace in the duty of Meditation; it is not learning but devotion that enables a
man to this duty.

2. Can a man be a blessed man without Learning? then he may meditate without
it, Psa. 1.2.

Ob. But it is a very hard Duty,

Ans. 1. That shows it to be an excellent duty, for the harder any duty is, the
more excellent; the hardness consists in this, that it is contrary to our
corruptions, and the more contrary any thing is to that which is bad, it is so
much the better.

2. Can you expect any duty should be easy at first? Is there any thing so of
temporal things which are of any excellency, as Writing, Playing on the Lute,
etc?

3. Because it is so powerful to mortify corruptions; sweet things nourish,
and bitter things purge: therefore if you will only perform those duties that
are delightful, they will nourish not purge out corruption.

4. Get but your hearts inflamed with the love of God, then this duty will not
only be easy and delightful, but it will be a duty that you cannot tell almost
how to avoid, for it is as hard not to think of what one loves as to think of
what one hates; Bid the covetous man not think of his money, or bid him think
of the things of God, and he will find an equal difficulty in both. Indeed
the love of God and desire of heavenly things are got by Meditation, but when
once our hearts are enflamed by Meditation, then our Meditations are inflamed
by love: As an Oven is first heated by fuel, and then it sets the sewell on
fire, and as with the fuel you must put in fire and blow it, but afterward it
kindles of it self, so the difficulty of Meditation is at first: when there is
but as it were a spark of love in the heart, it will cost him some pains by
meditation to blow it up to a flame, but afterward the heart will be so heated
with these flames of love, that it will so inflame all the thoughts, that it
will make us not only easily but necessarily to meditate on the things of God.

5. The people of God generally have found a great deal of difficulty in
praying without a form at first. Many godly Ministers used a set Form Form of
Prayer before their Sermons not many years since, and when they and private
Christians came to pray at first without a Form, they found a strangeness and
an unreadinesse thereunto; So it is in Meditation, Christians being not used to
it, it will seem a strange and difficult work unto them, but I may say of it as
it is said of the yoke of Christ, Grave cum tollis, suave cum tuleris, thou will find it very delightful or at least very profitable.

Ob. But if it be such a necessary duty, how comes it to pass that it has been
so generally neglected by the peo-ple of God.

Ans. It has been practiced by the people of God both in Scripture, as is
proved, (and it is evident that the Psalms of David are frequently nothing but
Meditations, though not in this method) and by many in our days.

2. It being a private Closetduty, the omission nor performance of it could be
taken notice of, and so the omission of it could not be reproved nor
performance observed.

3. The Directions and Instructions for Meditation have been generally very
abstruse and intricate.

CHAP. III. Preparatory Directions concerning some Circumstances belonging to
Meditation.
1. FOR the place, that must be private, remote from company and noise; Isaac
went into the fields, our Savior into a garden, and David wishes us to enter
into our Chamber, and be still. Psa. 4.4. and our Savior bids us enter into
our Closet, and shut the door, the place must be such as must be remote from
noise and company, or any thing which might distract us in the duty; and such a
place that we may not be interrupted or forced to break off, before the duty be
ended, it must be also private and remote from the observation of others, so
that we may neither be heard nor seen, because there are diverse gestures and
expressions, which are not convenient for any one but God and ones own soul to
be privy to: Which of those places you find to be most advantageous to you in
the matters of Meditation you may choose.

2. For the Time when; The best is in the morning. 1. Because it is the
first fruits of the day, and the first fruits being holy, all the rest are
sanctified. 2. Because our thoughts being then not soyled with worldly
business, will not be so subject to be distracted. 3. Because the body it self
is more serene then after meals, and this duty needs an empty stomach, not only
because the head will be more clear and fit for Meditation, but also because
many passages of Meditation require so much intention of the mind and servency
of affection that they do hinder digestion. 4. Because that it being in the
morning will have an influence upon the whole day, but this is not an
universal rule; for we read that Isaac went forth in the evening to meditate,
Genesis 24.63. and in case the subject of your Meditation be a Sermon, then if it
may be the best time is immediately after the hearing of it before your
affections cool, or your memory fail you.

2. For the how long, considering the parts of Meditation are so many, viz.
preparation, considerations, affections, resolutions, etc. and none of them are
to be past slightly over, for affections are not quickly raised, nor are we to
cease blowing the fire as soon as ever it begin to flame, until it be well
kindled, half an hour may be thought to be the least for beginners, and an hour
for those that are versed in this duty; But there are two rules in this
particular especially to be observed. 1. That as we ought not to leave off our
prayers before that temper and frame of heart is wrought, which is suitable to
the matter of our prayers, viz. we should not leave off the confession of sin
till our hearts are made sensible of and humble for our sins, nor should we
leave off our praises until our hearts are filled with holy admirings and
adorings of God, and inflamed with his love; So the end of Meditation being
affections and resolutions, we should not leave off until those are wrought. 2.
As in private prayer, so long as we find our hearts enlarged by the pourings
of the Spirit of Supplication upon us, we are not to leave off unless by our
continuance in that duty we must omit another duty to which we were more
particularly obliged at that time; So in Meditation as long as we find the
heart affected we are to continue it: But this Caution must be given, that in
such enlargements we must not continue them longer generally then while they
come freely and without much straining and compulsion, for that honey that
comes freely of it self from the comb is pure, but that which is forced by heat
and pressure is not so well rellished, but this Caution is for extraordinary
enlargements, for if the heart be dead, we must use all means to awaken it; But
as fire must be blown till it be well kindled, but afterward blowing hinders
the boiling of any thing that is set over it, So when once our hearts are
inflamed and enlarged with holy affections in an extraordinary manner, it is but
a hinderance to our affections to return to the Meditation of those Points that
raised them.

CHAP. IV. Rules for the Subject. The Division of and Reasons for this Method
of Meditation.
1. BY no means let it be Controversy, for that will turn Meditation into
Study.

2. Nor nice speculations, for they be saplesse, without nourishment: besides
being so light they float in the brain, having no weight to sink them down into
the heart, and indeed were they there they have nothing in them to affect the
heart withal.

3. Let the Subject of Meditation be the plainest, powerfullest, and usefullest
Truths of God, as death, hell, heaven, judgment, mercies of God, our own
sins, the Love and Sufferings of Christ, etc.

4. Let the Subject of your Meditation be that that is most suitable to your
spiritual wants; as in the time of desertion, meditate most of the love and
mercies of God, etc.

Rules for Meditation it self, they are of three sorts. 1. Preparatory. 2. For
the body of the duty. 3. For the Conclusion.

Two things by way of preparation besides the choice of the Subject, the first
is to be convinced of and to be affected with the presence of God: The second
is prayer for assistance from God. 2. For the body of Meditation it self, it
consists of three parts; The first I call Consideration, which is nothing but
the convincing our hearts of several Truths that belong to that Subject
whereof we meditate: As as if the subject of our Meditation be death, the
considerations may go thus, alas O my Soul, how, and when, and where we shall
die we know not, generally men die sooner then they expect, and certain it is,
whenever that hour comes, we must bid adieu to honors, pleasures, riches,
friends, and at last our own bodies, etc. The second part is affections,
whether it be love of God or Christ, or spiritual things, despising of the
world, admiring of God or any other spiritual affection: The third part are
Resolutions to do this or that, or leave this or that; Now that this is the
most proper and genuine way of Meditation appears by this. 1. Because it is not
artificial and such as requires Learning, as those Directions are which wish
us to consider the efficient, final, formal, material cause of death, the
adjuncts, concomitants, etc. which though they may somewhat help the learned,
yet such hard words and artificial methods fright the ignorant: 1. This is the
very method of those Meditations by which every one that is brought home to God
is converted; For the first thing in conversion is our being convinced of some
Truths, which conviction raises affections, for if the truths of God end in
conviction, and go no further, nay, if they end in affections only, and never
come to resolutions of shunning evil and doing good, conversion can never be
perfected, as for example, One is convinced that he is a miserable undone
wretch by reason of original and actual abomination, Upon this conviction
fear and sorrow are raised, yet if these do not work in us a firm resolution of
leaving those sins, we are yet in our sins and unconverted. 3. There are
several things for the concluding of Meditation, as shall appear.

CHAP. V. Directions for the working of our hearts to be convinced of and
affectedwith the presence of God.
1. FOR being convinced of and affected with the presence of God, it may thus
be wrought.

1. We are to consider that God is present every where, as truly, really, and
essentially as he is in heaven; For God did not create heaven to confine him
but to manifest his presence, for the Heaven of Heavens are not able to contain
him, for God is neither included by, nor excluded from any place, and though
Jacob says, Surely the Lord was in this place, and I knew it not, Genesis 28.16.
yet we must not imagine that Jacob was ignorant of that truth, but did not
actually consider it; but David in the 139. Psalm is clear in explaining and
clearing up the omnipresence of God. 2. We must consider that God does more
peculiarly observe his people, while they are performing of heavenly duties,
whether it be, while they are speaking unto him, or he speaking unto them, he
does then more especially observe the motion and frame of their hearts, as when
we are in any company we do more especially look upon and observe those to whom
we speak, or who speak to us; yet this is to be understood not as if God did
observe us more at one time then another, in respect of Gods knowledge it self;
but thus, that God is much more offended with us, if our carriage and frame of
heart be more irreverent, and unholy in the time of prayer and Meditation, then
at such times as we are in the works of our particular calling.

3. We may consider with our selves that Christ does actually behold us,
especially in these duties of holiness, for it is not the distance of place
that does hin-Christs knowledge and exact observing of us. Little did Nathanael
think that Christ saw him under the Fig Tree, Nathanael did not see Christ, nor
was he corporally present then, yet Christ behold Nathanael when he prayed, so
Christ beheld Steven before the heavens were opened, and the opening of the
heavens was not that thereby Christ might be enabled the better to behold
Steven, but that Steven might thereby be the better enabled to see that Christ
looked on him; without all controversy God knows and observes with what
reverence, faith, love, etc. we pray, for else our prayers would be in vain,
and our faith also vain, for how could he give us according to our faith if he
knew not how much our faith were? If the inward frame of our hearts were not
observed by him, then an hypocrite that has better expressions should get more
by his prayers, then a true Nathanael that has a better heart.

4. Suppose that thou had lived in Christ's time, or suppose that Christ were
now in England, consider with what joy, reverence, and confidence thou would
go to him for the pardon of thy sins, or for any other mercy thou stoodst in
need of; Thou may go so to him now, his distance from thee in respect of
corporal presence does not make him less able to know thy wants, or hear thy
prayers, nor his being now glorified makes him less willing to grant them then
if he were bodily present in the room with thee in the form of a Servant, as he
was once at Jerusalem: the glory of Christ does not hinder his love and
goodness, for Chtist is the express image of his Father, and God Attributes
do not hinder one another; The Majesty of God does not set bounds unto his
goodness, and make that finite, nor does his goodness make his Majesty less
glorious, his goodness makes his Majesty more amiable, and his Majesty makes
his goodness more wonderful; So neither does the exaltation of Christ cause
him to abate any thing of his goodness unto his people, but if any way his
love be altered, it is by being made more then it was, and when Christ was upon
earth, you must have come to him by faith, or you could obtain no mercy from
him, and by faith though he be in heaven you may obtain any mercy now: You may
consider any one or two or more of these considerations, until your heart be so
convinced of and affected with the presence of God, that you may thereby be the
better fitted for the carrying on the duty of Meditation more effectually.

CHAP. VI. Concerning the Preparatory Prayer that is to be used before
Meditation.
THE next Preparatory consideration is Prayer, and it is to be performed in
these words, or to like purpose: Lord, my design in this duty of Meditation is
not to be an hour sequestered from worldly employments, for that were to be idle
an hour, and to increase my sins not my graces, but my business at this time
is to be so convinced and affected with those spiritual Truths revealed in thy
Word, that I may fully resolve by thy strength and power to reform my life,
because I can neither understand the things that belong to my peace, nor
understanding them, be convinced of the certainty and truth of them; Nay Lord,
though my understanding be enlightened, yet without thee mine affections cannot
be enflamed; I can neither know, resolve, nor perrform what is good without
thee, for from thee comes both the will and the deed, of thy good pleasure, I
beseech thee Lord that thou would give me thy grace to make conscience of
performing this duty with my whole strength, and not carelessly and
perfunctorily; And Lord do thou enlighten me with and convince me of thy
Truths, and so affect my heart with the love of holiness and hatred of sin,
etc. that I may thereby be enabled fully, firmly (notwithstanding all the
opposition that the flesh, world, or devil can make) to run the ways of thy
Commandments with joy and with speed, and when thou have wrought in me the
will so to do, give me also the deed, and that I may not trust to the strength
of my resolutions, but to the continual gracious assistance of thy Spirit for
the performance of those things that through thee I shall resolve to do: Holy
and blessed God, Christ has sent me, wishing me to come to thee in his Name
for any mercies I stand in need of; grant these things which I have begged for
the Lord Jesus sake, Amen.

This or a prayer to the like purpose thou art to put up unto God, but it is to
be done with thy whole heart, for thou must know that it is by the strength
which thou shall get from God by prayer, whereby thou shall be enabled to
perform this or any other duty profitably, for it is he that teaches us to
profit, he that begins a holy duty without God, will end it without God also.
It is a dangerous thing to think that we can by our natural parts, learning, or
by the strength of grace already received, without Gods further assistance
perform any thing that can please God or edify our own sonls; For though our
Mountain be made strong, yet if he shall hide his face there will be trouble.
We may with much more sense say, Now the Sun shines so bright, and the air is
so clear, that now we can do well enough for a while, though the Sun be
ecclipsed; then to say, though our hearts be never so much inflamed with the
love of God, Now we are so filled and inflamed by his love, we shall do well
enough by our own strength, for the present we need not Gods further
assistance; Give us but fuel, matter to meditate of, and we shall be able to
continue and increase our flames: Do not account it a burden but a mercy and
privilege, that God has necessitated and commanded thee always to draw
strength from him.

CHAP. VII. Of Consideration.
1. THey must be plain Considerations, not intricate and abstruse: For the main
end of Meditation being the affecting of our heart, and reforming of our lives,
and not informing of our understandings, our considerations should be so plain,
that they may be without difficulty understood.

2. It must be certain and evident, not controversal and doubtful; for the end
of Meditation is not properly to increase our knowledge but to improve our
knowledge.

3. Much less should our considerations be curious and nice speculations, or
if we choose any Book, by reading whereof to help our Meditation, we must not
choose such as are filled with flourishes and Rhetoric, for let a truth be
dressed never so curiously, the wit and eloquence wherewith the truth is
clothed, leaves the truth before it comes to the heart; as some meats that are
made in curious works are spoiled of all those curiosities before they come to
the stomach; and the Be lights not upon the Rose which has the freshest
color, and the sweetest smell, but upon the thyme that is an Herb of little
Beauty; Besides Eloquence to them that meditate is much like pictures in Books
to Children, they neglect their lesson to look on their pictures, they will be
looking on the pictures while they should be getting their lesson; so the fancy
will be playing with the Eloquence, when the heart should be feeding on and
affected with the truths we read. The less time the truth stays in the
Understanding, the better; for the work of the Understanding in this business
is not to retain, but to convey the Truths to the heart; As Physicians use when
they are to give medicines to cure any disease in the bladder, they give such
as may soonest come to the part affected, for if they stay by the way they lose
their virtue, before they come to the part which they should cure; So if the
Understanding shall stay dallying with the Eloquence or searching out the
meaning or certainty of the truth it considers any long while, the heart will
lie cold and unaffected all that while: It is somewhat like that Story
concerning Musicians that were to play before the Emperor of the Turks, who
were so long tuning their Instruments which they should have done before, that
he would not stay to hear their music; Therefore let the Truths you consider
of to raise affections be plain, certain, nourishing.

4. The 4th Rule is, that in case any doubt arises upon a plain known Truth
(for Satan will be subject to cast in doubts against the most evident Truths)
then do as the Archangel did with Satan, you may enter the lists with Satan,
and it may be when you have a little considered and disputed the matter, the
mist may vanish, and the Sun shine clear, and Satan being resisted will
presently fly: but if Satan shall still wrangle, and your blasphemous doubts
shall not be removed, then dispute no more, but say as the Archangel did, the
Lord rebuke thee Satan: As a woman that is attempted to be ravished will strive
and struggle a while, and if she finds that she can quickly get loose, she
flies, but otherwise she cries out for help; The Archangel first disputed, but
when that would not speedily prevail, appealed unto God; To this purpose it is
good to be exceedingly well grounded in Truths from the Word of God, for that
is the Sword of the Spirit, and that by which our Savior silenced Satan in all
his temptations. It Is a dangerous thing to dispute with Satan by humane reason,
we must put on the Armor of God, if we will be able to stand in the evil day
of temptation, and when all is done to stand.

5. The fifth Rule is, that we should not over-multiply our considerations, but
as soon as by considering of the Truths of God we find our hearts strongly
affected, then we are to pass over that part: but this Caution must be
observed, that we must not as soon as we find our heart never so little
affected, leave off our considerations; The Be will not go from the flower as
long as any honey is easily drawn out of it: and indeed it is a temptation
which the people of God ought to take notice of; That Satan is subject to make
one pass over duties before we have drawn half the strength of them, as for
example, When we are confessing of our sins, as soon as ever our hearts begin
in the least measure to be humbled, he fills them with joy, such joy may
generally be suspected to be from Satan or our own naughty hearts, not from
God: Corn when it springs up too fast, and grows rank, husbandmen cut it down,
a corrasive that is laid on to eat dead flesh must not be taken off as soon as
it begins to smart, the Wheat in the stony ground did soonest spring up; We
should let our considerations take deep root, and not pass over to affections
and resolutions as soon as ever they take hold of our heart, but it is always
to be remembered, that in case our affections be very much inflamed, as soon as
ever we begin our considerations we are to yield to the Inspirations of God,
and to follow the leading of the Spirit; for this method that is set down, is
not to bind up and limit the extraordinary working of the Spirit of God; but
if our hearts be only a little moved, we must do as I have said, not leave
blowing the fire as soon as ever it begins a little to be kindled, for green
wood (for such are we in spiritual matters) will suddenly go out unless it be
very well kindled.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning Affections.
KNowledge is for Consideration, and Consideration is to raise Affections, and
the end of Affections are Resolutions, as the end of Resolution is Action and
the reforming of our lives; Our Affections are various according to the Subject
we meditate of; Sometimes we admire Gods goodness, his Majesty, his Wisdom,
Sometimes we admire and wonder at our own folly and madness, that we should
live so contrary to our own principles, that those Truths that God revealed
unto us on purpose that we might improve them to our eternal welfare, we
should lay by as things forgotten and useless; as if one that had a receipt to
cure the stone, and were convinced of the excellency and efficacy of it, yet
should make no other use of it but to read it over and lay it by; Sometimes
the affection is despising the world, and abhorring our selves in dust and
ashes, sometimes forrow, sometimes joy, love, fear, etc. which you may find
abundantly in the Psalms of David, which were but David's Meditations though
not in this Method; Now as soon as our affections are much stirred and raised,
it is time to pass over to resolutions.

CHAP. IX. Concerning Resolutions.
Rule I.

LEt your Resolutions be firm and strong, not slieghty, let not them be
velleities or wishes, but resolved pur poses or determinations; Do not say with
thy self, Well, I see very well that the wrath of God comes upon the Children
of disobedience, and I must to hell, or leave my taking of the Name of God in
vain; I do not do well to swear, and I could wish I could leave it; but say
thus with thy self, I am resolved by the blessing of God whatsoever comes of
it; to leave my swearing; There is no dallying with God, nor giving a faint
denial to sin; I have heard of one who hearing the sin of Swearing spoke much
against by some in whose company he was, observed their discourse, and said,
Well, by the blessing of God I will never swear more, and though he was a
common Swearer before, he was never since heard to swear one Oath to this day.

2. Let thy resolutions be for the time present, not for the future; Do not
say, Well, I do intend to leave my drinking, but for the present I am engaged
in such a meeting, and for that time I will do as I have done, but after that I
will think of it, and take some order for mending of it; this is but one of
Satan's wiles whereby he coseneth thee of thy whole life by days, which he
could not do by years; If Satan should say unto thee, Thou shall never repent,
never leave thy drunkenness, it may be it would startle thee, and he would be
in danger of getting nothing of thee by asking so much: but he tempting thee
only to let it alone this Week, and afterward for a week longer, etc. he
obtains the same thing at several times which he could not obtain at once.

3. The third Rule, Let thy resolutions be not only against thy sin but against
the means, occasions, and temptations to it; for it is better to discern Satan,
if it may be, then to put a Sword in his hand, and say, thou can well enough
defend thy self against him: This is Solomon's advice, He does not say to him
that would fly Adultery, You may talk with a harlot, but Be not enticed by her
words to uncleanness, he will not give thee leave to go into her house, or so
much as by her door, Pro. 5.8. So when he disswadeth the drunkard from
drunkenness, he wishes him not so much as to look upon the Wine; For as the
beauty of a harlot, so the color of wine will inflame our desires after it,
Prove. 23.31. after this manner did Job resolve, I have made a Covenant with
mine eyes that I will not look on a woman, and he resolved not only against the
sin it self but against the beginnings and temptations to the sin, Job 31.1.
and God forbidding the Nazarites wine, forbad them to eat grapes, lest by that
they should be enticed to drink wine. Now that I may press this Rule, I shall
answer an Objection which generally wicked men are subject to make, as thus,
When we persuade a Drunkard that he would leave his drunkenness, that he would
for two or three Months resolve not to go into Tavern or Alehouse, he cries
out of preciseness, and says, What, do you count it a sin to drink in a
Tavern or Alehouse? I answer therefore,

1. That when our hearts are affected with the sinfulness of sin, and wrought
up to a hatred of it, we do as when we exceedingly hate any man, we avoid all
those places where we are likely to meet him; I may bid such an one ask God why
he forbids the adulterer to walk by the doors of the harlot; May he not say,
Why, she lives in such a street, and as honest and godly men walk that way as
in any other place in the City?

2. Consider that Licitis perimus omnes is a good saying, we generally perish
by lawful things, for in things that are unlawful we are generally more
watchful.

3. Those things that may be lawful to others may not be so to thee; Meats that
are most nourishing to men in health, are poison to one in a Fever.

4. Know this, that though to be tempted be not a sin, yet when we have found
by experience that going to a Tavern, etc. has been a snare and temptation
that has generally prevailed over us, then to be tempted with such a
temptation is a sin though one yields not, because by going into temptation
which we need not, we sin; for if one shall say I resolve that though I do
speak with the harlot, I will not consent, though thou do so, and resistest
all her enticements, thou sinnest notwithstanding, for thou plainly breakest
the Command, Pro. 5.8.

5. But suppose that it were lawful for thee to drink wine in a Tavern that
have been so often ensnared by it, yet one effect of true repentance is an holy
revenge, by debarring our selves those things which are lawful, taking Gods
part against our selves, 2 Cor. 7, 11.

6. Consider that if thy hatred of sin and love of God be not strong enough
to stop thee from the beginnings, and keep thee from the occasions of sin,
how can thou expect that it should keep thee from committing the sin it
self, when it has got some advantage over thee. He that cannot stop himself at
first, will much less (when he has rolled down a steep hill half way) be able
to stop himself, for then he falls with more violence, and the same strength to
hold will not serve then which would at first; therefore I shall still continue
the advice, to resolve not only against the sin, but against the occasions,
etc. But I must give you one caution, viz. that though you find your heart
never so much resolving against and abhorring of any sin, yet take heed that
you build not upon the strength of resolutions, but beg of God that he would
enable you by his strength, and that as he has given you the will, so he would
give you the deed also. It was well observed by one, as follows.

In effect it is true that we do understand many things by experience which we
should not understand by knowledge, as this, I having oftentimes determined to
do many things, the one more pious, holy, and Christian then another, and
having seen for the most part the issue and effect to be quite contrary to what
I determined; and on the contrary, observing that other pious and Christian
things were done by me, without my prae-determination or forecast; I stood a it
were confounded in my self, not understanding in what this secret did consist;
I did not wonder that in things which I determined as a man, the contrary
should come to pass of that which I would; but I did wonder that in the things
which I determined as a Christian, the same should befall me; And finding my
self in this confusion, it came to pass that I read that Resolution of Saint
Peter, Though I should die with thee yet will I not deny thee; and considering
that though the Resolution was pious, holy, and Christian, the contrary of that
which he resolved befell him; I understand that my determinations had not their
issue and effect according to my desire, because I did not well consider mine
own utter disability to perform any holy and good work; So that I understood by
experience, that although God punished my inconsiderateness in not suffering
that to come to pass which I intended; yet on the other side he satisfied my
general desire of doing good, by suffering that to come to pass which I did
not procure, nor hope, nor pretend unto; Whence I have gathered, that the will
of God is, that I should depend on him in such manner, that I should determine
or propound nothing without holding him before mine eyes, showing unto him my
good will, and referring unto him the issue and success of my desires and
endeavors.

CHAP. X. Directions for Vows.
NOw because Vows do very frequently, especially in young beginners follow upon
resolutions, and because that very many pious and religious persons have been
ensnared by rash Vows, and after Vows it is not fit to make enquiry, therefore
I shall set down some Cautions of, and Directions fot Vows.

1. As we have said concerning Resolutious, let your Vows be rather against the
occasions of sin then against sin it self.

2. When the subject of your Vows are of things indifferent in themselves,

1. Take heed of making any perpetual vow, for the reason why you make any
vows against any indifferent thing, as in drinking wine, etc, It is because
then it was a snare unto you, but in process of time, it may cease to be a
snare unto you, nay it may be a very great snare, and occasion sickness or
death, not to drink it, as in some cases has happened.

2. Let all Vows concerning indifferent things be conditional, and let these
two constantly be two of the conditions. 1. That you will abstain from such a
thing, or do such a thing, unless you shall be otherwise advised by some godly
Minister or private Christian. I knew a Religious woman that had vowed to read
many Chapters every day; when she was unmarried she made this vow, but
afterward in the time of her lying in, and other weaknesses, the Chapters were
so many, that she did much endanger the loss of her sight, and the neglect of
all other duties, when her poverty and family grew great; Now had she added
this Caution to her Vow, she might have been delivered out of that snare, and
though it be true that in many cases a Vow may be dispensed withal, when we
cannot keep it without sin, as in this case, one has vowed a weekly secret
Fast, ones health, or child with which one goes will certainly be destroyed by
it, yet if it be but an inconvenience, though a very great one, it will not
release one from ones vow; Now the reason why I add that condition (unless
some Minister or for want thereof some other godly Christian shall otherwise
advise) is because the several cases that may happen are so various that it is
impossible to specify them all, or think of them all, and very difficult to
judge of them all, when we make the Vow; And moreover if we should leave it to
our selves, we should be too partial, for as when our consciences are much
touched for our sins, we are subject to be too violent in our spiritual
revenges, so in a little time when that pang is over, we are subject to be too
indulgent to our selves, therefore it is better to say thus, Lord, I do vow
unto thee, that I will keep every week a day of humiliation, or that I will not
drink any wine this three months next followiog, unless some such occasion
shall be, that if it had then been, or then thought of when I made my vow, that
such or such, or some other godly Minister would (had I consulted with him
then) wished me not to have made that Vow; then to say, I will do this or that
unless some such occasion be, that were the Vow to be made again, I would not
make it. 2. Add this Caution, viz. If I remember it, I will not drink wine
this month, the reason is, because if you drink wine, though you did not think
of it, you sin if your vow be absolute, but if it be with that condition it
is not a sin, and yet by adding that condition we give our selves no liberty,
since it is not in our power to forget it. The next Caution concerning Vows in
indifferent things is this, add a penalty upon the breach of your Vow, which
penalty is not added by way of hope of Satisfaction, that is gross ignorance
and superstition, but it must run thus, I will spend half an hour a day in
prayer for the Church to the end of this month, or else give so much to the
poor, and in such a case if we do either we sin not: the reason why we should
add a penalty it, because some inconveniences may be so great, that it would
bring some very great mischief upon us, and then we have liberty to take the
other part of the Vow, viz. to give so much to the poor; And now this penalty
must 1. Not be too light and trivial, but it must be of such consequence that
it may be a tie upon us, and yet not of so great weight as if it should happen,
it might prove some great inconvenience to us; For a rich man to say he will
give 6d to the poor is not considerable, and yet the same may be too heavy a
burden for one that is very poor to give. The next Rule is, Let this penalty
be always of something that is materially good, as giving to the poor,
spending some time in reading of Scripture; for as for Popish penances, as
whipping, Pilgrimages, and such like, they are unprofitable and ridiculous: The
next Rule is, Let this penalty be always some holy duty that is most contrary
to thy Master sin, as if thy Master sin be Covetousness, let it be alms; if
it be voluptuousness, let it be fasting with prayer, or abstaining wholly for
a time from that wherein thou most delightest, etc. The next Rule is, Let your
Vows be rather against the outward then the inward acts of sin, rather against
speaking angrily then being angry, for though inward acts of sin are worse,
yet they are not so much in our power. The next Rule is, If your Vows are
concerning doing holy duties, it is better to vow to spend so much time in
reading holy Scripture, or such like, then to vow to read so many Chapters,
for thou will be tempted to read them over too fast, that thou may have
ended, whereas if it be, so much time that thou have resolved to spend, thou will not be so subject to this temptation.

CHAP. XI. Rules for the concluding of Meditation.
1. THou art earnestly to beg of God strength to perform whatever thou have
resolved to do in his service; This must be done fervently, though briefly and
humbly, proceeding from an earnest desire to do what thou have promised and
resolved, and also from an humble sense of thine inability to perform it.

2. The second duty is thanksgiving, if thou shall perceive any heavenly warmth
of love or spiritual hatred of sin, or any other spiritual effect wrought in
thy heart, thou art to give God the glory, and not to rejoice in thy self, but
in the Lord, but thou art to rejoice with trembling, knowing that if thou art
puffed up, though thou have the will to do good wrought in thee, yet if thou
provokest him, he can stop it, that thou shall never be able to do what thou
resolvest to do.

The first is an humble acknowledgement of our failings in the performing of
this duty; For if we were not geeen wood, that love which is now but a spark
would have been a flame; God is not wanting unto us, but we are wanting to our
selves and him; After these are performed there remains three duties more.

1. We are to remember what Vows and promises we have made, and it is very
useful to write down all thy Vows (as thou make them) in a Book, because that
we shall else be subject to forget the Vow, or the time, or conditions upon
which we made it; And it is good to have a Book to keep a Register of things in
it (besides a Diary which I have spoken of, and given Rules for, in a Manual,
entitled, A Directory to Christian Perfection. 1. Let one head be (for which
you are to leave some leaves) for Vows, under which you must write all your
Vows or Resolutions, as you make them, or spiritual promises for Christians,
and such like. The second must be for the mercies of God, eminent deliverances,
and also answers of Prayers; These are to be set down with all pertinent
circumstances that may any way increase the mercy. The third head should be for
grosser failings, which were good to be writ down, not in letters at length
that every one may read them, but in characters known only to our selves;
There are other things which because I do not now speak purposely of that
business I omit.

The second thing after Meditation is ended, is, to remember what passages in
our Meditation did most affect us, and as it were to lay them up in our
thoughts, that frequently we may in the rest of the day think of them; As when
we walk in a garden we content not our selves with enjoying the fragrancy of
the flowers while we are there, but if we may have leave we often gather a
Nosegay to smell of the rest of the day. In this business of Meditation do
thou likewise.

The third duty after Meditation is by degrees warily and unwillingly to go out
of the presence of God to worldly emploiments; Do not go from the presence of
God as a bird out of the snare, with joy and with speed; And thou must go also
watchfully and warily from such emploiments, as one that carries some precious
liquor in a shallow, broad, brittle dish, he looks to his way, to the dish and
liquor that is in it, lest by holding of it awry by falls or stumblings, he
should spill the one or break the other; So must thou be watchful over thy
ways, else the grace that God has powered into thy heart in this duty will be
spilt. To rush into holy duties or out of them, argues too great undervaluing
of the things of God.

Instances OF Solemn, Occasional MEDITATION.
Meditation 1
ALas my God I am in a sad condition, mine afflictions grow daily upon me, and
that which is mine unsupportable misery, my corruptions, grow faster upon me
then my affliction; What before made me weep will not now make me sigh; The
heavy burden of a great abomination does not lie upon me so much as before I
was oppressed with a vain thought in my prayers: Alas Lord, alas, I am undone,
alas my corruptions have almost made me love them, and make me weary of duties,
and careless of graces, My joys are gone, and my sorrows are gone that were
suitable to thy Word, and now my joys are but the laughter of fools, and my
sorrows are carnal, sensual, and more of hell in them then of heaven, and as
now I can scarce tell my sorrows, so have I scarce any sorrow to tell; I have
sat down and wept to consider the great decays of holiness in me, but now I
can see my God going from me, and whenas now he is even out of sight, mine eyes
are as dry as my heart is hard; Alas Lord if thou will not return, thou will
lose a poor soul that has loved thee, and is somewhat troubled; Now poor sad
soul that it is so wicked as it is.

Meditat. II.
Lord, thou see the strange distempered temper of mine heart and spirit, ah
blessed God I should take more comfort if I should see my heart-bloud running
forth before mine eye, then to see mine eyes so dry and my heart so hard, I
have worn out almost all motives to holiness, they now take no impression in
me which before were too strong for me to bear, they ravished me which now do
not move me: I scarce ever go to prayer but I have enough and too many
spiritual complaints to employ it to express; If every day I had not just
cause to bewail a continued decay of grace, I might have some respit of my
griefs: But what shall I now do? When every day shall bear witness against me,
and every night my sin shall go to bed with me, and lie in my bosom, and rise
in the morning more strong then at night: Ah when my former holy life shall be
more terrible then others wicked lives; When my former prayers shall be like
the gall of Aspes unto me, when those duties which should be my comfort are my
terror: Alas what can my poor soul do? when my present sins and my past duties
which of them are the heaviest burden unto me, I do not know, what shall I do?
When I consider these things, then the thoughts of the affliction that lies
upon me makes me weep a tear or two, and my vain heart, my deceitful heart,
would persuade me that I weep for my sins: Those in desertion are in a blessed
condition to me, they are sad and I am miserable; I am guilty of that which
their consciences do but accuse them of: Alas, have I lost my communion with
God? my sweet communion, and the power I had to prevail with him for any mercy
almost that I prayed for? now I can pray, and pray, and pray, and go away
without a blessing, I can almost be content to be wicked, Thou know mine
heart or else my tears would deceive thee as well as me: If they are worldly
thoughts that have estranged me from thee, thou know how to cure me; If mine
utter impoverishings will cure me, let me be as poor as Job; If thou wast not
such a Physician as thou art I was past thy cure.

Meditat. III.
Lord, I am come now to pour out my soul before thee, and my tears into thy
bosom, to tell thee the sad thoughts and sorrows of my heart; Ah my God, In
this bitterness of my soul, and with tears in mine eyes, and pride in my
heart, and sencelesnesse upon my spirit, I speak these things: Ah Lord, thou
have scourged me with scorpions, for my sins do increase as well as my
afflictions, these afflictions to me are scorpions, to me they have poison in
them, and at once I am scourged and stung with them, a sad ease it is when my
punishment is heavier then I can bear, and yet notwithstanding I go from the
presence of God too, and that more and more. My tears dry up in mine eyes, and
my love goes out of my heart as soon as kindled; When the Candle of the Lord
shined upon my Tabernacle in my first conversion, when the fire of thy love was
kindled in my heart, I have had some discourses of devotion, that I was not
able to bear the ravishment that the remembrance and meditation of them brought
to my soul, now almost as full of sadness as then of joy: after those times,
as those after the Flood, My joys and the acts and workings of my grace grew
very short-lived in comparison of what they were before; Then they were
Methusalems for age, and Sampsons for strength to what they are now; Before
though I fell spiritually sick, and my strength and comfort was gone, yet I was
sensible of my weakness, it was a pain and a grief unto me that I could not
walk into the delightful garden of the Spouse, and to the sweet bed of his
Spices; I could weep for want of tears; if not, I could mourn for want of
sorrow, but now like a man that has groaned and strugled so long that he can
struggle no longer, but grown senseless, can hardly be perceived to breathe or
live; If the sweetest music should be played by him, or the dearest friend in
the world should come and ask him with tears in his eyes, Dear Husband, or Dear
Wife, how do you? the poor sick one does not so much as open the eye to see who
it is that speaks, or if open them, they being presently heavy with death, fall
down again, and he dies; So is it with my poor soul sometimes, I can hear my
Savior as it were saying unto me (for sometimes methinks I see him about my
sick soul,) Ah poor Soul how do thou do? Is my Joseph yet living? But alas,
Lord, thou know I have scarce strength or life to lift up mine eye to thee,
Lord, Can these bones live? Can these dry eyes weep? Can this frozen heart be
enflamed?

Meditat. IV.
Lord, I am ashamed to consider what I know of thee, when I think what I do for
thee: Ah my God, the cares of the world lie heavy upon me, Resolutions though
never so strong are too weak to overcome my corruptions; Alas, I can scarce say
any more then I have said in the confessing and bewailing my sad spiritual
condition, though I have said nothing to what I should say, Have I not told
thee Lord, with tears in mine eyes, and with a sad heart, that I found my
corruptions get ground of me? my prayers, my tears, my resolutions, and some
endeavors do resist but cannot overcome them, these keep them from prevailing
so soon but not from prevailing; I humbly confess or desire so to do that I
may complain to thee, but I should add to mine abominations exceedingly if I
should complain of thee; Mine heart does almost tempt me to it, when I consider
what I was and what I am, It is as a Talent of Lead upon my Soul, yet since by
my preaching thou art glorified, and thy people edified more then if I should
spend all my time in private Meditation, I am willing to submit, only I do
humbly beseech thee with tears in mine eyes, that though I have less time to
spend in such private duties, yet that my poor soul may not lose her love to
them, and though I perform fewer duties, I may not perform them worse then I
did when I performed more.

Meditat. V.
I do much wonder at my self and at many, nay somewhat at all Christians upon
days of humiliation, but most at my self to hear the tongue of a poor
Christian confessing, and his eyes weeping for his sins, and speaking of them
with such expressions and such sighs that one would think Surely this Christian
keeps a strict Communion with God, surely he would not sin for a world, surely
God is in all this man's thoughts: and yet stay but whilst he has done his
prayer, and you find in him such strong thoughts, words, and actions, that are
almost incredible, loose and idle words, and vain thoughts, I but too often
experience makes it even past hope it should be otherwise with me: If any Town
that was straightly besieged with cruel enemies, should send for aid to such or
such, and when they came they should send out most of the Town to join with the
enemy against those that came to help them, What we would say of such people,
Lord, just thus are we, We have a world of corruptions and temptations, sin,
and hell, and Satan, all beset us, all beset us, and violently assault us, we
pray for the help of God against them day after day, We send our prayers to
Heaven for assistance, Well, God does send his holy Spirit to help this poor
soul, In the Ministry of the Word tells us what we should do to overcome these
enemies, and sends many motions of the Spirit to bring into our souls grace to
strengthen us; We will not do what he advises us to do, nay, but we take part
with our corruptions, and resist and fight against the power of the world to
come; Oh thy patience is not to be understood, I am weary to think before I go
to prayer, how little fruit I expect from them; I pray, and pray, and weep, and
read, and hear, and sigh, and confess these as well as other of my sins, and
yet as a Ship in the Sea they do divide my corruptions for the present, but
they presently return to their former course; Lord, do not the bowels of thy
compassion yern within thee to see me thy poor Servant in such a miserable
condition as I am in? Do thou not see how sin and corruption do as it were
lie gnawing upon me, and eating up my very flesh, and destroying my soul, and I
have neither hand nor foot to move against them? Lord, who is it that must make
me hate corruption, is it not thy Spirit? Who must overcome my resisting of thy
Spirit, is it not thy Spirit? Lord, I do not know in the world what to do, to
leave off striving were not only to despair of thy goodness because thou do
not help as much and when I will, and besides if I cannot get ground, nay,
though notwithstanding I lose ground, yet doubtless I shall not go so swiftly
down stream as if I strove not at all: if I must be forsaken by thee to all
Eternity, yet Lord, let me not while I live so fall that I should be a scandal
to Religion; Alas, Is it come to this O my soul, that I must say, If God will
forsake me for ever.

Meditat. VI.
In the most serious addresses of my soul to take hold upon God, I find an
unhappy frozennesse benumme the best of my devotions, and thereby I show either
that I am extremely ignorant of thee Lord, or what is worse, senseless of
thee; The truth is I may justly tremble when I come to keep any day of
humiliation in thy sight, not only because of the desperate sins I am gulity
of, but specially because such duties do work little or nothing upon me, and
this is sure enough, that those Ordinances that do not foften, do harden; I am
in a great straight, my Conscience drives me upon duties, and I dare not omit
them, and yet my heart is so hard and filthy that they do not purify me, So I
am more defiled then before: Ah my God, thou know what afflictions are
bitter and strong enough to purge these corruptions; Lord, send them, and
though I am so vile that I do not now fervently and earnestly enough desire to
be cured, but yet Lord I know my want of desires of Reformation is one of my
greatest corruptions, I desire to be cured of that, or at least Lord, thy
fatherly goodness I hope will take care to cure me of that, and Lord, this I
know, that when thou shall send any such affliction upon me, I shall it is too
likely murmr and be weary of the chastisement of the Lord; It may be I shall
pray for the taking off of that corrasive before it has eaten away that
deadness of heart and other corruptions that now lie upon me, yet Lord do not
yield to such prayers, go on with thy cure, and if I be impatient cure that
corruption also, and every other corruption that shall appear in the time of
cure of any corruption: we shall bless thee one day for not hearing and not
granting such prayers as shall be for our spiritual harm: Lord, Death is very
bitter unto me, surely it would not be so bitter if there were no root of
bitterness in me; If I kept a stricter communion with thee in this world, I
should long for a full communion with thee in heaven for ever.

Meditat. VII.
Since our dear Lord Jesus Christ has loved me and given himself for me, oh
that my heart was ravished with his love, oh that he was the beloved of my soul,
and that I were sick of his love who died for the love of me; Oh that I could
not be stayed but with his flaggons; This my Jesus the chiefest of ten thousand
has told me, that he that saw thee, saw the Father, whereby I understand that
thou art just as he was, as pitiful, as gracious, as willing to forgive, as
sweet and as easy to be entreated as my good Savior; and in all the things
and passages that thy Word has made known to us of him, I read not of one of
all that came to him, not one poor soul that ever begged any grace or any
pardon, nor never did any come to be healed of any bodily disease in vain;
Lord, thou art as he was, Lord Jesus thou art as thou wast, thy being in heaven
makes thee not less like thy Father, or thy self; Blessed God, I do beseech
thee, I do beseech thee to give me to give me thy poor hard-hearted Servant a
soft heart; Lord Jesus I beseech thee (thou see mine hard my poor heart
desire as imperfectly as coldly) to make Intercession for me, me, for whom thou
have paid a dear price, as one that has been so long from his Friend, that he
can hardly call to remembrance what countenance he has, So I, poor I, that
cannot choose but pity the sad condition of mine own heart, which though it does
not uncessantly and importunately desire grace as it should, yet methinks it is
a sad thing to see it in such a careless temper, I am such a stranger to thee
that I have much a do to make one thought of thy sweet love and excellencies
that may affect my heart, and bring the sweet apprehensions of thee to
remembrance. Thy tender mercies and former relishes of thy goodness are to me
like the shadow of death, they are as Christ walking upon the waters, they
terrify me; Lord let me weep thee to me again; Oh my God I am undone, undone,
undone a poor undone creature; Those in desertion are in a thousand times
better condition then I am, they want the comforts, but then indeed they have
the graces of the Spirit, but is not my poor soul that wants both in a sad
condition, that can sit down and fall asleep when I should seek my Savior? I
have a soul of such a temper as makes me wonder at my self, as in the Spring,
and sometimes there will come a cloud that will seem to overspread the Heavens,
and yet on the sudden all will be blown over, and the day so fair that there
will not be a cloud to be seen; So am I, sometimes my heart is full of sorrow,
and mine eyes full of tears, and yet upon the sudden my heart loses that
sweet sad temper, and all is blown over, and not a cloud appears, and these
clouds of grief are not dispersed with the comforts and joys of thy Spirit, but
with worldly business or company; when I do grieve for my sins, carnal grief
bears a share in it, and carnal joy abolisheth it.

Meditat. VIII.
To confess my sins without any sense of them, without any hatred of them,
to pray for grace, and not to be sensible of the necessity or excellency of it,
to come to thine Ordinances without reaping any good from them, to think and
meditate of thee, and neither admire nor love thee, nor long and delight to be
in thy company, to what purpose are these things? thou desire of us our
hearts, and not our works, words, or thoughts, without that: Ah my Lord and my
God, shall all be in vain, and will thou cast me off for ever? Do thou hate
my soul, and am I an abomination unto thee? Must I be shut out for ever, and
never enjoy the sweetness of thy presence? Thou will not O my God, thou will
not, thou can not O my God, thou can not, for thou have made a Covenant
with me, and I claim that Covenant, for I have not any thing in the world
besides thy Covenant in the Lord Jesus Christ, that I can so much as have the
least hope that will do me any good: If the Lord Jesus Christ did not sit at
thy right hand to make Intercession for me, my sins continually, daily, hourly
clamoring against me, and accusing of me, must needs prevail against me. Alas
my heart is far from that spiritual frame that thou requirest, for the miseries
that sin brings are more troublesome and heavy to me then the filthiness that
is in sin; Thy blessings are more lovely in our eyes then thy self; Every
duty hardens me in my formality; Lord, thou art the Father of mercies, oh have
mercy upon me, for my case is not the common case of thy people, but few, few
of many may be found whose soul is like my poor soul, for where is there any
that can say so, and yet be so little affected as I am?

Meditat. IX.
Mine hopes are false, and my fears are true, the deadliest poisons do not make
me sick, nor the excellentest cordials do not comfort me; I am not sick of
sin, nor does the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ fill me with joy,
nay, rather does it not fill me with griefs and fears? If my sears and griefs
were not carnal, would they were more, but my carnal joys eat out my
spiritual grief, and my joys also: I am as it were like Absalom, I hang
between heaven and earth, I would fain have heaven, and yet would not part with
earth: Oh my Lord Jesus Christ, art thou of no more excellency in mine eyes?
Does thy love to me raise up no more love in me then to stand deliberating what
to do, when thou stand with stretched out arms to receive me to thy bosom?
Can thou love one that loves thee so little as I do? Thou did love me when
I loved thee not at all: Why sit thou so sad O my soul? Go cast thy self
into the arms and bosom of the Lord Jesus Christ, there lie and hear the
beatings of his heart toward thee, and it may be thou may be warmed with the
heat of his love; Christ pours out the boiling streams of his heart-bloud upon
thy poor soul, for his heart boiled in love toward thee, and can thine heart
still be frozen? Oh Infidelity thou art the poison of my soul, thou with thy
cold blasts have frozen mine heart, and keepst it so; Lord give me faith, or
else all thy mercies are in vain, Thy love is and has been too great for me to
believe: Lord, thou that love me so much as to give me Christ, oh love me so
much as to give me faith to believe it; There remains in mine heart no more
then the first spark of thy love, and the first principle of grace that thou
did put into my soul when thou did regenerate me; All the flames are gone
out that were once kindled in me; All the fruit, and leaves, and boughs are
stripped from me, there are all things to do beside bare regeneration, I am as an
arm cut off, so that it hangs only by a little skin, a slender thread; Lord,
this is my hope, that my corruptions and Satan that have quenched these flames
that I have had, shall never be able to quench this spark; But alas that is a
poor comfort, that this is all my comfort, that I shall not lose heaven, though
it be a thousand times too great a comfort for such a wretched sinner as I am,
to have: Is it nothing to lose all my comforts, all my duties, all my sweet
communion with thee, or at least only so much of these remains as to keep me
from being utterly cast off; For one that had fared deliciously every day to
come to have no more bread then to keep life and soul together, though he dies
not, yet he has a miserable life: Thus, thus, and far worse it is with me.

Meditat. X.
If I stood clear before thee O my God, of those many sins, of sencelesnesse
under judgments, fruitlesnesse under Ordinances, mispending of time, want of
watchfulness of mien own ways, and for the appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ; Only my sins of unkindness to the Lord Jesus Christ, were enough to
cause thee to take away thy mercies from me; I have heard and read the great
mystery of my Redemption, of his being scourged, and crowned, and nailed, of
his bleeding and dying for me, of his great love, and such things, that if a
Friend of this world had done or suffered the thousandth part so much, his
memory would have been precious.

Meditat. XI.
Ah my dear God, thou have been my God, and therefore thou art my God, how
little can my soul know by any thing that I now either do or feel? I am fain to
fetch evidences and signs from actions done many years since: My Prayers and
other holy duties were matter of more joy when I did them then now, they have
terror in them; Now I think I do them not as heretofore: I have been assisted
by thy grace, oh my lost joys and my lost duties, where I shall find you I
know not, the joys I had formerly, and the great zeal of mine heart made me
pray, but now not out of feeling and zeal, but for zeal and joy, and I go from
prayer with a sad heart and an hard heart; My prayers come neither from my
heart nor reach to my heart: Oh my Lord Jesus Christ where are thy motions and
the joys of thy Spirit to work thine own work in me? why do I walk in this
valley of tears not only without comfort but without grace, I do even stand
astonished at my self to see the vast difference between my self now and when I
was thine; When the Candle of the Almighty shone upon my soul, and the Spirit
of my God dwelt in me, then sorrow and weeping flew away: Alas! I now have
scarce any thing left me but carnal tears, and one great cause of my grief and
part of my misery is, that I can weep no more, sometimes indeed tears stand in
mine eyes when I consider these things; Lord give me faith, O give me faith, I
feel a deal of Atheism in mine heart; Mine heart is so full of corruption, of
all kind, and all degrees, that I can feel no bottom of this stinking ditch;
Mine Imaginations is diverse times a through-fare for Satan's blasphemous
thoughts, which my soul abhors, I may even sit down and spend the remainder of
my wicked life in weeping, and wailing, and wringing of my hands, and tearing
off the hairs of my head; My sad soul may say to my God, Art thou quite gone
from me, have all my hopes of thee been as dreams and empty shadows unto me,
and have thou shown me so much of heaven, and will thou make hell more terrible
and bitter to me? Shall thy sweet mercies be turned into the gall of Aspes to
me, not only to be bitter but deadly? I have cause, I have cause Lord, to
mingle my drink with my tears, to water my couch with weeping: Thou art too
great a God to be dallied withal, and what do I else? As our dearest Friends,
though we never so much delighted in their company while they were living, yet
we are afraid to be alone with them, they are a terronr to us after the souls
have left their earthly Tabernacles; So my prayers while they were living
prayers were a great comfort to my poor soul, but now my prayers are without
life, and my supplications are dead, they are a terror to me, they look gashly
upon me and I upon them.

Meditat. XII.
My dear God, thouart not moved with words, if we had the tongue of Men and
Angels, if we could speak as never man spoke, if our hearts meant no more then
they do, what would our vain words do? I am ever weary of my life because of my
corruptions, I can go no where nor do any thing, but my corruptions follow me,
and tire me even out of my patience: O that I could weep over my soul, and weep
over my prayers to see how dead they are, which way to turn I know not, I have
prayed a thousand times for another heart, and yet mine heart is as hard as a
stone, and so full of hypocrisy, that there is a world of hypocrisy in my
confessions of hypocrisy: Lord, shall I cast away my confidence, and lay down
my weapons, and put off mine armor, because my corruptions are so strong and
impetuous, and deaden my very soul? But alas what am I weary of? not of my
sins, but of the accusations of my conscience that will not let me alone;
Blessed be thy Name that I am troubled that I do not live holily, and yet I
will strive to live holily; Lord, mine heart is ertangled in the snares of the
world; Blessed Savior, thou which have overcome the world deliver me from the
cares and love of the world: Alas! what good do my tears do me? Do thou
bottle up such tears, such puddle water in thy bottles? Let the bowels of thy
compassion yern within the toward my poor soul: It is full of sin, but my
sin is my sorrow, though my sorrow it self is sinful, if thou stand as a
stranger to me I must give over my self for lost, then I may say, farewell
prayers; better to say, farewell, then to add to my former sins a greater
guilt by defiling my prayers that are as the Chariots to carry out my soul into
the bosom of God; What am I to stand against corruption or temptations? I am
no more able to overcome, nay, to resist them, then to remove Mountains: I have
sinned away my comforts, and sinned away my joys, and sinned away mine hopes,
and even my God, if thy mercies be not greater, and what remains for my poor
soul to do, but to sit down in sorrow, and even to mourn until my soul be heavy
unto death? It had been better for me that I had not been one to show the way
to others; Nay but oh my God, that is best for me that thou have done for me;
Blessed God do but make me thine

Meditat. XIII.
Alas Oh my soul may not I justly spend the remainder of my days in sighing,
to perceive my good God, from whose sweet presence I have in former times had
so much grace and comfort, to be such a stranger now to men, and what is worse,
mine heart so senseless of his absence! The time has been when myheart has
almost bled within me to think what a miserable condition I should be in, if
ever it should come to pass that it should be thus; Lord why do thou absent
thy self from my poor soul, if I were in a desertion of comforts I were in a
far better condition, but to be in a desertion of graces and not to be
troubled, is a sad condition; Me thinks I see my stock of grace grow weaker and
weaker, and more and more to languish, as one that is dying the pulse grows
weaker and weaker, until at last it be no moee: O Lord what to say I do not
know, alas! I cannot but call, and cry, and pray, Lord if ever thou will take
pity upon a poor miserable speechless sinner; Lord, If thou will that I may
overcome, Lord, I cannot get mine heart to be content to be damned, and indeed
since then I must eternally be separated from thee, I do not desire to get mine
heart to be content, but to struggle against it as long as I am able.

Meditat. XIV.
To have Satan and corruption come and beset me as soon as I awake, and to
follow me all the day long, and to go to bed with me, and to keep me waking, to
have no respite, is a sad condition: When I should awake with my God, my good
God, who kept me, and watched over me whilst I slept, to have Satan stand
ready, and hold his temptations before mine eyes which way soever I look, and
to prevail so far with me, as at last to make me scarce to hate the sin he
tempts me to, I feel in my spiritual part an utter abhorring of the sin, I
would give ten thousand worlds rather then commit the sin, and yet I have
much ado to refrain; alas, can my secure soul live?

Meditat. XV.
I am in such a wretched temper as to be willing to offend my God, and when I
go about to grieve, sorrow is far from me; nay, the grief which sometimes I
feel, is not strong enough to conquer the temptation, when tears stand in mine
eyes to consider the miserable condition of my soul in being so prone to sin,
the temptation increases; To hear one of thy servants groaning under thy hand,
and then to stand parlying with temptation, and not rather be afraid that the
same affliction, etc. Lord, I am in thy hand, for affliction lay what thou will
upon me, I must bear it, and I would bear it patiently; nay Lord though this
temptation be such an unwelcome guest, and I am too weary of it, yet so thou will give me grace to overcome my impatience, I am content Lord as much as I
can; but alas my God to have Satan my companion in stead of my God, I hope will
never be pleasing to me.

Meditat. XVI.
Lord, what my vain heart thinks of thee it matters not, except it be to
discover the wretchedness of it, thou have more glorious creatures to praise
thee, my praises and my thoughts of thee are so low and so unworthy of thee,
that thou might forbid me as thou did the devils to confess thee, or to
say any thing of thee: My dear God, if a world would buy it for one such sight
of thee as might so ravish my soul, that I might never more see any beauty, or
taste any sweetness in any thing but in thee, that I might see thee with open
face, that I might be transformed into thine image from glory to glory: Lord,
thou art still beyond me, the higher my thoughts are of thee the more thou art
beyond me and above me; When my thoughts are best my thoughts are lost in the
meditation of thee, as the stone that is thrown into the calm Sea, makes
greater and greater circles, but can never reach the shore: Lord, I am content
I may be lost in my self so I may find thee; Lord, though there were none but
thou and I in the world, I had enough, nay, though there were none but thou and
I in heaven, I had enough; Though I have nothing to say to thee but what I have
said a thousand times, Thou art my God, my Savior, my all, thou art he whom my
soul loves, yet though I have nothing else to say, nor can say there is any
new relish, yet I delight to be alone with thee, nay, though thou say
nothing to my poor soul but what I have heard from thee, yet let me still be in
thy company, I had rather weep and mourn for mine offending thee, then enjoy
all delights in the world; Those salt waters are more precious then their wine.

Meditat. XVII.
Lord, I beseech thee to order all mine affairs by thy wisdom, thou know
what afflictions are needful for me; I mnrmure oftentimes when thou afflictest
me, although I have again and again desired thee to direct all things that
belong unto me: but blessed God let not my murmurings so provoke thee as to
leave me to mine own self; Give me not what I desire but what I want, my
judgment in judging what is good or bad for me is little worth, for many times
I have judged such a thing to be for my hurt, yet it has proved much for my
good, and so on the contrary, but then I have by experience found it evidently
for my good, when I have yielded my self wholly to be guided by thee, all
things Lord make me know my self; I am a poor creature with tears in mine eyes,
and hypocrisy in my heart.

Meditat. XVIII.
Lord, It fares with me as it sares with one that has been a long time from
his friend, he has many things to tell him of, several particulars that
befell him since their last being together, so Lord I have been a stranger to
thee, and I have much to say to thee, much have I suffered from mine own
corruptions, and little have I done; I have a heart will let me do nothing for
thee; Lord, I am but a child, pardon my bablings; I have none to make my
complaint to, no not one; Thou have caused me to live in Mesech, and to have
mine habitation in the Tents of Kedar, and if thou Lord wilt supply the want of
those Christian friends I am now deprived of, Lord, my heart is so deceitful
that I have much ado to know whether I ever was or am yet thine; I know Lord
how I have spent days, sometimes whole weeks together in prayer, and
meditation, and reading devotionary Books to prepare my self for the Communion,
and yet then I had gross failings, for there was a world of covetousness in
me, and thirsting after humane learning exceedingly, and little prizing the
knowledge of Christ in my Sermons, I did little aim at thy glory, but to preach
my self; Now in these things I find some healings, but my duties are fewer,
and now there is far more wanting in comparison of what I should be, then was
then, of what I am now; Nay Lord, thou only know I shall be a gainer, but
alas! If I now I am alone shall have no more fire of thy love then I had when I
lived in the midst of glowing coals of devotion, how can I but go out now since
I had much ado to burn then? When I think of serving thee then my heart is so
perverse as to put in a carnal motive, and says, If thou do so, then God
will bless thee in such or such a temporal blessing, and my heart closes
with that motive.

Meditat. XIX.
O my God, as thou art my Father, so let me know that thy love to me being
known by me, may put wheels to my obedience, that now goes so heavily, and that
it may make mine obedience more pure that now is so full of insufficiency: I am
fain to be glad almost of any motive to make me serve thee, but yet it is my
burden that fear should make me do that which love should make me do, for
besides that such obedience is painful, that which is worse it is impure also:
Alas, I am a stranger too much unto thee, and in being so, an enemy to my self;
Lord this is the first day I have given thee this long while, it does appear
that it is so by the poor and weak duties I perform; My poor soul is like a
poor desolate Widow that has lost her dear Husband, every one tramples on
her, and oppresses her.

Meditat. XX.
Lord, where are those sweet embraces and manifestations of thy love, that thou
have bestowed on me in former times? When I have gone unto the treasury of thy
mercies, and fetched any mercy from thence that I wanted: Thou have given unto
my prayers my dear Brother, who went forth a blasphemer, or at least a common
swearer, and came home, I seeking thee for him a convert, after thou gave me
his life and the life of my Mother, and indeed Lord, what was it but I had of
thee? thou did almost miraculously restore one of my Sisters to comfort: But
now when I cry and shout thou shuttest out my prayers, and art almost as if I
had never any acquaintance with thee: Lord, I know that the fault is mine own,
Indeed Lord I then was scarce ever from thee, or out of thy thoughts: For were
I but as I have been, so often kept days of humbling before thee; It could not
be that my duties should be such as they are, but Lord thou see the tears
these thoughts cause me to shed, they are thine, do thou increase them, but
take away this dullness and deadness of heart that is the just reason why I
shed them, and if thou shall once purify and inflame mine heart by faith and
love, I shall shed more tears for my wandering thoughts in prayer, then now I do
for all the abominations I am guilty of; Alas Lord, the ordinary days of thy
Saints are far more holy then the days I set apart for special service of
thee; And their thoughts in the midst of their worldly businesses, are more
devout and zealous then my thoughts in my prayers, were always with thee; I
scarce did any thing though almost of never so small moment, but the reason why
I did it this or that way, was because it was some way or other more for thy
glory: Lord, It is not thy fault, for thou do wait to show mercy, whether my
wretched heart will consent to it or no: This I do set down as an infallible
trurh, and let all the world give thee the glory of it, All thy ways are holy,
just, and good, and thou do stretch out thine arms to embrace us, it is our
fault that we do not run into thy bosom, the infidelity and other corruptions
that are in our bosoms make us think that thou art not willing to receive us,
and so we not coming we want that experimental knowledge of thee that would
(if we had it) make us not so timorous of comng to thee as we are.

Meditat. XXI.
Before I begin to write, I know I have more cause to write in blood or tears
then in ink; Can a Mother forget her child? It is not, Can a child forget the
Mother? nor is it Can a Mother her child if the child forget her? or Can
there be any case wherein the Mother can forget her child? Lord, do thoo
awaken mine heart for it is asleep; Lord, do thou raise mine heart for it is
dead; Do thou thaw mine heart for it is frozen; Lord, thou art that celestial
fire that enflames all thine Angels with love, I have no way but to come before
thy presence in hope that at the last I shall be thawed if not inflamed, thou will not put out the smoking snuff of a candle, I am such an one enlightened
and enflamed, though now I send forth nothing but an unsavory stanch; What,
shall I stand imperfect as I am thus speaking, what I may and what I have to
say to my God, Lord, thou have commanded in thy Word that if an adulterer
defile a woman, and she cry not out, then she shall be put to death; Lord,
infidelity, hypocrisy, and vainglory, are come to undo me, to defile my
soul, and they have almost persuaded my soul not to cry out: to be ravished is a
great affliction, but to embrace the adulterer is an abomination: If I cry to
men for succor, if I go to Ordinances, alas the adulterer is a strong man, he
has locked the doors of my soul, and none can break them open but thou only:
Lord, do not stand knocking at the door of my heart, for the strong man will
not, and I am kept so fast by my corruptions, I cannot come to let thee in;
Lord, break open the doors, and come in to help me before I am utterly undone,
as it was with the Levites Concubine, so will it be with my poor soul,
corruption and corruption, and sin after sin, will so abuse her, that she will
be at last dead: Alas! methinks I look upon my poor soul as one looks upon a
Ship tossed among rocks in the Seas, one sees it, and pities it, but knows not
how to help it; there comes a wave, and carries it with violence among the
midst of the rocks, and makes it reel and stagger like a drunken man, and then
all in the Ship are fain to pump and toil to save their lives, at last it is
dashed in pieces, and all fain to get upon broke pieces of the Ship to swim to
the shore, if it may be: my soul is even laboring for life; Lord, what will thou do, will thou be as a man astonished, and as a mighty man that cannot help?
then I am undone, then I may say if thou will not, then farewell all my duties,
farewell all my graces, and all my comforts which I have had in the dear
embraces of my God: Ah must I not pray but with my tongue? Must I have no more
comforts but what poor creatures can give me? Lord, if I must perish let me
perish in thy way, let me convert many unto thee; Though I know my damnation
shall be greater if I perish for living so contrary to mine own doctrine: Lord
I am a poor miserable man and a more miserable Christian, thou art I cannot
possibly imagine what, but I hope Lord I shall know; these days of ignorance
and sin will not always last, when my change comes I shall no more sin and
repent, and repent and sin, as I do now: Oh my corruptions I hope one day I
shall leave you all in the grave behind me; The day is coming, when while I am
praising God you shall not come and lie as a talent of lead upon my soul; and
hinder my flight, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Come while my soul is filled
with joy to think of thy coming; O my God, thou art enough for me, enough,
enough, my soul can hold no more; Lord I am afraid of the joys sometimes I have
to think of thee, tears for my sins are fitter for me then tears of joy, yet
I dare not refuse them, nay, I cannot if I would, they are so sweet, so sweet;
Heaven is but a greater measure of them; Lord, thou art enough enough for them
that love thee.

Meditat. XXII.
To see a dead man arraied with all the richest clothes, still there is more
horror to behold him then delight; So my poor Soul looks gashly in all the
duties I perform, I have a cold and dead soul for all them, and more terror
there is in the deadness then there is comfort in the multitude of them, this
I know by experience that one looks upon hell upon whatsoever one looks but
up-Christ, yet Christ is not sweet unto me, my dear Savior, to whom I was so
dear: Lord Jesus give me a heart that may feel thy sweetness, I am convinced
that thou art so, but my poor heart has not enough tasted the sweetness of
this Truth, that all things are dross and dung in comparison of Christ; Lord,
here is mine estate, mine health, mine life, my liberty, and all that I have,
and had I more I would freely give all, give but such a heart as I desire, and
the same will I consecrate unto thee in spiritual affections all my days, now
I think thus with my self, When I was most desirous of and addicted to humane
learning, it was wonderful delightful to me to be instructed in some new
truth, or to have some difficult question clearly resolved; To read the
Mathematics was wonderful delightful, because they prove such strange
things, then I have recourse to the Word of God, and by that I am assured that
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in Christ, and in his
Gospel, then further I have recourse to the experience of the people of God in
the Word of God, and in particular to Paul, who being a learned man, yet
accounted all things as dross and dung in comparison of Christ; I have also
recourse to the experience of several godly Persons I know, of the abundant
sweetness in Christ: I have recourse to that small experience I have had of
the sweetness and excellency of the knowledge of Christ, therefore Lord though
I have not at this present the powerful and ravishing feelings of Christ's
excellency, yet assuring my self all these ways whereby I fully do assent to
that truth, that It is life eternal to know thee and Jesus Christ; I do beseech
thee O Lord to give me a fuller knowledge of thee in Christ; I beseech thee, I
beseech thee Let not mine undervaluing of this knowledge cause thee to deny it,
I shall more value it if I had more of it: Lord, I know if thou should look
in me and my life, to see what thou can find to hinder the granting of this
Request, thou may find enough; nay, I that know my self not so well as thou
do, know enough and enough, nay, I know nothing to move thee in my self,
except something I have had from thee, those things I have so abused that I
know they may be swift witnesses against me: b^t Lord, if thou should give me
this knowledge of them, I might do great things for thee; Lord hear me: Alas
Lord my desires to know Christ do even die, while I am praying to know him;
Alas Lord such an heart as I have is fit for none but thee, for none in the
world can tell what to do with it but thou only; It is past the skill of all in
heaven and earth but thee, it is not in the power of Ordinances and duties if
thou should not set in.

I would pity the soul of my greatest Enemy if I should see it in such
continual storms and troubles as are in mine, there are new corruptions appear,
such as I may term them nothing so fitly as sparks of the fire of hell, to have
ones heart rise against God, when the continual desire of ones soul and prayer
is that one might be inflamed with the love of God; Lord, while I am working my
heart to a serious thought of thee, endeavoring to have mine heart full of
admiration of thee and affiance in thee, before I pray unto thee, that if it
may be my prayers may be as an arrow-drawn up to the head, but when I go about
to pray and send up my Petitions, my thoughts of thy glory and goodness slack,
and it fares with me oh my Soul as sometimes it does with one that is tying
knots, when one has pulled the first very hard, yet it slacks before one can
tie the second; If I kept but a strict communion with thee, and did as thou
desire (Lord why should thou desire) us always to be with thee, how
should we be acquainted with thee far more then we are, and if we knew thee
more how should we love thee more; and if we loved thee more how should we know
thee more? for thou revealest thy self to them that love thee; Alas O my Soul,
why should not we always be with God, since he gives us leave; how gracious
art thou to invite such sinners as we are to come to thee! For thee to wash our
souls clean with the immaculate blood of the Lord Jesus Christ; Alas Lord I am
mine own enemy, nay, I see it and know it, and it cannot be otherwise: Lord, I
am so tired out with my corruptions, that I am even weary of my life, and
almost weary of my duties; Lord even at this present, how when my soul was so
troubled that mine eyes were ready to weep, there comes a thought of a poor
worldly business into my soul, and my thoughts and sorrows for heavenly
matters are gone.

Meditat. XXIII.
O my God, how coldly without love, how doubtingly without faith do I call thee
my God! Lord how careless am I in thy service? how very careless? how long
Lord, holy and true, shall I be thus laden with corruptions? Nay, which is my
greatest misery, I am not but very little sensible of my own vileness, that
makes me that I do not hunger after righteousness. Blessed Lord, I do humbly
prostrate my soul before thee, and do with all the weak power of my soul
importune thee by all the merits of my dear Savior pray thee to look upon me
in mercy: When the poor wounded man that went from Jerusalem to Jeriche, lay
half dead, and speechless in the way, though he was not sensible of his own
misery, yet the good Samaritan was; though his tongue did not, could not call
for pity, yet his wounds opened their mouths wide and spoke aloud to the
Samaritan, Though his eyes shed no tears, yet his very heart wept blood at his
wounds, and moved compassion. Like to that poor wounded man am I, so weak, so
sick, that I am scarce sensible of mine own desperate condition; Lord, though
my heart be not full of love, it is full of wounds; Lord, thou know my
miseries, I humbly beseech thee to pity me, not according to my prayers but
according to my wants. Lord, that I do not desire to serve thee, that I do not
hunger nor thirst after righteousness, it is the greatest misery that I have.

Meditat. XXIV.
Oh how terrible is the thought of death to me, it is not so much for want of
faith as holiness, and indeed I find that I can never with comfort think on
death, but when I have lived very holily before, for what will faith in that
case help me, without holiness? for faith without holiness is not faith but
presumption: Oh how sweet! how dear! how excellent a thing is holiness? Oh how
full of peace and joy is my soul when I am full of that? and yet Lord how
careless am I of thy service? how many times in the day when I might think of
thee without any hindrance of my studies, do I choose rather to think of
vanity? O wean my soul O God from every thing that is not thee. Fill my heart
with thy self, dwell in me my dear God, Why do I call thee dear? When I prefer
every trifle before thee, O most glorious Lord God, whom ten thousand worlds
cannot sufficiently praise nor love, which art thy self, and can not be more,
nor can be less; how easy Lord is it for thee to change my heart, mine
heart of stone for an heart of flesh; Lord, as long as I have this heart of
stone, there is no hope that I should serve thee with any cheerfulness, or any
constancy, Lord, hear my prayer.

Meditat. XXV.
O blessed God, If the way of thy providence be such, that thou will not give
so much grace as to make me, through the abundance of it, almost whether I will
or no, to serve thee, yet to whom thou do give so much grace as to desire
more grace, O let not this desire which is of thy own infusing be in vain, if
there be any thing in the whole world that I desire more then thy grace, then
let me want grace to desire it any more; Lord, if the reason why thou deniest
my prayer be, because I do not desire as I ought, I humbly beseech thee to
grant that I may ask aright; alas my afflictions lie heavier on me then ever
they did, and I am more wicked or at least less holy then ever since my
conversion I was; how little am I affected with any thing that belongs to thy
service, nor yet does it affect me that I am not affected: Lord, if there were
any in heaven or in earth that could help me besides thee, then considering my
manifold sins, I should; I but Lord I would not, thy mercies are so great, go
to any other: Now Lord, now is the time to have mercy upon me; I am like the
man that went from Jerusalem to Jericho, wounded, naked, and half dead, I
cannot call for help, O let my wounds move thee to compassion; If I cold bewail
my sinful misery with tears of repentance, I know thou would deliver me, but
I cannot weep, nay hardly mourn; Oh faint, faint is my grief, and cold is my
love; What will thou do Lord with one that scarcely from his heart desires to
serve thee: alas, what can thou do for me more or less then to make me
desire to serve thee! Accept I must, or for ever be lost; What a low degree of
goodness am I come unto? a Soul full of sadness, and empty of goodness; To
morrow Lord I am to receive thee into my soul, thee my blessed Savior, Lord,
thou know I did not use to have a heart so empty of goodness, when I
expected thee to come next day.

Meditat. XXVI.
Lord, now I do resolve to serve thee, and in this particular especially; I
will not speak evil of any man what injury soever he both me; Now I will so
watch over my words that I will not offend with my tongue; and that by degrees
I may attain some perfection herein, I here vow every week between this and the
next communion to keep one day so strictly, that I will not, during that day,
speak so much as one idle word that day, if I do I will give to the poor Lord,
how excellent is thy service? so pure, so sweet; O that there were such a heart
in me that I might for ever serve thee.

Meditat. XXVII.
When I read the story of the Martyrs, I do wish that I had lived in those
days that I might also die as they did, or methinks I could now willingly lay
down my life rather then yield to the abominable Idolatry, and superstitions of
the Sea of Rome; but when I search and try my heart, I much fear that the
reason of this my desire is, because I think it easier to lay down my life for
Christ's sake, then for his sake to overcome my corruptions; for it being but
one act, though it has more pain, yet being but of small continuance, it is
less trouble, then all my life long to fight against sin; and thus I do ill
even in my best wishes, in diverse respects; for I chose Martyrdom, not because
thereby I might more honor God, but that I might the sooner and easier come to
heaven; And again, that I think I might content my self though I did not so
much hate corruption, If I died a Martyr all would be well; whereas Though I
give my body to be burnt, and have not charity, it would profit me nothing, and
to love God it is impossible for him that does not hate sin, and fight
against his corruptions; Alas O my soul, how weary are we of our spiritual
fight, and we would fain find some other way to heaven then by the continuance
of it; O that I were dead to the world and lived to God, how vain is the world?
yet while we know something better we shall not think so; We talk much of the
vanity of the world, but who believes that the world is vanity and vexation of
spirit? Or who is sensible of this truth? Or if he were sensible of it, and
sometimes affected with it, yet it soon vanishes, and we do not live
accordingly; How much easier is it to speak like an Angel then live like a
Saint!

Meditat. XXVIII.
Lord that thou would do it for me, take my soul and my body, what shall I do
with them any longer? I govern them so ill, and indeed am so unable to govern
them that they govern me; Lord, if thou shall condemn me at the last day, I do
now justify thee, and testify to all the world that thou art just, though
then (if such a time shall come) I shall blaspheme thee; My dear God, I have
yet a spark of thy love, I will not leave that small hold of thee for ten
thousand worlds; I know Lord there is no dallying with thee: What if I spoke
with the tongue, and writ with the pen of men and Angels? it is nothing; Lord
take a poor soul at his word, Lord I am thine, and do now give my self and ten
thousand worlds if I had them to thee; yet when thou do take from me some
poor part of my estate, I murmr; Alas, I have a poor weak heart.

Meditat. XXIX.
Lord my knowledge of thee is but small, and that which is is but little
spiritual or experimental; To know thee by what others write and say of thee,
is sweet to them that can set their seal to it from their own experience; Lord
what is it that has kept me so long from thee, or kept thee so long from me? I
know I have been wanting to thee and to my self; Lord take my heart, I have too
much love for any besides thee; though I have too little for thee: Oh how sweet
are the thoughts of thee, and would be sweeter, if I thought oftener, and
longer, and more attentively of thee: Alas, I am almost grown out of
acquaintance with thee; I do not perceive my corruptions in any thing more then
in this, that though to think of thee be a thing so easy and so profitable,
yet I think so seldom: My dear God, deliver me from the business of the
world; Suits of Law and such things they undo me, they take up my thoughts
that I cannot be rid of them; I feel upon me the curse which thou threatnest
upon the people of Israel, If they would not serve thee with joy, they should
serve strangers with a great deal of hardship: I was well while I was with
thee, then I had my Songs in the night, now my days are turned into the shadow
of death: Lord, draw me, draw me, make the cords of thy love stronger, or
rather then I should perish make the cords of thine afflictions stronger, and
if I murmr scourge me while I leave murmuring; How true do I find that
saying, He that injures forgives not; My wickedness I have committed against
thee makes me not able to believe almost that thou art or can be reconciled
unto me: When I should do more for thee and less against thee, I shall
easilier believe thy loves, or rather when thy spirit shall shed abroad thy
love in my heart; I shall know thou love me, I sigh and mourn, and weep over
my poor soul, but cannot help it: Dear Lord, Let my tears prevail with thee;
Pity, Pity, have Pity upon a poor languishing soul that is even gasping out its
last breath; It grieves me to see what a sad condition I am in, I am not yet in
hell, and by thy mercy I may never come thither, but I am running headlong
thither; Woe is me that I am constrained to live in Mesech, and to have my
habitation in the Tents of Kedar.

Meditat. XXX.
Lord, I pray for mercies, and when I have them, to see the unsuitablenesse of
my spirit to them, and mine unthankfulness for them, brings more sadness upon
me then to want them; All the things I begged of thee for temporal mercies,
both in carrying me forth and bringing me home, and concerning my business I
went about, not finding things in such a sad condition at home, yet my heart is
the same still, as hard, and as stony, not willing to yield it self and all up
to thee, as if I were more able to order matters then thou. Now my heart is
subject to murmr that it is so hard when it should mourn: Lord, thou have
done enough to justify thy love and thy tender compassions to me, if thou
should never do more, and not only thy justice could not be blamed, but not
thy mercy: My dear God, let me not die in thine arms of love, except I must
die, and then let me die in thine arms.

Meditat. XXXI.
Accept of my poor prayers, and when at the last day, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be known, the hypocrisy and coldness of my desires shall be
known, and thy goodness shall be admired in hearing such prayers as mine are:
For the light of thy countenance to shine upon, and the breathings of thy
Spirit to blow upon a garden of Spices, is not so much for the advancement of
thy free grace, as for thee to shine upon, and thy Spirit to breathe upon such
a dunghill as I am, that sends forth such noisome savours as I do: Lord, if
thou will be my God I have a body and a soul, I will give thee them; It Is true,
they are thine already, but alas, if I had any thing to give that were not
thine, I would; but I have not.

Meditat. XXXII.
Lord, I wait to see the day of my salvation, and the hour when thou will show
me thy loves, and when I shall lie in thy bosom and arms, and hear the
beatings of thy heart in love, and the soundings of thy bowels toward me, and
know thine everlasting thoughts of love to me, when thou shall seal the pardon
of my sins to me, and make me read the counterpain of the Covenant of love
between thee and me, which thou reservest in heaven, and is fair and not
blotted as mine is, and when shall the day of the love and joys of my espousals
return, and my thoughts be swallowed up in love; Lord, why should thou
withhold thy love, the manifestations of thy love: Can thy love love to be
concealed from thy Beloved? I will wait for the discoveries of thy love, I am
loath to do any thing before thou come whom my soul loves, for fear thou
should come when I am not looking for thee, and thou escapest me. I look
every prayer to see thee come leaping on the mountains and skipping upon the
hills as a Row or an Hind; But I see thee not, why do thou put a spark of
love into my heart; If thou will leave me, why did thou cast thy mantle upon
me, and when I follow after thee, say, what have thou done? thy loves are
better then wine, sweeter then honey, even more to be desired then life it
self; Lord, if the small sparks and relishes of thy love be so sweet to me,
what will the feeding on this heavenly manna be? If a drop of thy love be so
sweet, what will the overflowings be? If thy smiles bring so much joy, what
will thy embraces do? Lord, I long till I am undone with thy love; All my
carnal and worldly joys undone. Lord, it is not my unworthiness that should
hinder me, nor will hinder thee from bestowing; Lord help my unbelief; Well
Lord, if I must walk in darkness and see no light, yet give me thy grace that
I may stay my self upon thee my God; my life is but short, and when the hour of
my departure shall come, then I shall enjoy him whom my soul loves, and know
as I am known; then I shall forget the sorrows, pains, and throws of my
travel, for the joy that shall be revealed. My Bride says come, and the
Spirit says Come, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly.

Meditat. XXXIII.
I wait for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, if thy love be as fire in
straw, or such like matter, lie smoking, and makes ones eyes weep while one
strives to find the fire; At last it being able to hold no longer breaks forth
into a great flame; and the longer it is before it discovers it self, the
greater is the flame and light, when they do break forth: Lord, whilst I am
looking for thy love, thou make me weary, let the length of thy stay be made
up by the fullness of thy presence, and greatness of thy manifestations when
thou come; I seek thee in my prayers, and I say, O where art thou whom my
soul loves, and yet thou sendest me away weeping and mourning: I seek on my
bed, when I awake in the night, but I find thee not; I speak with those which
have found thee, and they tell me, nay, I know it by thy Word, that thou art
near to every soul that seeks thee; and when a poor soul cries thou will answer
it, then I multiply my prayers, and call louder, and yet my prayers are as the
wind that passes away, and returns no more; O my Lord and my God, thy love
was strong enough to make thee suffer, and thou did die that thou might
make known and commend thy love unto the Sons of men, and now thou have done
all this to manifest thy love, and will thou hide it from me? Creature-love
has wrought strange things in me, I have never been weary of their discourses
and humane learning, how has it made me ravished with some learned saying! and
if thou would discover thy love, and shed that abroad in my heart, certainly
it would work wonders! For the Creatures flames of love are but as a blaze that
straw makes, but is soon out, it has not substance enough to nourish and
maintain what it begets; For Creature-Excellencies are not strong enough to
keep up the delight we take in them, but thou Lord art love, and thou art such
a treasure of excellencies that the poor soul makes new discoveries of those
treasures every day. To all Eternity thou art enough to keep alive and in full
strength all the love, and joys, and praises of Saints and Angels. Lord, thou
art enough to answer thine own love, but what am I that I should speak of thee?
thou art so glorious that I am afraid to speak of thee!

Meditat. XXXIV.
Lord I call, and thou do not answer, I am even tired out if thou do not
support, I sink under the burden, I long and look to see thy beauty, but I
cannot behold nor perceive one glimpse: that thou art excellent, I see by the
eye of faith, but thine excellencies do not affect me: All my prayers are
turned into this, Lord show me Christ, and show me him whom my soul loves, for
I have heard of him, and the fame of his excellencies have come unto me, yet
mine eyes have not seen him; I think with my self, Surely Christ manifesting
himself, and to be filled with all the fullness of God, and to have a
conversation in heaven, must needs signify more then ever I have experienced
in my self; For such poor things as I have found wrought in my soul cannot fill
up those expressions. Then I hear of those whose lives are spiritual and
Christ-like, not glorious in outward mortifications; Thou art blameless that
way speaking of such things which God has wrought for them and in them, which
I have not found, but are the very same things which are in my view, and I
follow after to attain but cannot: Then from their relation of the Lords
dealings with them, I perceive that God did humble them more before he did
discover himself unto them then ever he has as yet humbled me, so that I find
no rest day nor night in my spirit, and yet though I am thus restless in
seeking after something which I cannot know what it is I seek for, I cannot
discern any true, sincere, constant love to Christ. He neither lets me know
that he loves me, nor that I love him, so that I stand amazed, and know not
what to do, and still by the help of God I will not cease to cry and call upon
him for whom my soul I doubt not but would love, if he discover his beauties
and love unto me, and work them on my heart: I seek for one, who I cannot tell
who he is before I find him, then I shall know and shall tell to all who he
is, and set forth his excellencies, though they shall as little understand me as
I do them who declare the things that God has wrought for them:

Meditat. XXXV.
There is not such an one in the world as I am that I know, Publicans and
harlots, I justify them; I, in the midst of means, of Ordinances and mercies,
in the midst of the flames of love, nay, when thou laiedst on me that
affliction that is now fresh bleeding in mine eyes, or rather despised and
forgotten, I should have learnt obedience by things I suffered, and I have done
as if I were to learn to sin by them; Thou have chastised me with rods, and I
have put the sting of sin into them, and have made them scorpions; Thou
sendest them for Antidotes, and I have turned them into poison; Lord, teach me
what it is wherein thou art so offended, to leave me thus: Lord, I believe thou
have pardoned me, but small is my comfort, when thou pardonest sin, but
subduest it not.

Meditat. XXXVI.
Lord, I do so evidently find my self unable to judge of truths, or to resist
temptations, that I almost, nay altogether lie at the mercy of every
temptation, and to be carried about with the wind of every vain doctrine, if
thou do not stand by me, what should I tell thee the secret puddle of my
heart? I am weary of the stench and filthiness of it; there is not a prayer
but they meet me at it, and lie as a talent of lead upon me; If mine heart were
all on fire with thy love, these things could not be: I sometimes have thoughts
rising in my heart that are wicked, proud, and foolish thoughts; I begin to be
offended, that I begging for the manifestations of thy love, yet have them not;
but those thoughts no sooner begin to arise, but I consider What am I that thou
should give me thy loves, and how can I expect the manifestations of thy
love, when I will not give thee my loves, but let them run waste upon the
creature? How many times do I choose to do any thing rather then spend my time
in Meditation and Prayer, nay to do nothing and be idle; For although thou
love us first, yet thou do not usually discover thy thoughts of love to a
soul, before she has made over her love and her felf unto thee; then I think
thou can by the power of thy Spirit bring in my heart, my soul, and my love,
and that usually ere thou do ravish the soul with the discoveries of thy
love: this I know, and let all the world know it, that whatsoever wicked
thoughts arise in my weak heart, which I cannot answer, I know that all thy
ways are holy, just, and good; Lord, what shall I give for the sheddings
abroad of love in my heart? that which should be given for it, were it at the
utmost parts of the world, I could fetch it thence, But Lord, the price of it
is already paid, it is near unto thee, even at thy right hand, O thou most High,
he has paid for this mercy by his blood long ago; and my prayers thou
requirest, not as a price: Lord, fill me with these spiritual supplications,
that I may give thee no rest, nor take any rest my self until I have found him
whom my soul loves; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Meditat. XXXVII.
O Lord beat me and drive me with storms and tempests, I am come unto thee like
the Prodigal Son, for all but that which most of all I should have, a
spiritual sorrow, ragged, and tattered, and undone; My sins and misery are like
his, not my sorrow; For me to see my self languishing, my graces daily grow
weaker, my love colder, and even almost to be speechless in prayer; Alas, the
sorrow that I have is rather bewailing my misery then my sin; I know not what
it is Lord but thou do; Sure I am my condition is sad and I am sad, and my
sadness is all the poor remains of comfort that I have; and yet I no sooner
begin to take any comfort in my grief, but I perceive so much hypocrisy in my
grief that the poor spark of comfort that I have is put out; Alas, tears of
blood were fitter for me then dry eyes; O Lord, must every trifle steal away my
heart from thee; Thine excellencies are too high for me, Wisdom is too high
for fools, O that thou would take me out of mine own hands, and deliver me
from my self, and howsoever my heart is not importunate enough now; I shall
thank and praise thee to all Eternity if thou will make me thine; Thou have
done as much to draw me with the cords of love, even to wonder: Lord, do thou
snatch me as a firebrand out of the fire, if thou should stay till I am
willing without thy making me so, I am lost: For I shall never part with these
painted vanities, for all the glory in heaven, except thou give me the eye of
faith to see it, and a spiritual palate to relish it.

Meditat. XXXVIII.
O Lord, will thou let a poor sinner lie gasping out his last breath at thy
feet, and die in thine arms, I have abundance of love for the world, O that
thou had it all: I am sure I am not, nor shall never be at quiet, until thou
have it, nor would I sleep until I am in thine arms of love; My dearest God,
how comes it to pass that my heart cannot give it self to whom it will? Had I
a thousand worlds I would give all for thee, that I might be thine; O my soul,
why should we stand consulting and contriving what to do? God is ten thousand
times more then all things; Why should we weight a Talent of Lead and a Feather
together to see which is heaviest: O Lord, my soul has chosen thee long ago, I
have abundance of experience of the truths of those things which I have
believed: I am thine, and thou art my God; Thou have chosen me, and I have
chosen thee; If I should be so vain at any time as to leave thee, thou art the
same, and thy choice fails not; Thou Lord which madst me chose thee, whilst I
had no experience of thy love, wilt make me continue my choice. Lord, that any
one should choose hell before thee; It makes thee not to be less glorious;
Lord, must my blasphemies praise thee; I find so much hell in my heart, that
it is not troubled in any proportionable measure that there is so much hell in
it; When I set apart an hour for Meditation and prayer, then I keep my heart
somewhat close; but at other times, I am little careful to improve what I read
or heart to inflame my heart; I had better not set an hour apart, and give thee
all the day by thinking always of thee; Lord, I do now acknowledge, for then I
shall not, but if thou should leave me, I should be too much given to
blaspheme thee; Nay blessed God, let that never be, Lord, it shall never be;
When I consider the desperate hypocrisy of my heart, I may every morning
expect that thou should give me up to a reprobate sense, to commit sin with
greediness; When I think of these things, I pour out my soul within me: to
think with my self, I shall lose my estate, a little troubles me, to think I
shall lose such a friend, it affects me more, but to think I shall lose my God
and become an Apostate, that is a hell unto me; I have begged of thee as for my
life that thou would not leave me, and now I beg, O forsake me not utterly;
To have such a heart that will neither inflame my words nor be inflamed by
them, is that which has not been so; Lord, except thou will follow one, that
will not stay when thou call, and overtake one that runs from thee when thou
followest I am, lost: Well though I am sure my froward and careless carriage
will justify thy justice if thou condemn me, and magnify thy mercy if thou
savest me.

Meditat. XXXIX.
Lord, this day is thine own, and by being thine is more mine; I must now burn
without coals about me; The time has been when if I had been cold and dull;
the Society, expressions, and examples of others in days set apart to thee,
would have enflamed me; Now the company I have is water and snow; Woe is me
that I am constrained to have mine habitation in the Tents of Kedar, and yet
Lord thou art never wanting; Thou sendest forth thy beams of light and heat, if
I bring not clouds over mine own head; I may have enough light from thee; Lord,
when will these days of sin be ended, and the time of refreshing from the
presence of the Lord come? I come into thy presence, but when I am come, I am
silent and deaf, neither able to speak to thee, nor hear the sweet whisperings
of thy Spirit; O that I had a heart to give my self unto thee, or that thou
would take these poor longings of my soul for a gift, and thereupon take
possession of my soul; My days of leaping for joy to think of thee are gone,
and now my days of sorrow to see mine own vileness are come; My tears are now
my meat and drink, O that I had more of them so they were more spiritual; I am
a poor creature but thou art the rich God; My poor heart why do thou not
speak? art thou silent? what say thou? Is not God a good God? what relish or
sweetness is there in these words, if thou do not set to thy seal; Lord, to
thy glory though not to my comfort be it spoken, Thou have been a good God to
me, but I have no comfort from this truth, if I never relish it; yet if mine
heart will be so wicked as not to acknowledge it, yet my hand shall write that
which shall witness for my God against my self; Thou art good, patient, and
merciful unto me, enough to make earth and heaven to wonder at thy goodness,
and my vileness: ah my God, my God, must my words go beyond my thoughts of
love to thee? Lord, thou art enough for heaven, enough for thy self, and art
thou not enough for me? Try O my Soul, try, thou will never trust before thou
know this by experience, thou know abundantly that the creature has told
thee It is not in me, this thou know by experience, and by faith thou
know it is in God; Well then, lay all thy weight and strength upon him and
none upon the creature; Hold upon him with both hands, or else thou will
attribute the greatest failing unto God; For as he that stands upon never so
strong a place, if he lean against a rotten wall he shall fall, and one that is
asleep, when he falls will not know whether failed him, and so if we do but
leave to our own wisdom, we shall happily think that God fails; Lord, I wait, I
long for thine appearance; Thou art enough Lord, I know not what to say, I am
undone without thee; Lord, I hear the poor fly, oh how it flies up and down;
Now it is warmed and revived with the warmth of the Sun; yesterday it lay
still as dead; surely Lord, if thou will shine upon my soul, I should be active
and cheerful in thy service; No marvel heaven is so full of thy praises, when
thou communicatest thy self so fully to them; the crumbs that fall from thy
Table are too much for me, these temporal blessings are more then I can
challenge, yet Lord I cannot be content with them, give me thy self, and it
suffices, for all is nothing and snares without thee.

Meditat. XL.
Alas my God, pride and despair divide my life when I find any thing I do in
some manner as I should, I begin to be puffed up, and think, that I do more then
some others of Gods people, and when I look upon my failings, these thoughts
begin to arise. It is in vain, I shall never overcome such corruptions, my sins
do me more harm by discouraging me then in the commission.

Meditat. XLI.
Lord, There is no peace until thou have all our love; while our heart is
divided between the world and thee, we can have no quiet, natural Conscience
draws one way, and natural corruptions another way; It is our ignorance that
makes us think that there is not enough in thee to satisfy all our desires,
and to supply our want, which makes us join the creature with thee; When Lord,
when shall all my thoughts be of thee? I am weary of being thus divided; Lord,
if I can dispose of my self, I give my self wholly to thee; O refuse not that
gift which thou have so often desired, thou have said, give me thy hearr, Lord
mine heart longs whilst thou have it; If thou say that I do not give my self
freely and wholly enough, alas, nor never shall until thou take my heart, and
discoverest the secrets of thy love unto me, when thou do that I shall run
after thee; Lord, here is my poor soul, it lies at thy seet, grovelling and
gasping for life; the creature has left me, and I have left the creature, and
would not that it should have any more of my love, but it still wooes me, and
follows me for my love, unless thou overcomest these strong corruptions, I
shall never be at quiet.

Meditat. XLII.
Sometimes my heart begins to be filled with joy, so that I am ready to cry out,
Thou art mine exceeding joy, and then I consider what I shall do, for I am
afraid that my joy is false; When I consider how I came by it, whether my
prayers have been more fervent and frequent of late, or my repentance more
profound, in the midst of this consideration, I can hardly say but think with
my self, Why should I delay or refrain my enjoyment of God? and am ready to say
within my self, The false joys in God are better then the true joys of the
world; these joys are too sweet to let go; Lord Jesus when thou kissest me with
the kisses of thy mouth; I will kiss the Son lest he be angry; Lord, thou
art too good for me, if I may say so, how could I ever expect that thou
should come near me more? The poor love I have makes me say a thousand
worlds and a thousand heavens for my God; the small beams of the light of thy
countenance are so sweet; Lord, if thou would but continue the joys thou
sometimes affordest, I had enough, I need not the comforrs of the world to make
it up, nor fear that the afflictions of the world though one need continual
supplies of comforts to support one, yet they could not spend them.

Meditat. XLIII.
I will go to God, says David, he is mine exceeding joy, a sweet saying, O
that there were such a heart in me, yet I have an unenflamed heart, a frozen
heart, if I leave all things and my self, I should find thee, but these poor
joys of the world quench the joys of the Spirit, I shut out the glorious beams
of thy heat and light, and light up the candles of the creatures, which have
neither heat nor light in comparison of thine; When I go about to rejoice in
thee, my sins come and tell me that they must be mourned for first; Any thing,
Lord, any thing, so I may do what is pleasing in thy sight; I am willing to
stay for my joys while thou art pleased to give them; Only I beseech and desire
these three things of thee. 1. That I may not want grace though I want joys. 2.
That I may not go about to make up the want of thy joys with carnal joys, let
me not kindle a fire, and walk and rejoice in the light and sparks of what I
have kindled, etc. 3. That though thou have kindled joy, yet that I may have
sorrows that are spiritual: Lord, how abundantly good art thou to them that
love thee! I lie under the weight of thy love and thy joy; When I come hungry
and thirsty to thee, to be satisfied with thy joy to the utmost; I ie now as a
Ship upon the shore, while the Tide of thy joys come and lift me up, and carry
me into the Ocean of thy goodness; When Mary Magdalene stood weeping at the
Sepulcher, thou did call her by her name, and she forgot all her sorrows, she
left her tears, the Sepulcher, and the Angel, and cried out Rabboni, My heart
makes me believe that I would give the whole world to see Jesus Christ, for I
think if I could see him I should lie down at his feet, and beg his grace, and
he would not deny me; This is part of my weakness and want of faith, for he
hears my prayers as fully, and is as willing to grant them now he is in heaven,
as if he were on earth; Lord Jesus thou that never did deny any poor soul
that came to thee for grace and pardon, thou never sendest them empty away, but
grantest their request, Have mercy upon me O Lord, my need and wants are as
many and as great as any of them all; and if my sense of my misery be not so
great, my misery is so much the greater.

Meditat. XLIV.
Lord I perceive that spiritual sorrows and spiritual joys are wholly thy work,
for my sins are as many, as great, and of as deep a dye as any in the world
that is not the sin against the holy Ghost, and I am fully and sensibly
convinced of it that they are so, and yet I am as senseless as if my condition
were quite hopeless; for were it not so, could I possibly be so seared as I
am? Thou have said, I will take away the stony heart, Lord, if thou will work,
who or what can hinder? My corruptions and my sins have and do harden my heart
by having and committing them, Nor will they soften it by considering them;
What hinders thee from taking away the infidelity and stoninesse of my heart?
If that hardness and infidelity does, why that is the thing to be cured: If I
were not sick I need not a Physician: Lord, I say not this to justify my self,
for it is thou of thy free grace that must justify me, for I am lost: And so
for joys and comforts, though I read and hear of the comforts that thou
pourest out on others, I am not moved, nay, those very Stories and sayings
which have formerly inflamed me, now are as sparks falling into the Sea, warms
not at all: alas, when I shall meet thee at the last day, thy mercies they
shall testify against me, when they shall witness my slieghtings of them, my
fruitlesnesse under them and unthankfulness for them; What can I say, Alas, my
poor soul, we are undone, but that day is not come yet, one hour more, the Lord
it may be will give me, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, Come into my poor soul,
for I am afraid to meet thee at the Tribunal of thy judgment: If thou were on
the earth methinks I could go with confidence to thee that thou would hear
me, but now thou art in heaven I cannot; Blessed are they who have not seen and
yet believe: Lord, I have received double for all my sins, in respect of any
profit or pleasure I have had by them: I have had full measure, pressed down, and
running over, but alas, my vexation of spirit is more gall then all the
pleasure that I have had that have been worldly, the loss and want of the
discoveries of thy love cannot be recompensed with all that the world has, thy
loves are better then wine, indeed in respect of the offense to thee, every
prayer deserves hell.

Meditat. XLV.
Lord, I am as afraid of comforts as of terrors, for when I have comforts I am
subject to pride my self in them, and in stead of having sweet thoughts of
thee, have high thoughts of my self; Afflictions breed sorrow, and comforts
pride; Sorrow is better then pride, My preaching is my temptation, and my
accuser; If I preach not the strictest ways of God, my negligence condemns me,
and if I do my Sermons condemn me; For my life is hell, I am afraid of
publishing something I have by the help of thy Spirit written, lest my life
should do more harm by scandal, then the writings should do good by directing
to holiness, and yet sometimes I think that if I publish and own such writings
they would be a strong engagement to live more holily; But I have something
against that also, for that Motive would in short time lose its strength; Such
waxen wings would melt and let me fall to my former ways, and that holiness
which is born up with such carnal motives is a poor thing; Lord, how am I
distracted and torn in pieces with these thoughts; Nay Lord, if thou will have
me go with these burdens on my soul, do whatever seems good in thine eyes; If
I may but drudge in thy house, though I lie among the pots, yet to be a
skullion in thy house is better then to sit at the Table of Princes; Lord, I am
undone except thou work a miracle of mercy, yet if I am undone, it may before
thou give me over and discoverest me to the world, thou will let me do
something more that may glorify thee, and edify the people, nay, it may be
thou may suffer me as long as I live to do much of which thou may have
glory; Lord, if my heart be not upright, yet O that my actions and my
Preachings may be such, that men seeing and hearing them may be stirred up to
glorify thee, by doing those things sincerely, which I it may be do out of
hypocrisy, I am sure too much hypocrisy; Lord, I have begged for such a heart
as may not deceive me, nor dishonor thee, O my God, What shall I do? Nay Lord,
what will thou do? I am undone unless thou do work mightily above all I can
speak or think, according to that mighty power wherewith thou did raise the
Lord from the dead; O that I might be so raised that I might return no more to
corruption.

Meditat. XLVI.
By this I know and am sensible, It is not for any man to live by his own
strength, by my knowing how impossible it is for a sick man to recover without
thee: If a living man cannot speak, how can a condemned man live without thee?
If living bones cannot move, how can dry bones live? Lord, thou meetest me not
at duties, thou speak not to me there, thou speak to me in mercies, and I
answer not; in judgments, and I carry my self as a sleepy man that is
unwilling to be awaked; What will thou do with me Lord, when I will neither
speak to thee nor answer thee when thou speak! O the weakness of my graces,
and the power of thy mercies; Those sins I have had a mind to commit, thou
have taken from me the opportunity to commit; It is a comfort to me that I had
not opportunity, but it would be a greater comfort not to have a mind.

An Instance according to the Rules given for meditating on the Scripture.
A Meditation on these words.
ISA. 66.2. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word.


1. LET us seriously consider O my Soul, That if an Angel, or God himself from
Heaven had spoken these words in our hearing, as once Christ did to Paul, when
he was going to Damascus, surely I think they would have very much affected us:
Is the Word of God less his Word because it is written? I read that the
Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18, 19. speaking of a voice that he himself heard from
Heaven, says, that he had a more sure word of Prophecy, that is, as I
conceive, that he was no less sure that the words of the Prophets were the
very words of God, then those that he heard with his ears; Then let us not be
less affected with these words then if we our selves had heard God himself
speak them.

2. Nor let us think that they less concern us, then if we had earnestly
begged of God to tell us what he would have us to be and do; and as an Answer
of our prayers we had heard him speak to us from heaven in particular, To this
man will I look that is of a poor and contrite spirit, and trembles at my
Word: For doubtless God has not caused his Word to be written in vain, at a
venture, for whomsoever should read it, but knew not who they were should
read it, but he knew every particular person, to whose hand his Word should
come, and knew his Word should come to my hands, and I should read these very
words, and therefore caused them to be written in particular for my sake,
though not exclusively. Christ died for all his people, yet Paul says, that he
loved me and gave himself for me, and Christ did think particularly of Paul,
and so of every one else for whom he died and gave himself up as a Sacrifice
and ransom, particularly thinking on and intending every one that should be
saved by his death: If a Minister should go to one that is given to Swearing,
and tell him of the heinousness of that sin, and lay it home to his conscience
in private, it generally does affect him more then to hear the same sin
reproved in public, yet he should as particularly apply it then, though he had
not in this respect so much reason to apply it, as I have to apply these words
to mine own soul; For the Minister does not nor can actually and particularly
intend every one that is guilty of the sins he reproves (for he knows not
every particular person that is guilty of the sin he reproves) as God does
every one that reads his word; Therefore let us take this and apply it to our
selves, as if God had sent these words written with his own hand to me in
particular: When it is said that the Scripture is written for our learning,
etc. Romans 15.4. I conceive the meaning is not only by way of sufficiency, but
by way of intention, efficacy, and decree, in respect of his people, that is,
not only that there is a sufficient matter in Scripture to instruct us, but
that God did intend and decree that this place of Scripture should instruct
every particular one of his people that is instructed by it.

3. And indeed what is the reason that I now read these words, and do now
intend to meditate on them? Is it not, or certainly it ought to be, that I
should try whether I am such, and whether I have such an heart and spirit as
these words signify, and if I am not so much as I ought to be, that I should
humble my self, and be as truly sensible and as much affected, and much more,
then I am with those bodily infirmities that lies upon me; and if so be there
were a receipt given me, which I had a long time sought for, and endeavored to
get, being assured that if I had it, it would cure me; Surely I should not only
read it, because I might be able to tell others what would cure such a
disease, or to enable my self to discourse of that matter, but I should read it
with abundance of joy, and unquestionable resolution to take it: Alas Lord, why
do I not read thy Word so also, where the unquestionable remedies of all
spiritual diseases are set down? Surely it is my seaselesnesse of the
mischiefs of these spiritual distempers that makes me so little affected with
grief for them, and with joy that I have found out the remedies for them.

4. Blessed God, it is no more in my power to know thee by the strength of mine
own abilities, if thou do not menifest thy self and thy truths unto me, then
it is for me to see the Sun without the Sun, therefore Lord do thou take
off the Veil that is upon my heart and understanding, and that which is upon
thy Truths. I read in thy word that my blessed Savior did rejoice in spirit,
and give thee thanks, because thou did hide thy Truths from those that were
wise and prudent, and reveal them unto babes; O that I were of the number of
those babes to whom thou would reveal thy Truths: Lord, give me a powerful,
spiritual, experimental knowledge of the Truths that are included in these
words.

5. And holy and blessed Father, If thou will be pleased to let me know thy
mind in thy Word, though thy commands should be never so cross to my
corruptions, (my base corruptions, which have hindered me from a world of joys,
grace, and communion with thee, which if it had not been for them I might had
long ago) I will do it by the power of thy might; Lordforbid that I should be
so wicked as to enquire of thee the Lord (which I do or should do as often as I
read the Scripture;) as we read the Jews did desire the Prophet Jeremiah to
enquire of thee for them, though they were resolved beforehand what to do; Yet
they said, they would do whatever thou should command, whether it were good
or evil: Oh that I had at least a heart to resolve to serve thee; If I must
want, let me want riches, health, liberty, rather then grace; Rather let me
want strength then want a will to serve thee; I had as good sin unwillingly
as to do what thou command unwillingly; Lord, give me truth in the inward
parts.

6. Those things that lie plain in these words is, that those that are of a
poor and contrite spirit, that tremble at the Word of God, are highly esteemed
of him; So that poverty of spirit, and contrition of spirit, and trembling at
the Word of God, are the three things that are here so highly commended and
prized by God.

7. But now let us seriously consider whether we are thus qualified: Am I poor
in spirit? Those that are so have low thoughts of themselves, and are not
troubled that others have low thoughts of them too; They like reproofs better
then praises; They do not murmr under afflictions, but rather wonder they are
no more afflicted; Is it thus with us?

8. Lord, If there be any thing of poverty of spirit in me, if I take reproofs
well, or afflictions in any measure patiently, certain it is, it is not at all
from my self: I was born with as proud a heart as any, and certain I am that I
did not change mine own heart; Thou take away the stony heart we do not give
thee it.

9. But alas Lord, I am far from being poor in spirit in any measure according
to that which thou in thy Word requirest. My passion and the boylings of my
heart, my loving to be called Rabbi, and to be esteemed by others, and many
other distempers and corruptions of that nature, which I have daily to struggle
withal, evidently prove the pride of my heart, nay, and the afflictions that
thou laiest upon me plainly show what the corruption is that thou intendest
especially to cure, by the Medicine ofttimes one may know what the disease is;
and Lord it is in vain (if there were no other end in it then to manifest my
distempers to thee) for me to confess the secret pride of mine heart, the
strange windings, turnings, depths, and strange and new Monsters of pride and
hypocrisy; that I might daily discover in my self; Alas Lord thou know
these altogether, and since thou do so what cause have I to wonder that thou
should shine upon such a dunghill as I am! But Lord, thou that only can
cure me of this pride and hypocrisy of heart, for my prayers cannot, nay,
though I consider and am convinced of the desperate wickedness of mine own
heart, the vileness of my nature, the abominations of my life, yet these
cannot work without thee, as a Plaster though it be never so excellent, laid
on the wounds of a dead man, it draws not, it heals not, so are all
considerations and convictions to a dead heart.

2. But alas, what is there in me whereof I should in any measure pride my
self? For others to have good thoughts of me is no very strange thing, for so
they had of the Scribes and Pharisees; but for one that knows the baseness of
his own heart, the carnal grounds, manner, and ends of his actions, and a
thousand other distempers and corruptions, for such an one to have high
thoughts of himself is, one would think, impossible, But that as to God nothing
is impossible, that argues power; so to such a heart as every one has by
nature nothing is impossible, that argues sin; and we have more cause to
wonder that we have not committed the sin against the holy Ghost, then that
we have done the evils that we have; For certainly had God but given us up to
the strength of our own corruptions, and to Satan's subtlety and malice to
improve them, we had committed that sin long ago, and alas, what good does
the high esteem of others do us? Are we ever a whit the more holy because they
think us so? Nay, has it not proved a means to make us more sinful? God has
abundantly declared his wrath against this sin, by that vengeance which he has
poured out upon Satan for being guilty of it: How many severe threatenings are
there in the Word of God against pride, and how many precious promises to those
that are humble; The Lord beholds the proud afar off, but to this man will he
look that is of a poor and contrite spirit, and trembles at his Word.

3. What are the things that cause thee to pride thy self? Are they thy gifts
either of edification or sanctification? Consider that 1. They are very mean,
scarce any of thy calling has weaker gifts of edification, and no Saint under
heaven has weaket gifts of sanctification. 2. Suppose thy gifts were great, O
what a heavy account must there be for mispending such talents? What way can
thou worse mispend them then by priding thy self in them? Do men praise thee?
Alas thou may go to hell with their praises, for so did the Scribes and
Pharisees: Do all men speak well of thee? and do thou pride thy self and
rejoice in that? Fear and tremble at what our Savior says, Woe unto you when
all men speak well of you, for so did their Fathers of the false Prophets. 3.
Consider how unkindely thou dealest with God, thou do as a woman that should
deck her self with the jewels that her husband had given her, nay, that she
should give away these Jewels to those with whom she played the harlot, the
more to entice them, Is not this the act of an imperious whorish woman? as God
himself does phrase it, Ezekiel. 16.30. and do but read that Chapter, and you
shall see whether you have not abused all the blessings of God more then they
did; They spent them in honor to and in worshipping of Idols, and can one make
a baser Idol in the world to fall down and worship it then ones self?

4. Let us consider what are the remedies of this sin. 1. Consider how much
hell there is in thy heart, What a base and vile wretched nature thou have;
Consider what the Scripture speaks of men in their natural condition, and be
sure the Scripture which was written by the Spirit of God, does not use to do
as those vain men do, who when they praise or dispraise, care not whether their
expressions are true or false, so they be high enough, and they rather strive
to speak as much as they can, then as much as they ought; surely whatsoever the
Scripture has spoken is made good to the utmost by those that are in hell, and
would by every man on earth, did God withdraw his restraining, sanctifying
grace, and were those sparks of hellfire that is in every one by nature blown
up to a flame, and heightened by those sufferings that are there inflicted. 2.
Consider how little good and how much corruption there is in our best actions,
from what carnal principles, upon what carnal grounds, and for what carnal ends
we perform our holy duties; surely there is more sin in our best actions then
ever yet we have discovered in our greatest abominations: Do but meditate upon
those several considerations set down in the meditation of our sins, and it
will be a great preservative and remedy against pride. Lastly, Resolve with thy
self never (unless the glory of God may thereby be advanced) to speak or do any
thing that may cause others to have high thoughts of thee, or at least not to
that end; Whatever good duties thou do, whether of prayer or alms; etc. as
secretly as may be, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does. Though
thou art exceedingly to be humbled for thy sins, because they offend and
dishonor God, and scandalize Religion, yet let not this at all trouble thee,
that thereby the esteem that men have of thee is much abated: To conclude, pray
earnestly as if thou were to pray for thy life, for it is thy life that God
would humble thee, desire God to afflict thee, or use any means that he would
sanctify to that end; and when thou have finished thy Meditation, consider what
passage has most affected thee, and keep it in thy thoughts, that by often
thinking of it thou may be humbled and made to be of a poor and a contrite
spirit, that God may delight in thee, and that thou may delight in him. Now
to the King eternal, the immortal, invisible, and only wise God, be honor and
glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

MEDITAT. I. Of the End for which we were Created.
Preparation.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Desire of God to assist thee with his Spirit.

Considerations.
1. Consider, God did not create thee for any need he had of thee (for though
thou should do all that he commands thee, thou art an unprofitable servant
to him, and thou come wonderfully short of doing what God commands) but only
to declare and exercise his bounty and goodness to thee, in bestowing upon
thee his grace in this life, and his glory in the life to come, but as it is in
Deuteronomy plainly set down Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and all thy strength, and all thy mind: and to this end he has
enriched thee with understanding to know him; Remembrance to be mindful of
him, Will to love him, Imagination to represent his benefits to thy thoughts,
eyes to behold the wonders of his works, and a tongu to praise him, etc. 1.
Thou being fully convinced of this, thou will plainly see that it evidently
follows (which is the next thing to consider) that whatsoever is contrary to
this end, that hinders thee in or from knowing, loving, serving, and enjoying
of God, must be avoided and abhorred as the greatest mischief that can befall
thee in the whole world. 2. The second thing that plainly follows from this is,
That thou should be little or nothing troubled for the loss of any thing,
which though thou losest thou may notwithstanding serve God, thou may lose
thy riches and yet thou may be holy, therefore thou must not mourn nor grieve
for the loss of friends, of health, etc. 3. Nor must thou much desire and
endeavor for those things which no way further thee in this great business of
knowing, serving, and following God, but they are to be accounted superfluous
and frivolous.

2. Consider the folly and madness of those who live no otherwise then as if
they had been created for no other end then to drink, and eat, and sleep, and
dance, and game, or to get riches, and such like fooleries. Certainly if these
people were asked whether they did in their consciences think that God created
them, that they might spend their lives in dancing, etc. they could not say,
yes; None can imagine that has any understanding, that at the day of judgment
God will ask them why they did not dance more, and game more, and gain more
riches.

3. Consider seriously with thy self whether thou live suitable to the end of
thy Creation; think with thy self that when that time which thou spendest in
eating, drinking, sleeping, recreation, visits, vanities, is taken from thy
life, what a small pittance is left for God, and for the works of thy
particular calling, nay, thy sleeping, eating, drinking, recreation, should all
be done some way or other to enable and fit thee the better for the service of
God; But alas how seldom is it that thou have thought of fitting thy self for
Gods service by eating, drinking, etc. Nay, how many times have thou made thy
self unfit for Gods service by such things? Now before thou go any further
be fully convinced of these truths, and if any scruple should remain (which
cannot though a man be but truly rational) argue and pray them away, for
though it may be some Objections may be too hard for thy arguments (which
notwithstanding seldom comes to pass, since thy consideration must be of
truths so plain, evident and obvious, which all grant) yet no scruples will be
too hard for thy prayers.

Affectione.
1. Be ashamed and confounded within thy self that thou have lived so contrary
to thine own principles, and that thou have minded that little or nothing in
doing of it as a thing by the bye, which now thou do but seriously think of
it, thou plainly see to be the main business of thy life, saying thus, Alas,
O my God, what did I think of when I thought not of thee? What was I mindeful
of when I forgot thee? Alas O my Soul, how comes it to pass that we thought of
these things no sooner? It Is a strange thing that our hearts and the world
should so far deceive us that we should prefer eveny trifling thing before that
which concerns us more then ten thousand worlds? We have served the world which
was not made but to serve us.

2. Abhor thy life past; Well, I am resolved to leave you, ye vain and sinful
pleasures, I will no longer dote upon you, you have but too long bewitched my
soul, I might have had a thousand holy thoughts and prayers, and treasures of
alms laid up for Eternity, which I am sure I should not have repented of when
I come to die, and you vanities have took up my time and stole away my heart
and thoughts from these things: Well, I have enough of you, I have done with
you, for the rest of my strength and days I will give unto my God

3. Turn thy self to God, and say, Blessed God, will thou accept of the service
of a poor wretch, that has spent so much of his time and strength upon base
lusts and vanities? Nay, surely Lord, If thou will accept of such a wretch as I
am, such a heart, such love, such service as I have, I will give to thee; and
for the time to come thou shall be the very joy of my soul, and the
deliciousness of my thoughts, and do thou indeed entreat and importune me to
be reconciled, how wonderful is thy mercy, that notwithstanding I provoked
thee hitherto daily to thy face, yet that thou should follow after me to
embrace me, whereas what could be expected but that thou should pursue me to
destroy me?

Resolutions.
Well, by the blessing of God I am resolved that though heretofore I have spent
whole days in such and such like recreations, which at best are but vanities,
for this month I will either not use such and such recreations at all, or at
least spend no more time any day in them then I do in prayer and meditation,
and I hope one day the Lord will work in me such a heavenly frame of spirit,
that prayer and meditation shall be in stead of a thousand recreations; David
was of that temper, for he says, that he will go to God his exceeding joy, and
that the Law of God was dearer to him then thousands of gold or silver, and
that his heart was ready to break for the very desires and longings that he had
after God; O my Soul that will be a rare time when it shall be thus with us;
Why should David love God more then we? He forgave David much, but he has
forgiven us more, well O my soul, if thou will pray hard, and follow hard after
God, thou little know what he will do for thee, and the joys that he has
laid up for them that love him even in this world are unspeakable and glorious.

Conclusion.
1. Pray: Lord, thou know the decitfulnesse of my heart, the strength of my
corruptions, and the multitude of snares and temptations which encompasse me on
every side, especally when I am in worldly employments in company, thou know
how subject holy flames are to go out, therefore be thou pleased by the holy
breathings of thy Spirit to keep these holy fervours of love from being
quenched; it is not the strength of my resolutions that can enable me to resist
temptations; if I am not kept by the mighty power of thee my God, I am lost.

2. Praise God, blessed be thou O God for any heavenly motion or desire that
has been wrought in me, thou might have suffered me as thou do thousands
(I have provoked thee as much as they) never to be convinced of, or affected
with these truths, it is thy wonderful mercy that thou did make me for such a
blessed end as the enjoyment of thy self, and much greater mercy that thou have
let me know so much, but most of all that thou have given me a heart to desire
and endeavor after it, Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

3. Acknowledge thy failings, alas Lord, whatsoever is wrought in me that is
good, had been far greater, but that I am green wood to the sparks of thy
love; Lord, pardon the iniquity of my holy services; My highest and most
inflamed thoughts of thee are unworthy of thee: it is well that I have thee to
love, whom I need not fear loving too much.

After the Meditation is ended,

1. Think with thy self which of these truths, or what passage of this
Meditation did most warm thy heart and affect thee, and fix it, and treasure it
up in thy thoughts, keeping it (as it were a nosegay in thy hand, to smell unto
all the day.

2. Set down this that thou have resolved to spend no more time in such a
recreation then thou shall spend in prayer and Meditation.

3. Go unwillingly from this duty, and do not rush into worldly businesses, but
look to thy heart which is a slippery deceitful thing.

MEDITAT. II. Of the Mercies of God.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Pray, beg of God that he would put such considerations and thoughts into
thy heart, that thou may be so convinced of and affected with his goodness,
that thou may love, praise, and serve him.

Considerations.
1. Consider how much thou art engaged to God for bodily mercies, he has given
thee thy senses, sight, hearing, and other parts of thy body; If thou did
want thy sight, what would thou give for it if thou wast Emperor of the
world? How many thousand pounds would thou give? A Diamond is not therefore
worth no more then 6d because a poor man can give no more: if thou should
reckon up what thy hands, feet, health, liberty were worth, to what a vast Surn
would they arise? Thou have all these things from God, thou have not them from
thy Parents, they knew not before thou were born whether thou should be male
or female, thou may say to God as David did, In thy Book were all my members
written.

2. Consider what faculties of soul God has given thee; What a miserable
condition are mad men in, those that are born natural fools; thou art well,
and thousands are sick, thou have plenty when thousands beg their bread.

3. Consider what spiritual mercies God has given thee; how many thousand
poor ignorant Heathens are there which never heard of God and of Christ, who
were born and bred where the Gospel is not preached, but worship the devil, but
thou dwell in the Sunshine and under the droppings of the Gospel, and are
not these great mercies and unvaluable? If thou do not value them, it argues
so much the greater goodness in God to bestow them upon thee; nay, has not
God made thee to know him? he has not only given thee the light of the Gospel,
but eyes to behold it.

4. Consider the greatness of God; Why should he look after thee, nay, why
does he not destroy thee? Thou art but a worm, nay, a viper: why does he let
thee hang upon his hand of providence, and not shake thee off into hell fire?
As we walk we do not step out of our way, to avoid crushing a worm to death: if
we see an adder or such a venomous creature, we go out of our way to destroy
it; God has not dealt so with thee, but when thou have run from God he has
called after thee, and would not suffer thee to perish though thou would;
and when thou have come against him with thy sins and thy rebellions, he has
stood with stretched out arms to embrace thee, Are not these miracles of
mercy, O my Soul? how many mercies do thou receive from God, even at that
very time when thou sinnest against him?

5. Consider the innumerable multitude, the infinite greatness of his mercies,
and the wonderful love wherewithal he bestows them: How precious are thy
thoughts toward me O God (says David,) I am sure thou have just cause to say
so also, O my soul. The mercies that God has bestowed are wonderful, but those
that he has promised are far greater: What manner of love has the Father
bestowed upon us, that we should be calledth Sons of God! Now we are the Sons
of God, and it does not appear what we shall be; That he should make us his
Sons is very much; but that he should not spare his own Son that he might
spare us, is beyond all admiration.

Affections.
Admire the goodness of God; Lord, what is man? what is sinful man that thou
should so regard him? What am I that am the worst of men? why art thou so
good to me that have been and am so bad? When I was in my blood to the loathing
of my person, thou said unto me in my blood Live; nay, not only when I was
weltring in my own blood, but in the blood of Christ, thou said unto me,
Live; What did I ever do to deserve those mercies? or what have I or can I do
to requite them? As thy glorious Name so thy mercies are extolled above all
praises.

2. Admire thine own ingratitude; Have I so requited my God O my Soul, as to
return rebellions for mercies! Has God heaped upon me so many glowing coals of
love and mercy, and is my heart still frozen? Must God only be a looser by his
blessings? If man (who is bound to do me good when it lies in power) bestows a
small courtesy on me, how do I thank him whenever I meet him? but though
God (who is no way engaged) of his free grace bestows thousands of thousands of
blessings, how do I live in the midst of them without ever regarding of them?
Nay, my ingratitude is such that I make God a looser by his mercies: If thou
Lord had made me to beg my bread, I should have been more thankful for one
days food then I am now for a years; Are his mercies less because they are
continued? Alas O my Soul, how foolish are we? We do even daily provoke God to
take away his blessings, because we will not prize them while we have them; and
then there is another thing wherein we do wonderfully ill, if God does but lay
any affliction upon us, and take away but one mercy, in stead of being thankful
that we have enjoyed it so long, and that he has not taken away all, we
murmr and repine, and rob him of all the praise that is due for the rest of
the mercies we enjoy. Alas, what does God require of us for all his mercies but
this, that we should love him with all our heart, soul and strength?

3. Stir up thy heart to praise and thanksgiving; Bless the Lord O my Soul,
and all that is within me bless his holy Name; Forget not all his Benefits,
who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; Who redeemeth
thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving-kindenesse and tender
mercies: Not love God, not praise God O my Soul? why what could God require
less at thy hands then these? I have heard of one that being delivered out of
a great and long desertion, had much ado to stay within doors and not run into
the streets and stay every one she met, that she might tell them what God had
done for her soul: How do the Angels love and praise God to all Eternity? and
why should the Angels love and praise God more then I? He never forgave them
one sin, he has forgiven me thousands, it is true they are in glory, so shall
I be too if I be not unthankful for the mercies I have received.

Resolutions.
I am resolved for the time to come to sing Psalms oftener, I have not enough
delighted in that duty: It Is strange that that which is the happiness of
heaven I should find so little delight in: well, for this next Month I will
spend one hour a week in meditating upon the mercies and love of God; His
mercies are enough, and great enough surely to take up so much time, for in
heaven Eternity is little enough to admire them.

Conclusion.
1. Pray, desire God that he would by his Spirit blow these coals of mercies,
that he may inflame thy heart with love and joy and praise of him; alas
otherwise the judgments of God will not affect us, nor the mercies of God
inflame us; it is the Spirit that quickens, else mercies will not profit.

2. Praise God, Call upon thy soul again and again, awaken thy heart, let it
not be so drowsy at a work of so great importance.

3. Acknowledge, that were thy heart ought, thy mouth and thy heart would be
filled with the praises of God, acknowledge that is no want of matter, and
motives of praise in the truths which thou have considered, but thy heart is so
dead that nothing almost will work upon it.

After the Meditation is ended think with thy self what truths did most affect
thee, etc.

2. Write down thy resolution, etc.

3. Go unwillingly from this duty.

MEDITAT. III.
Of Sin.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Desire God to assist thee in this Meditation.

Considerations.
1. Consider seriously how much God abhors sin, and how odious it is to him;
this you may see both by what God has said and what God has done to show the
abhorrence of it.

2. Sinners, it is said that God loatheth them, and they loathe God, Zec. 11.8.
and God by his Prophet cries out, saying, O do not this abominable thing which
I hate; How often does God profess his hatred of sin? if one should spit in
a man's face, or lay toads or Serpents in his bosom, or whatsoever you could
imagine, it could not be so abominable to him as sin is to God, he hates it
more then we hate hell; how can we know any ones hatred of any thing but by his
expressions and his actions, suppose you should see one take some curious,
costly, or rare dish of meat which he loved above any meat in the world, and
because there was some small crum of another meat which he had an antipathy
against, he should fling all with violence and detestation away, were not this
enough to satisfy you that he abhorred that meat, a crum whereof made him
abhor that which he so much loved? Suppose you should see one take a Watch,
whose wheels and all the rest were cut out of entire Diamonds, and spying some
little small, and almost indiscernable spider in it, should fling it to the
ground with so much violence that he should break it all to pieces, it would
evidently argue how much he detested a spider: What excellent Creatures are
Angels, and yet because a sin though but of thought was found in them, how
does it cast them like lightning into hell! Suppose further thou should see
the meekest, wisest man, and lovingst Father in the world, taking his Son, and
scourging of him with rod after rod, until that he wereall of gore blood from
head to foot, and though he cried out and begged of his Father to spare, yet he
would not spare him, but scourged him to death: Would you not say that the
Son had done somewhat that the Father did wonderfully abhor? Has not God
dealt thus with Christ? Did he not chastise him until he shed blood from the
Crown of the head to the sole of the feet? Did not Christ die under his
correcting hand? Did not Christ cry out again and again, Father if it be
possible let this cup pass from me? And did he not love Christ more then any
Father loved his Son, and all this because Christ was guilty of sin, though
but as a Surety; these things are not inventions of wit or rhetoric, but real
truths; If the destroying of Sodom, Gomorrha, Jerusalem, Angels, and the most
part of Adams posterity, and the whole world, save eight persons; If the
Sufferings of Christ be not enough to satisfy thee of Gods hatred of sin,
then thou may go on to thy own destruction: but know this that it will be
bitterness at the last.

2. Consider what thou do when thou sinnest, every sinner does virtually put
heaven and Christ, and God, and his favor and loving kindness, and all his
promises in one scale, and that pleasure, profit, or honor which sin
promises, with a wounded conscience, the torments of hell, the wrath of God in
the other scale, and doubtless virtually a sinner choosech sin with all
these mischiefs, before the service of God with all his mercies. It is as if a
sinner should say, Rather then I will not satisfy my base lust; I will part
with God, with Christ, with heaven and all, I will suffer his wrath, let God do
his worst I will have my will; Every obstinate sinner does in his heart say
thus, and though now thou little imaginest it, yet at the day of judgment this
will be made as manifest to thee as if it were writ with a beam of the Sun;
Things that now seem less consequent, shall then be made evident: A wicked
wretch that sees one of Gods people hungry, naked, imprisoned, and does not
relieve him; he little thinks that is all one as if he had seen Christ so, and
not relieved him; but at the day of judgment Christ will make it manifest unto
him.

3. Consider how often thou have sinned against God, Every unconverted man does
nothing else, his plowing is an abomination, all his imaginations are only evil
and that continually: Nay, though thou art one of Gods people, yet David cries
out, that his sins are more in number then the hairs of his head, and do
thou think thy sins are fewer then David's? How many years have thou lived?
how many days, hours, minutes? thy sins are more; The Hour-glasse that runs
has not so many sands in it as the sins that thou committest in that hour;
If thou do not believe this consider, that there is not one of thy thoughts,
words, actions, but is polluted with abundance of sins; If thou say [Our
Father] since thou do not speak it with that reverence, attention, fervency,
faith, love, joy, confidence, admiration of his goodness, and many other which
we are engaged to have, when we call God by the Name of Father, thou becomest
guilty of all the contrary sins, and many more that are not named, in speaking
that one word in thy prayer not as thou oughtst. Fear not making thy sins
seem greater or more than they are.

4. Consider further for what trifling vanity, nay for what base things that
thou will be ashamed to own before men, thou have lost God, lost thine own
soul, if thou returnest not, and have brought on thy self more miseries than
the tongue of man can express, or the heart of man conceive: there is nothing
that thou see with thy eyes, or hear with thy ears, or feel with thy
hand, is more certainly true than this. But alas, because thou have heard it so
often, and God of his infinite goodness and patience has not made thee yet to
feel the stroke of his justice, and the misery due to sin; thou will not
believe him, though his threatenings be never so clearly set down and with much
earnestness.

5. Consider against what precious mercies, what sweet love, what blessed
experience, holy inspirations, what abundance of means, strong resolutions,
precious promises, clear light, etc. thou have sinned.

Affections.
1. Pray to God to help to a further sense of the sinfullness of sin.

Blessed God, must all these considerations pass as a Serpent on a stone
without making any impression upon my soul? Lord give me an affecting knowledge
of the sinfullness of sin, and not have such slight thoughts of sin as I
have had; but grant that I may esteem of sin as thou esteemest it.

2. Talk with thine own soul about this matter. O my soul are these
considerations true or false? if thou think them false, bring thy objection,
show wherein the error lies, which thou can never do; but if they be true (as
certainly they are) how comes it to pass that we have made nothing of sin?
it is in vain for us to put off the sense of our sins until it be too late.

3. Be confounded and ashamed in the presence of God; Alas O Lord my God, as a
thief is ashamed when he is taken, or as a woman is ashamed when her adulteries
are found out by her loving husband; so and a thousand times more I desire to
be confounded and ashamed in thy presence, when I consider, how abominable my
life has been; and how that I have committed my abominations even in thy
sight, and provokt thee to thy face; and had not thy patience and mercy been
infinite, thou could never have stood out against so many provocations: I had
been in hell roaring and blaspheming long before this day; and then I had been
past prayers, and past mercies, and past pardon: What shall Isay unto thee O
thou preserver of men? to excuse my sins I cannot, I have nothing but the
multitude of thy tender compassions, and thy free grace in Jesus Christ to fly
unto; Lord lay my sins home to me to humble me, and to break my stony heart,
but lay them not to my charge to condemn me. If thou had not in thy word
promised forgiveness to sinners through Jesus Christ, I could no more hope to
obtain pardon, than even the devils themselves.

Resolutions.
It is enough O my soul, and too too much, that we have been undoing our selves
and provoking God thus long: that we have as it were with all our power pulled
down the vengeance of God upon us, and as it were kindling his wrath against
us, but he has not suffered his whole displeasure to arise, nor suffered us to
perish though we would; blessed be his Name that we have not committed the
sin against the holy Ghost; which we certainly had done, had he given us up
to the strength of our own corruptions, and to the power and malice of Satan to
improve them to our destruction. Is it true indeed that God says, Yet return,
and I will save thee, does he stand with stretched out arms? does he indeed
stand with stretched out arms to embrace us? is it possible he should be so
gracious to forgive such and so many sins, and of such long continuance?
Well, blessed be God, we will go unto him, and never offend him more. We will
hereafter whenever we are tempted unto sin, say, What sin against such
love, such mercy, such experiences? offend that God that has pardoned us? that
has done such things for us, and is not content with that, but has promised
to do more? I will not hereafter stand parlying with temptations, but I will
cry out unto God, and say; Lord help me, for I suffer violence, and in
particular, I am in some measure sensible that I pray not with that fervency
and reverence as I ought to do; for the time to come, I shall (by the blessing
of God) mend that: I am too passionate, well, since God has been so gracious,
as to forgive so many, so great, so grievous sins, that mine own heart is not
able to understand their vileness or number; I will not hereafter be troubled
when I hear my neigbour or underling, or when I hear my fellow N. use such or
such taunting words against me, I will not be provoked by this or that despite
or contemptuous trick, that he or she does use against me, but rather I will
endeavor to say or do such a thing, to gain his good will, and to pacify his
anger conceived against me; for certainly his injuries are not comparable to my
sins; and yet God forgive me them, there is a difference between I. N. and
me, I am resolved I will go to him, and be reconciled this very day; or if I
cannot, I will pray for him and speak well of him this very day, if I have
occasion to speak of him at all: howsoever I will pray for him now.

Conclusion.
1. Pray: desire God that he would increase thy detestation of sin, and that
thou might as well hate sin as leave sin, and that he would not let any
spark that has been kindled by his own Spirit go out in thee: Say unto him;
Lord, I do not beg riches, I can go to heaven without them, please thee without
them; but I beg of thee grace, and strength against corruptions, pardon of
sins, if thou deniest me these, I am undone.

2. Praise God: Blessed be thy Name that my heart has been in any measure
affected with the hatred of sin, that I have in any measure known and
considered the things that belong to my peace; thou might have suffered me to
drop into hell, and never to have thought of it before I had been there, but
thou have not dealt so with me.

3. Acknowledge thine own unworthiness of so great patience as God has
exercised toward thee; thine inability to think any of those good thoughts
that thou have had, etc. as is in the first Meditation.

After all, think what passages most affected thee.

2. Write down thy resolutions, etc.

3. Go unwillingly from the duty.

MEDITAT. IV. Of Death.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Pray for his assistance.

Considerations.
1. Can thou not remember that thou were by such an one when he died, did
thou not see how his countenance failed, his eye-strings broke; how he grew
weaker and weaker, at last grew speechless; how he throtl'd in the throat, how
his teeth grated, how he sweated and strugled for life, and at last gaspt, and
died: consider that thus thou must do likewise, how soon the Lord only knows;
that thou art well now is nothing, that thou art young and strong now is
nothing, for how many are there that have been strong, and well, and as young
as thou, within a very few days after have been in their grave. That thou must
die is certain, when, where, how, none knows but he that made thee: only this
is true, that generally men die sooner then they expect.

2. Consider that there will be an end of the world as to thee; thou must leave
riches, friends, wife, children, houses, lands, and thine own body also. Thy
friends may stand weeping by, but they cannot prolong thy life one minute.

3. Consider that when thou come to die, it will certainly not repent thee
that thou have spent so much time in prayer, so much in meditation, so much in
holy duties; it was never known since the world began, that any one did then
say, O that I had prayed less; though these holy duties now seem irksome and
troublesome to thee, doubtless then they shall bring more comfort to thee, then
all those riches and vanities in which thou have spent so much time and took so
much delight in. These things are certain and infallible; our understandings
cannot, (O that our lives did not) deny them.

Consider how that the dearest frinds thou have in the world, will hasten thy
filthy carcass out of the doors; they will scarce dare to stay with it alone,
but say as Abraham did, Let me bury my dead out of my sight: and then how
seldom will they think or speak of thee; or if they do, what good will it do
thee.

5. Consider, alas, poor man whether will thy soul go then, to hell or to
heaven: do thou know to which? do thou not think thou shall go that way
which thou have gone all thy life long? if thou have walked in the ways of
hell, how can thou imagine that at the end of that journey thou should
arrive at heaven.

6. Consider what good will all thy wealth, all thy pleasures, all thy vanities
do thee at that day? they will all vanish as does the morning dew. Alas who
knows not all these things, and yet not one of a thousand consider and lay
them to heart, and to know these truth and live unsuitably to them, does but
add to our folly and madness: O that they were wise, says God, that they would
consider their latter end. These serious considerations of our death, and
preparation for it, is one of the chiefest points of wisdom in the world.

7. Consider if thou miscarry in this great work of concernment, viz. thy
death, thou art undone for ever. If thou might live again and mend that
error which thou committedst in thy dying ill, than there were some hope, but
it is appointed for all men once to die, and but once.

Affections.
1. Abhor sin; It is you and you only that can make that hour miserable unto
me; Alas, O my Soul, though we now have slight thoughts of such and such
sins, through the deceitfulness of Satan and our own hearts, yet at that
hour if we had a thousand worlds, we would give them all, for that which we
have so little regarded while we live, viz. that we had kept a strict Communion
with God, and watch over our own hearts.

2. Despise the world; O ye vanities and fooleries of the world, why should I
spend my time and strength in following after you? What have ye done for me, or
what can you do? when I shall stand most in need of comfort, you will not only
prove vanities but vexation of spirit: Solomon has tried you, and he has from
his own experience, and from the teachings of the Spirit, has told me that you
are but vanity, and all men when they come to die set their Seal to this Truth:
Shall I to mine own destruction yield to your enticements? why should I not
have the same opinion of you now, as I certainly shall have when I come to die?

3. Humble thy self before God and cast thy self into his arms of love; beg
wisdom of him; every night I am a day nearer my grave then in the morning; I
am nearer to it but Lord make me fitter for my grave, and when that hour shall
come, let it not come as a thief in the night to rob me of all my comforts, and
rather then that hour should not be an happy hour, let my whole life be nothing
but affliction and misery; Alas Lord, if thou deniest me this Petition what
will thou give me? Thou have said, O that they were wise that they would
consider their latter end, and I said, Lord teach me so to number my days that
I may apply my heart to wisdom.

Resolutions.
O my Soul, since things are thus, let us not resist known truths, shall we
neglect these truths because they are plain; if they are abstruce then we doubt
them; If they are plain shall we despise them? Do thou not know how soon thou
shall die, then what have we to do that must be done before we die, do it with
all thy might, for the night comes wherein no man works: My children are not
yet sufficiently instructed in the ways of God, I will set apart half an hour
in a day to instruct them for this month, or give so much to the poor every
time I miss: there is such a neighbor or acquaintance who goes on in wicked
ways, and my words have so much power with him, that I am confident if I do
earnestly beg of God to bless me in the work, and take him privately, and lay
before him his danger, and press him to holiness, he may be wrought upon, I
have omitted it hitherto, but I am resolved sometime within a week to take some
opportunity to speak seriously and home unto him, or give so much to the poor,
and so every week give so much to the poor, until I have spoke with him, etc.
And since it so much concerns me to be prepared for death, I will every day
make it one special clause of my prayer to beg of God that he would fit me
for that hour, and I will lay up treasury in heaven by giving to the poor, and
make my self friends of this unrighteous Mammon, that when I fail they may
receive me into their habitations.

Conclusion.
1. Pray, Beg of God that he would increase in thee strong, spiritual
apprehensions of death, and that the thoughts of death might imbitter every
unlawful pleasure to thee; Say unto God, Lord, how few days are between me and
eternity, whether of horror or of glory, I am not yet fully satisfied; It is a
sad thing that a thing of so great concernment I should be uncertain of; O
blessed God, let this Meditation so work upon me that I may not cease to pray
unto thee, and to examine my self, and use all holy means for the making of my
calling and Election sure; For very shortly I shall be past praying, past
examining; for when thou shall summon me out of this life, then I must come to
judgment, therefore those resolutions that I have made of walking more
strictly, give me grace to perform them to the utmost.

2. Praise God, blessed be thy Name O God for any inward motions of thy Spirit
that thou have afforded me, and for any, etc.

3. Acknowledge thy weakness, etc. blessed God if my heart were not so base,
so hard, so vile, that it always hinders me either in holy duties, or from
holy duties, it were not possible but that such serious truths, such powerful,
spiritual, practical truths, should have wrought so mightily upon me, that I
should never from this very hour be deceived any more with the vanities of the
world, but should have set my self and made it my business to prepare for that
great day, etc.

After all, 1. Think what passages most affected thee.

2. Write down thy Resolutions, etc.

3. Go unwillingly from the duty.

MEDITAT. V. Of the Day of Judgment.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Beg of God that he would enable thee seriously to think of, firmly to
believe, and strongly to be affected with the truths concerning the day of
Judgment.

Considerations.
1. Consider how dreadful and terrible that day would be when the Sea shall
roar, when the very powers of heaven shall be shaken, when Christ shall come
with thousands of his Angels in flaming fire: when an Angel came down from
Heaven to roll away the stone, the Soldiers that watched there became as dead
men; nay, the holiest men that have lived have been exceedingly afraid, when at
things of far less terror then those things are which will be at the day of
Judgment; For Moses himself did exceedingly fear and tremble when he heard and
saw the terrible signs that were at the giving of the Law, and the blessed
Apostle, Heb. 12.21. became as a dead man when he saw Christ not in flaming
fire as he shall appear at the day of Judgment, Rev. 1.17.

2. Consider that at the day of Judgment sin will appear out of measure
sinful, for then it will appear with all its aggravations, for the Majesty,
holiness, and mercies of God will appear in their perfect glory, Men shall
then know what it is to sin against God, our Ignorance of God now makes us so
senseless of the sinfulness of sin, but when God shall appear like himself
how shall those sins that men now make light of make them run mad with
despair.

3. Consider O my Soul, that those excuses that now quiet thee will not serve
at that day, nay, thou will be ashamed to own them.

4. Consider how strict an account God will require of thee at that day, if
only thy grosser abominations that are odious in the sight of all men should be
brought to judgment; but the smallest sin that ever thou committest, every
idle word, and every vain thought, the very grounds, manner, and ends of thy
most hely performances shall then appear more dreadfully sinful then now the
most crying sin that ever thou committedst does.

5. Consider that every one of thy thoughts, words, and actions whether good or
evil shall be brought to Judgment, even thy most secret and unknown sins to
thy self or others. Consider O my Soul what shame and confusion will cover thee
at that day, do thou not remember that at such and such a time what thou
did in secret: Suppose all those sins that ever thou committest in private
should be known to all in England, or should be writ on thy forehead, that all
that saw thee might read them, would thou not be ashamed to come into any
company? but what is this to that which shall be at that day, when all the
secret sins shall be published before all, Men, Angels, and God himself;
these are not inventions of men to terrify thee, but truths of God to reform
thee.

6. Consider how fully and clearly thou shall be convinced that day of thy
sins, those with whom thou have committed them will witness against thee,
thy dearest Friends that thou had in the world must and will testify against
thee; nay, Satan that tempted thee to those sins, and God that forbad thee
those sins, nay, thine own conscience (which then will as perfectly remember
every sin with its aggravating circumstances as if it were but then
committed) will be a swift witness against thee; this will be that worm that
dies not; a clamorous and a wounded conscience are insupportable even in this
life, but neither are the clamours so loud, nor the wounds so deep and
pestilent as then they will be.

7. Consider the dreedfull Sentence of Condemnation that God will pass upon
the wicked, viz. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and
his Angels; Wicked men know not now what it is to depart from God, but then
they shall know; for God before Men and Angels in fury poured out, to bid them
be gone, and call them Cursed wretches, who knows the horror of it? If the
wrath of a King be as the roaring of a Lion, what will the wrath of God be?
Consider further, that word is everlasting fire and eternity; How dreadful art
thou further to have such miserable Companions as devils, if the devil should
appear to thee when thou art alone how could thou bear it?

8. Consider the sweet Sentence that shall pass from the gracious mouth of
Christ to his people, viz. Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world: and how sweet will those
words be, when in the midst of all their fears and troubles the righteous shall
hear that Sentence of absolution; What abundance of comfort have the people of
God when God manifests and gives them his loves even in this life, and seals
them to the day of redemption, and lets them see their names written in the
Book of life, giving them full assurance that he is theirs, and they are his;
but alas, all those joys may not be compared to these: the testimony of our own
conscience, and the witnessing of the Spirit, the manifestations of his love,
and the smiles of his countenance are not so clear, so full, so lasting, as
they shall then be, no more to be compared to them then the light of the Sun is
to that of a spark of fire: for Christ to call us blessed, is more then for all
the world and for all the Angels in heaven to call us so: doubtless it did
exceedingly affect Daniel when the Angel told him that he was greatly beloved,
Dan. 9.23. If thou had a thousand worlds O my soul, would thou not give
all for this, that God would say so to thee; Well, if thou will be watchful
over thy ways, live holily, love and believe in Christ, and repent, the day
will shortly come when Christ shall say that and much more.

Affections and Resolutions.
1. Tremble O my Soul when thou think of these things, Why are not thou
exceedingly affected with the thought of them; have thou such a full assurance,
or is thy life such that thou need not fear; Was not Moses and John as holy
as thou? Was not John the beloved Disciple, and Moses one with whom God spoke
face to face, and yet they trembled: O my Soul, it is much to be feared that it
is ignorance and infidelity not a Gospel-assurance that makes thee so
senceless; nay; it is infallibly certain, that whosoever lives wickedly and
trembles not at the thought of judgment, it proceeds from a conscience seared
with a hot Iron.

2. Admire and be astonished at the miserable condition of all those that live
without God in the world, such are all they that repent not and believe not the
Gospel.

3. Examine and try thy self O my soul, Let us judge our selves that we be not
judged; We may easily know what Questions shall be put to us that day, we must
be judged by the Word of God, then let us judge our selves by it now; do we
indeed strive to enter in at the straight gate; May that which we do in the
service of God be truly called striving or no? Can a saint prayer be called
striving or no? when every temptation at the first assault overcomes thee, and
thou fightest not a stroke; Is this striving? Is this to fight a good fight?
and resisting unto blood? Do we think that God at the day of judgment will
avouch this striving? nay, can our own Conscience think it so now? Be not
deceived God is not mocked.

4. Pray, O blessed God, thou that art the great and just Judge of all men, be
pleased to fit and prepare me for that, that that day may not come so as a
thief in the night as to rob me of all my comforts, deal with me how it seems
good in thy eyes, afflict me, chastise me, only let me be saved in the day of
the Lord.

5. O my Soul, Let us truly consider what we are to do, and how we are to live,
that when others at that day shall call to the hills and to the Mountains to
fall upon them, and to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb, we may lift up our
heads because our salvation draws near: Well, O my soul, I read in the Word
of God that the neglecting to judge our selves and the judging of others, are
two sins that will cause all those to be judged and condemned that live in
them, therefore I am resolved by the gracious assistance of the Spirit of God
for the time to come, never to censure or judge any one, as I have done; and
frequently to examine my self, and as frequently and severely to judge my self
as formerly I have used to censure and judge others, and to use as much lenity,
mildness in judging and censuring others, as ever I did in censuring my own
ways, and if. I do speak ill of any one, I will, if I remember it when I am
before the Throne of grace, not only beg pardon of my sin in rash judging,
but as much as in me lies make him some restitution by putting up as many
prayers for him as I have spoke evil things of him: and let us further resolve
of my soul, and by thy blessed assistance O God. I am resolved, and do promise
before thee for the time to come frequently, and I beseech thee that I may
always do it before I do or speak any thing, consider whether I dare own that
action or that word at the day of judgment, and if I dare not own it, I will
not dare to do or speak it; and when at any time I think of omitting of any
holy duty, and think that such or such an excuse will serve, I will bring it
before the Judgment Seat of God, by seriously considering with my self whether
in my conscience I think that God will take that for a sufficient excuse at
that great day: For the Conclusion of this Exercise I refer you to the
Conclusions of the former Meditations, for I am loath that this Manual should
swell too much.

MEDITAT. VI. Of Hell.
BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

Considerations.
1. Consider O my soul the greatness of these torments; certainly if God so
heavily afflicts his own people as he did Job, Heman, and diverse of his people
who have been in dissertion many years: How sad are the expressions of David,
he says he roared for the disquietnesse of his soul: And how many sad
expressions has Job, that he had not time to swallow his spittle; and how that
he chose rather a strangling then life, and many other exceeding sad
expressions, which could never have proceeded from an holy man, who is set
before us as a pattern of patience, if his afflictions had not been very great:
and Heman said, that the terrors of the Lord were so great, that he was almost
distracted with them: and so from his youth up until that time that he writ
that Psalm. Psalm. 88. If this be done to the green tree, what shall be done to
the dry? And if God chastise his people with such rods, what scorpions shall
the damned be scourged with? and if the righteous have been thus afflicted,
tossed with tempests and not comforted, where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear? what shall the portion of their cup be? even the dregs of the vials of
Gods wrath; for upon the wicked he shall rain snares fire and brimstone and a
horrible tempest.

2. Consider what the sufferings of Christ were; if we do truly and seriously
consider how much those words signify, when our Savior says, My soul is
heavy to the death, we shall be helped to understand what our Saviors sorrows
were. If the wisest, holiest and patientest man in the world, who was not
oppressed or distempered at all by reason of any bodily distemper of
melancholy, I say, if such a man should come to an intimate bosom friend, and
with a sad countenance should tell him that he was even ready to die, because
of the abundance of grief and sadness that lay upon his spirit, would not this
argue that his sorrows were exceeding great? especially when his friend never
heard him to complain in all his life, though the injuries and sufferings had
been very great all along: If he should further say unto his friend, I beseech
you to watch with me; surely it would argue an heart overwhelmed with grief.
Now I say for our Savior to say so to his Disciple, and afterward to sweat
blood, O what unknown sorrows did our Savior feel! How then is it possible for
the wicked to escape, when God spared not his own Son though he was but a
surety; and those sorrows that made him groan, will crush thee to pieces; Woe
be to that man that is to satisfy the justice of God in his own person.

3. Consider O my soul the sad aggravating concommitants of these torments;
every member and faculty both of body and soul shall be tormented: here if our
head aches, may be our heart does not ache; if we have the Stone, we have not the
Gout, or if both them, yet not some other torturing disease; or if the whole
body be tortured, yet one may possess his soul in patience; but to have a
tortured body and a wounded conscience, who can bear it? besides all this, none
can help, none will pity those that are in hell; nay what is the height of
misery, that way God himself shall in the midst of all their roarings and
tortures, laugh at their calamity when it comes as desolation and as a
whirlwind upon them.

4. Consider seriously what Eternity means; for ever, ever, ever, to be
tormented, is an an overwhelming consideration: to lie under the torture of the
Stone but one night, how tedious is it; but to be tormented to all eternity, O
it is the hell of hells.

Affections and Resolutions.
Be astonished and tremble at the wrath of the Lord: Alas O my soul why do
thou not tremble as Felix did, when thou considerest these things, why art not
thou more sensible of the power of his wrath? do not the foundations of the
earth tremble, and the pillars of Heaven shake when he is angry; and how comes
it to pass, that thou art so little affected with these things? have thou full
assurance of the favor of God? when was it sealed? surely the very possibility
that these things should come upon us, should very much affect us.

2. Pray: O blessed God, thou that have the keys of death and of hell, take
pity on me; and though I neither understand nor am sensible in any considerable
measure either of the miseries of hell or of my own danger in falling into
them, Lord how thou know both, let the bowels of thy compassion earn toward
me, and never suffer me to fall into that devouring fire, and into those
everlasting burnings: blessed be thy Name that I am on this side of hell, if
thou had cast me into that place of torment, as I have daily provoked thee to
do, I had been past hopes, past prayers, past mercies, past repentance; I
beseech thee O Lord that thou will chasten me, that I may not be condemned with
the world.

3. Despise and abhor the sinful vanities and pleasures of the world: O vain
world there is nothing in thee but sin and misery, temptations, vanity and
vexation of spirit, and are thy vain profits and pleasures so much to be
valued, as for them to dwell in devouring fire? and are the pleasures of sin
that are but for a season, so much worth, that for them we should dwell in
everlasting burnings? Have we not had frequent experiences, that the sorrows
we have had for committing of sin, have far exceeded the pleasures that we
have had in committing of it, and surely the terrors of an awaked conscience,
are not to be compared with the horrors of the damned, and other insupportable
and endless miseries of that place of torment.

Come O my soul, let us not deceive and flatter our selves with vain and false
hopes of the mercies of God: it is true, God is very merciful to them that
fear him, and we may be sure of this, that if we do sincerely desire and
endeavor to serve him, that we shall find his mercies as much above our
thoughts and expectations of them, as the heavens are above the earth; but if
we slight them and are careless of his service, and turn his grace into
wantonness, let us not deceive our selves with vain words, for because of these
things comes the wrath of God upon the children of disobedience: and those that
live so, shall surely find, that at that day the mercies of God will not serve
at all to mitigate, but abundantly to justify the wrath and fury of God that
he shall pour out upon the wicked: then they shall pay for every mercy they
have received, and the riches of his despised goodness shall but increase the
treasures of his wrath: therefore O my soul, since these things are so, what
are we to do? why do we not fear him that can cast both body and soul into
hell? The Prophet Habacuc, when he did but think but of some temporal
judgments that God had threatened, rottenness entered into his bones. If indeed
the love of God did constrain us, so that we did from a principle of love make
conscience of sin, so that we never offend God, it were well; but since we
plainly find that it is not strong enough alone, let us not fear to call in and
improve the consideration of the torments of hell to deter us from sin; the
motive is imperfect but not sinful; our great work we have to do in the world,
next to the glory of God, is to avoid hell, and obtain heaven, and to resist
our now three great enemies the world, the flesh and the devil, who endeavor
day and night to drive us headlong into perdition. If any one in the world,
much more if the devil should appear to us, and offer us such a sum of money if
we would give him our souls that we might be damned, we think we should abhor
him and his offer; but alas does not every one that uses by extortion and
violence either gets or keeps what is not his, do the same thing? his
damnation it as certain and as infallible, though more secretly and invisibly
contrived by Satan, as if Satan should visibly appear to him and he make a
contract with him: therefore O my soul let us take heed of the wiles of Satan,
for he generally works by the world, and the flesh to deceive us, therefore let
us now resolve by the blessing of God to look upon the world and the flesh, to
be as dangerous and implacable enemies as Satan himself, let us not endeavor
to please the world by vain discourses, by omitting what God commands, or doing
what he forbids: Let us not be troubled but rather rejoice; when we are reviled
and scorned for righteousness sake; For the time to come when I am to do any
religious duty, I will not so much as consider what men will judge or say of
me, nor endeavor to make the world my Friend, since God himself has set
enmity between us; and as for the flesh I am sure we are no debtors unto that,
we have paid it far more then ever we owed it, therefore for the time to come
I will rather abstain from lawful, then use unlawful pleasures, and I will
take heed not only of those pleasures that are unlawful in kind, but those
also that are unlawful in degree: and that I may better avoid unlawful
pleasures, I will sometimes abstain from those that are lawful; and having
seriously considered, I am convinced of this, that I have not made conscience
enough in the matter of sleep, I have not redeemed the time from that, nor have
enough considered the sinfulness of it, but like the sluggard that Solomon
speaks of, have turned upon my bed as a door upon the hinges, therefore
henceforth I shall endeavor to get as much time from sleep, as the health and
strength of my body will permit: and because I am confident that if the damned
were in their natures changed, and were to live again on earth, they would
think it a blessed change, to change their howlings into singing of Psalms, and
their roarings into Prayers, nay if they were to live Methuselahs age upon the
rack: Therefore whenever I am at any time tempted to be weary of this labor
of love that is to be undertaken in the hardest duties of religion, I will
endeavor to shame my self out of that temptation, by thinking thus with my
self, that hell is so much worse then we can suffer in this world, either in
Gods service or for Gods service; that it were not only a desperate wickedness
but madness, for the avoiding of the one to fall into the other. For the
conclusion of this Meditation, observe the Directions and Instances of former
Meditations.

MEDITAT. VII. Of Heaven.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Pray to God to assist and enable thee in the work.

Considerations.
1. Consider O my soul the wonderful greatness and incomprehensibleness of
those joys. For 1. Consider what great things God has given to wicked men in
this work, what vast dominions, power, wisdom, learning, majesty, and indeed
as to the things of the world as much as their hearts can desire; if God gives
such things to Dogs and Swine, what may we think are the dainties of that
banquet which God feasts his children withal.

2. Behold the earth and the Heavens in the height of the beauty of the Spring,
and in the strength of the glory of the Sun, how delightful a sight is it to
behold the works of Gods Creation here below, the commonness of this sight much
abates the delight and wonder of it; but doubtless if a man that were born
blind should when he had attained to the full perfection of his age and
understanding, be placed in a Paradise as Adam was, and should see as soon as
his eyes were opened, the earth adorned with all manner of curious flowers and
trees laden with all manner of fruits, and the Sun shining in its full
strength, how wonderfully delightful would such a sight be? and if the
footstool of God be so rich, how glorious is his throne.

3. Consider the wonderful manifestations and joys that God has bestowed
upon his people in this life, they are unspeakable and glorious: Some have
cried out, Lord, either withhold thy comforts, or enlarge the vessel, for I am
not able to bear my joys. We read of Daniel, that the manifestations that God
gave him, drunk up his spirit, and made him sick some days after, Dan. 8.27.
Such joys have been so great, that they have sweetened the bitterest
persecutions; they have made them clap their hands for joy in the midst of
flames, and cry out in the ravishment of their spirits, O ye Papists you talk
of miracles, but here is a miracle, I am in the midst of these flames as in a
bed of Roses. But alas what are the joys that God communicates to his people in
this life, they are but as the drop of the bucket to the whole Ocean: the
Apostle tells us, that it does not appear what we shall be. We would give if we
had it a thousand worlds, one would give all to enjoy these spiritual
sanctifying ravishment of spirit one day; If these then are so sweet, what are
those things that thou have laid up for them that love thee!

4. Consider, that God has prepared these joys, on purpose to glorify his
goodness, and power, and wisdom, in preparing joys for his people worthy of
his magnificence and love; he does it for that end, that he may be glorified
and admired in all his Saints; and what cannot infinite power and wisdom, and
what will not infinite love and goodness do, when they set themselves to
prepare an entertainment, and to bestow a reward that may set forth their
greatness? What do Kings do in such cases? that which is accounted a feast
amongst among poor people, is a rich man's fast. If the strength of this
consideration were drawn forth, it would wonderfully affect us.

2. Consider wherein these joys consist for the negative part of them: There
will be no sickness, no pain, no death, no temporal misery or imperfection;
nay, there shall be no sin, no temptations nor corruptions, no desertions, no
imperfections of graces, or duties, or comforts. What would a poor soul give to
be delivered from this body of sin and death; there we shall see God clearly,
fully, everlastingly; there our enjoyments shall be incomprehensible, our union
wonderful and inseparable, and all shall be eternal. What a world of
difference is there betwixt a dead carcass, and the same body when he lived?
when it is dead, it is senseless, ghastly, filthy: how beautiful, how active,
how many rare endowments had it when it lived? and all these proceeded from the
union of the soul with it; and if the soul which is but a poor creature by its
union, does communicate such rare things to the body, what do we imagine will be
communicated both to the body and the soul, when God shall be more nearly
united to them then they are one to another; when they shall be made more
capable of receiving, and God will be more abundant in communicating.

Affections and Resolutions.
1. Admire the love and goodness of God; O blessed God from the beginning of
the world men have not perceived by the hearing of their ear, nor have they
seen with their eyes, nor have any understood, save only thou O God, what thou
have prepared for them that love thee; how have thou commended thy love to us,
that we are thy Sons, but it does not yet appear what we shall be; O the
length, and breadth, and height, and depth of thy love that cannot be known;
Lord, what are our duties, or what are our persons that thou should so highly
reward them and us; our best righteousness is as filthy rags, and for us we
are worms, nay, a generation of vipers; Is it not enough that thou do not
shake us off from thine hand of providence into hell fire, but that thou
should lay such Vipers in thy hosome, and warm us with thy love; Is it not
enough for thee to forgive us our rebellions, but that thou should give us
such blessings: were it not a miracle of bounty and goodness, for thee to bid
us seriously to consult and think what to ask of thee, and thou would give it
us, though it were to the half of thy Kingdom, but that thou should set thy
wisdom on work in preparing, and thy liberality in bestowing such
incomprehensible rewards that we could neither ask nor think, but as far as
the heaven is above the earth, so are thy thoughts of love above our thoughts;
For thee to give thy Kingdom, thy Christ, thy self, these are acts of
goodness; that art infinitely above us, yet worthy of thee, that delightest to
magnify thy goodness, that rejoycest over thy people as the Bridegroom
rejoices over his Bride.

Despise the World, What are the things of this world O my Soul, what is there
here to be desired but sin and misery, snares and temptations, vanity of
vanities, and vexation of spirit, one hours communion with God, and the joys of
the holy Ghost, that he has given to his people in this world, are worth more
then the world can know of; Why do we spend our strength and money for that
which is not bread, and our labors for that which does not satisfy: O vain
world, God has outbidden thee, thou offerst trifles, he offers me heaven for
my love and service, though my love be unworthy, too little for him, yet it is
too much too good for thee.

3. Long for and breathe after heaven; As the Heart pants after the
waterbrooks, so pants my soul after thee O God, My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God, when shall I be
delivered from my absence from thee, and from mine ignorance of thee; Make
haste O my beloved, and be thou like a Roe or a young Heart upon the mountains
of Spices: The Spirit says Come, and the Bride says Come, and the Bridegroom
says, Surely I Come quickly, even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

4. Encourage and stir up thy self to the love and service of God; Come O my
Soul, Let us be steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as we know that our labor is not in vain in the Lord; Let us
not be weary of well doing, nor of the labor of love, for we shall reap if we
faint not; We have known and in some measure endeavored to serve God thus many
years, were it not a sad thing for the want of continuing one year, one month,
it may be but one week, or one day more I should lose all my hopes and
expectations of glory: God forbid; O my Soul, Let us encourage our selves in
the Lord, we are not kept by our own but by the mighty power of God through
faith to salvation; and be thou assured of this that the first minute thou art
in heaven, thou shall have such full measure, pres't down, heapt up, and
running over, that thou shall break forth in the Songs of joy and praise to all
Eternity, magnifying, admiring and adoring God that ever he gave thee leave and
grace to serve him, then shall thou see, and so thy experience shall make thee
confess with joy and wonder, that the light afflictions and labors of love
that thou endurest in this life, are not worthy to be compared to the joys that
shall be revealed in thee; When at any time thou beginnest to be weary look to
the price of thine high calling, and when thou come to heaven thou shall
admire, when thou see how abundantly thou art over-recompensed, and thou will
have just cause to say, Lord, what is this that thou have done for me, alas,
what were the things that I either did or suffered in thy service, what were my
filthy rags that thou should give me such a robe and Crown of glory; O my
Soul, what if we do weep, now the time is at hand when God will wipe all tears
from our eyes.

O my Soul, these things cannot be believed and slighted, and understood and
neglected; If thou do not believe them, what is the reason? Are they too
glorious things for God to bestow upon such wretched sinners? why do thou set
bounds to the goodness of God, and say, Hitherto thou shall go and no further,
nay, doubtless since God has said that he will do that which shall glorify
his goodness to his people, the incredibility of it makes it more credible,
but if thou art convinced of the truth, why art thou not affected with the
excellencies of these joys? do thou not relish them? well, For the time to
come I will meditate more of these things, I will by giving to the poor lay up
my treasures in heaven, I will part with such and such vain delights for it, I
will spend more time and communion with God in praising, admiring, and adoring
of him, that if it be possible by frequent performing of these duties, I may at
last taste and relish the incomprehensible sweetness of them, that I may be
enamoured more of heaven, and because all my endeavors are in vain, if the
Lord reveals not these things unto me, therefore I will beg of God that he will
discover the riches of his goodness to me, I have not been careful enough nor
sensible enough of sins of omission, when I have had no just thing to take up
my thoughts, yet I have not thought of thee; henceforth when my heart is
affected with thy excellencies, thy love, thy mercies, I will praise thee, when
it is not, I will pray to thee that it may, and for my Master-sinne mine
iniquity, I will be most frequent in those duties that are most contrary to it;
I will especially in my reading of Scripture, take notice of, and write down
those places and those examples that are most proper for the cure; I will speak
against my iniquity, that if it may be I may thereby the more engage my self to
leave it.

MEDITAT. VII. Of the Excellencies of Christ.
1. BE convinced of and affected with the presence of God.

2. Desire of him who only can, to manifest the Excellency of Christ unto thee.

Considrations.
1. Consider that if the holiest man that ever lived lived near thee, what high
expectations would thou have of his carriage and conference, when thou saw
his zeal and patience, etc. But no man lived ever without sin; Therefore
suppose an Angel should take upon him humane nature, and live amongst us, with
what enflamed expressions and affections would he speak of God, of Heaven, and
every thing that is spiritual; But alas, his carriage, his holiness, his
wisdom, were as nothing in comparison of Christ's; For there was not any word
or action that ever Christ spoke or did, that if all the Angels of Heaven had
studied and set down how it ought to have been done, or they themselves should
have been to have done it, they could not have equalled it, nay, even God the
Father had he taken our nature, he would not have spoke or done any word or
thing which should have had (in respect of it self or any circumstance) more
holiness or wisdom then Christ's words and actions had, so that certainly in
this respect he that saw Christ saw the Father, as he him self says.

2. Consider the wonderful wisdom of Christ, Certtainly he was greater then
Solomon; For though he was the humblest man that ever lived, yet he himself
said so, nor did it any more argue pride in Christ to say that he was wiser
then Solomon, then it would have argued in Solomon that he knew more then a
newborn babe. When his most most malicious and cunning adversaries came to
ensnare him in his words, so that they thought it were impossible for him to
say I or No to their Questions, without extraordinary prejudice to himself, yet
he answered with such admirable wisdom and innocence, that they went away
ashamed of their folly; Nay, when Satan himself came and set upon him with his
subtlest temptations that he could possibly find out, yet our Savior without
deliberation and study, immediately answered him so fully that he could not so
much as reply but was fain to fly to another temptation; and no marvel for he
was the wisdom of the Father.

3. Consider the wonderful and exceeding holiness of Christ when he was in the
height of all his Agonies and Sufferings, he abated not any thing of his love
and confidence in God; For his Sufferings did not make him forget or diminish
any thing, no, not in the least circumstance of his graces, or of any thing
that the Law required at his hands: To be so freely willing to have that Agony
continue, which was unspeakable, and as the torments of Hell (if his Father
pleased) was more then if those in Hell should freely submit to endure the
torments they suffer. The holiness of those in heaven is not comparably so
much greater then the weakest Saint on earth: As the Holiness of Christ was
greater whilst he lived on earth then that of those in heaven; Nay, all the
Saints on earth are filled from his fullness; For he is the Fountain that
conveys to his Saints as they are able to receive the infinite Ocean of the
holiness of the Godhead; No marvel that the Angels when they saw his glory,
cried out, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbaths.

4, Consider, that notwithstanding all these infinite Excellencies in Christ,
he thought it no robbery to be equal to the Father, yet how exceedingly did he
humble himself, and how gracious was he: The poorest man or woman in the world,
nay, the greatest sinner that truly repented, with what love did he receive
them: He was the Son of Righteousness from whom the Angels receive their
glory, and yet he disdains not to shine upon such dunghils as we are; It is
strange O my Soul, to consider how willing Christ was to please every one; only
provided it was in things that were not for their hurt that desired them; Many
times, nay, most times, when others were with him, when he in respect of
himself only would have done otherwise, yet he did as their desires required,
Romans 15.3. The Apostle says, even Christ pleased not himself, many times when
he was hungry; If any came to him that needed Instruction, or if he were sleepy
and any came to him that needed consolation, he would abstain from meat and
sleep that he might do them good; It is not so with great men, but it was so
with Christ who was the great God.

Affections and Resolutions.
1. Admire the Excellencies of Christ, O blessed Savior, thou art the chiefest
of ten thousand; Thou art altogether lovely, Thou have a Name above all Names
that at thy Name every knee should bow; Thou Lord art set at the right hand of
the Father in the heavenly places; Far above all principality and power, and
might, and dominion, and every Name that is named, not only in this world, but
also in that which is to come; Thou art the brightness of thy Fathers Glory,
and the express Image of his Person; Consider O my Soul, what can these words
mean, Surely if God commanded all the Angels to worship him, when he brought
him into the world, how much more should we for whom he has done much more
admire and adore him in Spirit and in Truth.

Be confounded and ashamed that thou art not more affected with these things:
Doubtless O my Soul, It is not for want of excellency in Christ, for he is the
Lord of glory, but for want of a clearer Faith in thee to behold his
excellencies; If the Scripture had not spoke the thousandth part of Christ as
it does, how could thy thoughts have been lower of him then they are; how could
thy heart be more senseless: It is a shame that every vanity should steal away
our hearts from Christ, much more abominable is it that our very sins that
murdered him should ever prevail with us in the least.

Pray, Blessed God it is not in man by all his wisdom and industry to know or
be affected with the Excellencies of Christ, if thou do not reveal them; If I
had a thousand worlds they were too small a price for so great a mercy; O show
me thy self and thy Son and it suffices; And now O my Soul, are the
Excellencies of Christ nothing unto us? Do we indeed admire them? Surely all is
but mere words and vain thoughts, if we do not strive as far as we may to
imitate him in those Excellencies, for which we pretend to admire him; Are we
patient as he was, meek, humble, holy, who when he was reviled reviled not
again, etc. We do but deceive our own souls in giving glorious titles and
speaking high things of Christ, and in the mean while not endeavor to
transform into his Image; It is impossible we should love him for his patience
and holiness, and not love patience and holiness, not yet never care to
practice and get them; Therefore for the time to come the life of Christ shall
be the example whereby I shall endeavor to frame mine: And that I may the
better do so, I will read over especially the New Testament, and observe in
every particular what Christ did, how he spoke to his Friends, to his Enemies,
how he demeaned himself in every action, whether civil or natural, or
Religious, how in all his Relations; And when I have written them down, I shall
often peruse them, and shall endeavor in every action that I do, and word that
I speak, to remember if I can, whether there be any parallel instance in the
life of Christ, if there be, I shall make that my pattern, and do likewise, but
if there be none that I can think of, then I would do that which in my
conscience I think Christ would have done in like case.

For the Conclusion I refer you to the Directions and Instances of former
Meditations.

The Conclusion of the whole.
I Found a great deal of difficulty in writing this small Treatise of
Meditation, not in the doctrinal or directory part, because Christian
experience and study are things by which that party is managed, but in the
setting down of instances and examples therein I found the difficulty to lie:
For Meditation is an harder work then to give Directions thereunto; aand I have
generally found it easier to study a day then to meditate an hour, but of all
the kinds of Meditation whereof Instances are set down in this Book, I found
the greatest difficulty in those of Solemn Occasional Meditations, they
consisting for the most part of prayer, which the devout soul when it has
ended forgets, so that if one might gain a world when the heart is overwhelmed
with grief or inflamed with love, or ravished with joy, one could not remember
the powrings out of the soul: In such cases one may say of such Meditations as
St Paul speaks of those glorious things which he saw when he was wrapped into the
third Heavens; they are neither lawful, nor possible to be uttered, many times
the secrets in our communion with God, are of that nature that it is not lawful
by reason of that scardal, nor possible to utter, because the affections being
so intensly employed invention, memory, and intellectual actings of the Soul,
during that time do almost quite cease, and indeed whosoever goes about to
invent instances of Meditation, if it be only a learned man and not holy, his
studies may exceed his actings that way, but if it be an holy experienced
Christian, as his inward thoughts of love, joy, grief, and admirings of God are
above all that his tongue does or can utter, so those secret expressions which
he uses between God and his own soul, when his thoughts are full of heaven,
and of God, are much beyond what he can invent, or by stndy expresses;
Therefore since those Meditations that are fullest of devotion cannot be
remembered, to set down Instances of Meditations, except one should take them
from some Saint as he was pouring out his soul before God in secret; one can
never set them fully down in secret I say; For the soul is never so free, nor
may be before others as with God alone, and the truth is, if I had not had
these Instances of Solemn Meditation by me, I think I should hardly have set
down any of that kind; I should only have referred him to the Psalms, It was
so that I wrote these from the mouth of one to whom though unseen, I was often
times so near that I could hear his secretest devotions, if uttered though but
with an ordinary voice, I am very confident for his part, he thought that none
but God and his own Soul were privy to his Prayers, I have sometimes considered
it as a case of Conscience, whether it was lawful by stealth to hear, and
afterward to publish the private Meditations of others, but considering how
much advantage it may bring to others, and how the party himself can suffer
nothing in it, his Name being concealed by me, I resolve to publish them,
besides I very well know (as I said before) that the spiritual expressions
between God and ones own soul in secret, are forgotten almost as soon as ended;
It is very unlikely that any should remember them ten years after, as the most
of these are: I thought good to give an account of this matter, lest I should
be thought to have that holy frame of heart which many of the expressions in
these Meditations argues that he had that used them, and arrogate to my self
that which is far from me.

If any shall be offended at the brevity and shortness of my Directions for
this great and weighty business of Meditation, I shall only say thus much as
to that:

1. That I am not willing to overcharge or affright new beginners (for for such
I do very much intend this Treatise) with too great a number of particulars.

2. I would not have this swell above the bigness of a Manual, for I have
often observed that when one has persuaded some to buy some Book, and told
them it has been but a small price, it has been almost as strong a motive
(the smalnesse of the price) as the goodness of the Book: and I would not be
willing that both these Motives should be wanting to the Buying of this Book.

As for the plainness of the Style or matter, I shall thus excuse it, if it
oughto be excused, I wrote this for the meanest and ignorantest sort of
Christians that they might buy, and understand it, that they might buy it, I
have made it a Manual that they might understand it, I have made it plain, and
spoke to them in their own language, and to the Learned I say if any such shall
read this Treatise, Indocti repiunt coelum, and though I highly prize
Learning, yet I know that as to prayer and meditation, and all other acts of
devotion wherein we keep a strict Communion with God, and watch over our own
souls, an experimental knowledge and acquaintance with, and inflamed affections
toward God will more avail us then all the Learning in the world, and
doubtless it is not generally ignorance in those that live under Ordinances,
but the non-improvement of the Truths we know, that will undo us, if we did
but improve these plain truths, viz. that God is, that there will be a Day of
Judgment, that we must die, that we ought to love God with all our heart, with
all our soul, with all our mind, with all our strength, that we should do as
we would be done to; I say, if we did but improve these into practice, we
should attain to more holiness then if we knew a thousand times more, and left
those truths (as generally men do) by them, as things forgotten, I do very
much think that the truths of Religion have been spun into too fine a thread of
late days, and some have observed that fewer have been converted of late years
then formerly, when fundamentals have been plainly, powerfully and practically
pressed upon the conscience, it is an error to think that notions so they be
spiritual, cannot be too acute or speculative; I have one thing to entreat of
the Christian Reader, and it was one end of publishing this Treatise, that I
might with it publish these my desires, the thing that I am to request of you
will neither be charge nor trouble, It is your frequent, serious, fervent
prayers that I desire of you; I know it is used too much as a complement among
Christians, to desire prayers of their Christian friends, and they are too
often superficially promised, and too seldom conscienciously performed, nor
would I have thee whosoever thou art that fear God, account this my Request
as a thing of course, and that it is at thy liberty to grant it or no, for
suppose a poor distressed man overwhelmed and almost swallowed up with the
sense of his miseries and wants, should with tears and strong importunities
beg relief of thee; Do thou think it were an arbitrary thing (when it was
in thy power) to relieve him or not? Might thou not justly expect that the
the next time thou wentst to pour out thy soul before God, that he should keep
by him the denial that thou gave that poor man, and give it thee when thou in
the distressed thoughts of thy heart, madst thy prayer to him, and do thou
think that the Lord will hold thee guiltless, when one whose afflictions are
many corruptions, strong temptations to (...) shall in the anguish and
bitterness of his spirit desire thy prayers, and thou refuse or neglect:
Consider whether at the day of judgment thou will have any sufficient excuse
to plead; I have sometimes thought that the Bills that have publicly been put
up for the prayers of the Congregation have been too little regarded, it may be
they have been too customarily and formally put up, it may be so, but it is not
good for us to be Judges of evil thoughts, little do we know what terrouts and
fears, and anguishes of spirit overwhelm them, while they are so little
regarded by us, O that we were sensible of others afflictions and sorrows
whether spiritual or temporal, as they themselves are, and as we would have
them to be of ours were our souls in their souls stead, and if the Lord should
so by his providence order it as to bring us into those straits which we saw
our Brother in, and would not afford him so much as our prayers, may we not
justly expect that the next time that we our selves are in streights, our
consciences should take up a Parable and taunting Proverb against us, and say
as Joseph's Brethren did we are verily guilty concerning our Brother, in that we
saw the anguish of his soul, when he besought us and we would not hear,
therefore is all this distress come upon us; And that which I would desire
thee to beg of God for me is, That he would give me sincerely to aim at his
glory in all my actions, but especially those that belong to my Ministry, that
I might not be as a broken vessel, and that he would give me greater
discoveries of and love to himself and the Lord Jesus Christ; and that he would
give me gifts, and strength, and wisdom, opportunity, and a heart to serve
him, and mercies suitable to my wants, that mine afflictions may be sanctified,
my temptations conquered, and my corruptions mortified.

One thing more I am to request of thee, that is to do what I know too much
neglected by my self, and I fear by others; Thou art to pray for a blessing
upon thy self when thou read this Treatise, and that God would make it a
blessing unto others also into whose hands it shall come: I desite you that you
would help me with your prayers in this particular; When we do but take our
ordinary daily bread we crave a blessing, how much more when we do things that
concern our eternal good; When we take a Book to that end spiritually to
benefit by it, do we think that it is in our own power, or in the power of any
Treatise that we read, (without Gods assistance) to do us good; Nay the Word
of God it self is but a dead Letter, if the holy Spirit be absent when we hear
or read it: But that thou should desire a Blessing upon thy self in reading
of this Book is not all I request of thee, but that thou would also extend
thy prayers further, even for others, that it may be also for their edification
whosoever shall read it; For as we are to pray that every Sermon we hear may
be for the spiritual advantage of others as well as of our selves; It holds
also in reading of Treatises of Devotion.

FINIS.

