Whereas diverse Statutes were made, viz. 1. Car. 1. Against unlawful
Assemblies for Pastimes upon the Lord's Day. 3. Car. 1. Against Carriers,
Butchers, Drovers, Carmen, etc. For abuses committed by them upon the
Lord's Day. 21. Jac. 20. Against profane Swearing and Cursing. 1. Jac. 9. 4.
Jac. 5. 7. Jac. 10. 21. Jac. 7. and 1. Car. 4. Against Tippling and
Drunkenness. 3. Car. 3. Against unlicenced Alehouses. 4. Jac. 4. Against
selling Ale and Beer to unlicenced Alehouses. 33. Hen. 8. cap. 9. Against
unlawful Games. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. 9. All Licenses to keep houses for
unlawful Games shall be void.

ALL which good and wholesome Laws having of late years been much neglected and
little observed, for that they have received very rare and slow execution, to
the great dishonor and displeasure of Almighty God, through the frequent
multiplying of many notorious offenses within the populous City of London, and
the adjacent parts thereof, which by the said good Laws are forbidden upon
several penalties.

These are therefore to authorize and command you the bearer hereof, to enter
into all such houses and places as you or any of you shall suspect, for the
most effectual execution of the said Statutes, or any of them, with such other
person and persons, as you shall think fit for your assistance. And upon your,
or their view, or lawful testimony given to you or them, of any offender or
oftenders against the effect and true meaning of any of the said Statutes, to
take and apprehend every such offender and offenders, and bring him or them
personally before me, or some other His Majesty's justice of the Peace, or
other Officer, as by the said Statutes, or any of them are respectively
appointed or assigned for the punishment of the said offenders, to answer such
Objections as shall be made against them, or any of them. Willing and
commanding all Constables, Officers, and other His Majesty's loving Subjects to
be ayding and assisting unto you in the due execution hereof. Whereof they may
not fail at their perils. Dated this (...) day of Anno Dom. 164

And to all Constables, Officers, and other His Majesty's loving Subjects
hereby authorized, and to every of them within the said (...)

