THE RIGHTS OF THE PEOPLE Concerning IMPOSITIONS, Stated in a learned ARGUMENT;
WITH A Remonstrance presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty, by the
Honorable House of Commons, in the Parliament, An. Dom. 1610. Annoque Regis
Jac. 7.

By a late eminent Judge of this Nation.

LONDON, Printed for William Leak, at the Crown in Fleetstreet, betwixt the two
Temple-Gates. 1658.

TO THE Courteous READER.
THis excellent Treatise of the no less worthy Author, happily falling into my
hands, I instantly thought it my duty to make that public, which had given so
much useful satisfaction to many learned, and judicious, in private; remembering
that ancient Adage, Bonum quo communius, eo praestantius

I hope it is needless to commend either the Reverend Author deceased, the
Treatise, its use, or style; since the Authority by which it is published, is a
sufficient argument of their known worth.

If thou kindly accept of his good meaning, whose only aim in the publishing
hereof was the Common good, it will be an encouragement to him (and others) to
present to thy view, what may hereafter fall into his hands worthy thy further
perusal.

Thine; J. B.

20. Maii. 1641.
AT a Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons, for examination
of Books, and of the licencing and suppressing of them, etc.

It is Ordered, That this Treatise be published in Print.

Sir Edward Deering, Knight. and Baronet.

There is lately come forth, An exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of
London, from the reign of King Edward the Second, unto Richard the Third, of
all the Parliaments holden in each Kings reign, and the several Acts in every
Parliament, together with the Names and Titles of all the Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts and Barons summoned to every of the said Parliaments.
Collected by Sir Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet. And are to be sold by
William Leak at the Crown in Fleetstreet, betwixt the two Temple gates.

A Remonstrance delivered to His Majesty in writing, after the inhibition given
by Him to the Commons House of Parliament, as well by word of mouth, as by
Letters, not to proceed in the examining his Right to Impose without assent of
Parliament.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WHereas we your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the Commons assembled in
Parliament, have received first by message, and since by speech from your
Majesty a command of restraint, from debating in Parliament your Majesty's
right of Imposing upon your Subjects goods exported, or imported out of, or
into this Realm; yet allowing us to examine the grievance of these Impositions
in regard of quantity, time, and other circumstances of disproportion thereto
incident: We your said humble Subjects nothing doubting but that your Majesty
had no intent by that command to infringe the ancient and fundamental right of
the Liberty of Parliament in point of exact discussing of all matters
concerning them, and their possessions, goods, and rights whatsoever, which yet
we cannot but conceive to be done in effect by this command, do with all humble
duty make this Remonstrance unto your Majesty.

First, We hold it an ancient, general and undoubted right of Parliament, to
debate freely all matters which do properly concern the Subject, and his right
or estate; which freedom of debate being once fore-closed, the essence of the
liberty of Parliament is withthal dissolved.

And whereas in this case the Subjects right on the one side, and your
Majesty's Prerogatives on the other, cannot possibly be severed in debate of
either: We allege that your Majesty's Prerogatives of that kind concerning
directly the Subjects right and interest, are daily handled and discussed in
all Courts at Westminster, and have been ever freely debated upon all fit
occasions, both in this and all other former Parliaments, without restraint;
which being forbidden, it is impossible for the Subject, either to know, or to
maintain his Right and Propriety to his own Lands and Goods, though never so
just and manifest.

It may further please your most excellent Majesty to understand, that we have
no mind to impugn, but a defire to inform our selves of your Highness
Prerogative in that point, which (if ever) is now most necessary to be known;
and though it were to no other purpose, yet to satisfy the generality of your
Majesty's Subjects, who finding themselves much grieved by these new
Impositions, do languish in much sorrow and discomfort

These Reasons (Dread Sovereign) being the proper Reasons of Parliament, do
plead for the upholding of this our ancient Right and Liberty. Howbeit seeing
it has pleased your Majesty to insist upon that Judgment in the Exchequer, as
being direction sufficient for us without further examination: Upon great
desire of leaving your Majesty unsatisfied in no one point of one of our
intents and proceedings, We profess touching that Judgment, that we neither do
nor will take upon us to reverse it; but our desire is to know the Reasons
whereupon the same was grounded; and the rather for that a general conceit is
had, That the Reasons of that Judgment may be extended much further, even to
the utter ruin of the ancient liberty of this Kingdom, and of your Subjects
Right of propriety to their Goods and Lands.

Then for the Judgment it self, being the first and last that ever was given in
that kind (for ought appearing unto us,) and being only in one Case, and
against one man, it can bind in law no other, but that person; and is also
reversible by Writ of error granted heretofore by Act of Parliament; and
neither he nor any other Subject is debarred by it, from trying his Right in
the same or like case, in any of your Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

Lastly, We nothing doubt, but our intended proceeding in a full examination of
the right, nature, and measure of these new Impositions (if this restraint had
not come between) should have been so orderly and so moderately carried and
employed to the manifold necessities of these times, and given your Majesty so
true a view of the state and right of your Subjects, that it would have been
much to your Majestres content and satisfaction, (which we most desire,) and
removed all causes of fears and jealousies from the loyal hearts of your
Subjects, which is (as it ought to be) our careful endeavor: Whereas
contrariwise in that other way directed by your Majesty, we cannot safely
proceed without concluding for ever the right of the Subject, which without due
examination thereof we may not do.

We therefore your loyal and dutiful Commons; not swerving from the approved
steps of our Ancestors, most humbly and instantly beseech your gracious
Majesty, that without offense to the same, we may according to the undoubted
Right and Liberty of Parliament, proceed in our intended course of a full
examination of these Impositions; That so we may cheerfully pass on to your
Majesty's business, from which this stop has by diversion so long withheld
us. And we your Majesty's most humble, faithful, and loyal Subjects, shall ever
(according to our bounden duty) pray for your Majesty's long and happy reign
over us.

The question is, whether the King, without assent of Parliament, may set
impositions upon the wares and goods of merchants exported, and imported, out
of, and into this Realm.
THree things have been debated in this Parliament, that have much concerned
the right of our whole Nation, of which every one of them has exceeded the
other by a gradation in weight and moment.

The first, was the change of our name, which was a point of honor, wherein we
showed our selves not willing to leave that name, by which our ancestors made
our Nation famous: The name of Britain not admitted in legal proceedings.
yet have we lost it, saving only in those cases where our ancient and
faithful Protector, the Common Law does retain it.

The second was the union; a question of greater moment, for that concerned the
freehold of our whole Nation, not in so high a point as having, or not having;
but in point of Division and participation, that is, whether we should enjoy
the benefits and liberties of the kingdom our selves only as we and our
ancestors have done, or admit our neighbor Nation to have equal right in
them, and so make our own part the less, by how much the greater number should
be among whom the Division was to be made. Coke l. 7. Calvin's case.
This was adjudged against us both Legally and Solemnly, and therefore in that
we rest, hoping of that effect of this judgment which we read of in the Poet,
Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine habetur. Virgil. Aen. l. 1. Dido's speech
to Aeneas.


The third is the question now in hand, which exceeds the other two in
importance and consequence, concerning the whole kingdom; for it is a question
of our very essence, not what we shall be called, nor how we shall divide that
we have, but whether we shall have any thing or nothing: for if there be a
right in the King to alter the property of that which is ours without our
consent, we are but tenants at his will of that which we have. If it be in the
King and Parliament, Then have we property, and are Tenants at our own will:
for that which is done in Parliament, is done by all our wills and consents.
And this is the very state of the question which is proposed, that is, whether
the King may impose without consent of Parliament.

Impositions are of two natures, Foreign, and Intestine.

Intestine, be those which are raised within our land in the commerce and
dealing that is at home within our selves, and may as well for that reason be so
called, as for that vescuntur intestinis Reipublicae, They are fed and
nourished with the consuming and wasting of the entralls of the Common wealth.
Against these I need not to speak; for the Kings learned Council have with
great honor and conscience in full Council acknowledged them to be against
the law.

Therefore I will apply my self to speak of impositions foreign, being the
single question now in hand, and maintained on the Kings behalf with great art
and eloquence.

The inconvenience of these impositions to the Commonwealth, that is, how
hurtful they are to the Merchants, in impoverishing them in their estates; to
the King in the increasing of his revenues by decay of traffic, and to the
whole people in making all commodities excessive dear, is confessed by all,
and therefore need no debate. The point of right is now only in question, and
of that I will speak with conscience and integrity, rather desirous that the
truth may be known, and right be done, than that the opinion of my self or any
other may prevail.

The occasion of this question was given by the book of rates lately set out,
affronted with the copy of Letters Patents, dated July 28.6. Jac. In which
book, besides the rates, is set down every kind of merchandise, exported and
imported, for the true answering of subsidy to the King, according to the
Statute of Tonnage and Poundage.

In the first year of his reign there is an addition of impositions upon all
those kind of wares, which within the book are expressed, and the rate of the
imposition as high and in some cases higher than the rate of the subsidy: And
this declared to be by authority of those Letters Patents. Hereupon considering
with my self, that heretofore the setting on of one only imposition without
assent of Parliament, upon some one kind of merchandise, and that for a small
time, and upon urgent necessity of actual war, did so affect our whole Nation,
and especially the great Council of the Parliament, being the Representative
body of the whole Commonwealth, that neither the sun did shine, nor the rivers
run their courses until it was taken off by the public judgment of the whole
State.

I thought it concerned me, and other members of that Council, that were no
less trusted for our Country, than those in former times, and have their
actions to guide and direct us, to have the same care they had in preserving
the right and liberties of the people, having now more cause then they had, for
that the impositions now set on without assent of Parliament, are not upon one
or two special kinds of goods, but almost indefinite upon all, and do extend
to the number of many hundreds, as appears by that printed book of rates, and
are set in charge upon the whole kingdom as an inheritance to continue to the
King, his heirs and successors for ever: which limitation of estate in matter
of impositions was never heard of, nor read of before, as I conceive.

The inducements expressed in these Letters Patents are much upon point of
State, and with reference to the rights and practice of fortaine Princes; For
this I will not take upon me to enter into the consideration of such great
mysteries of policy, and government, but will only put you in mind of that I
observe out of Tit. Tit. Live. l. 8.
Livius the Roman Historiographer: Omnem divini humanique moris memoriam
abolemus, cum nova peregrinaque patriis and priscis praeferimus.

To that which has been spoken for the Kings Prerogative, I will give answer
to so much of it as I may conveniently in my passage through this debate:
wherein I will principally endeavor to give satisfaction to such new objections
as were made by the worthy and learned Counselor of the King that spoke last,
in maintenance of his Majesty's Prerogative.

The case in terms is this: Pat. July 28. Iac. 6.
The King by his Letters Patents before recited, has ordained willed, and
commanded that these new impositions contained in that book of rates shall be
for ever hereafter paid unto him, his Heirs, and Successors, upon pain of his
displeasure: Hereupon the question arises whether by this Edict and Ordinance
so made by the King himself, by his Letters Patents of his own will and power
absolute, without assent of Parliament, he be so lawfully entitled to that he
does impose, as that thereby he does alter the property of his subjects goods,
and is enabled to recover these imposition, by course of Law.

I think he cannot; and I ground my opinion upon these four reasons.

1. It is against the natural frame and constitution of the policy of this
kingdom, which is jus publicum regni, and so subverteth the fundamental Law
of the Realm, and induces a new form of state and government.

2. It is against the municipall Law of the Land, which is jus privatum, the
Law of property and of private right.

3. It is against diverse Statutes made to restrain our King in this point.

4. It is against the practice and action of our Common wealth, contra morem
majorum; and this is the modestest rule to limit both Kings Prerogatives, and
Subjects Liberties.

Upon the first, and fourth of these four principal grounds I will more insist
then upon the second and third, both for that in their own nature they are a
more proper matter for a Council of State, to the judgment of which I apply my
discourse (and they have not been enforced by others:) As also for that the
other two (as more fit for a bar, and the Courts of ordinary justice) have by
some professors of the Law been already most leardnedly and exquisitely
discussed.

For the first: it will be admitted for a rule, and ground of State, that in
every Commonwealth and government there be some rights of Sovereignty, jura
Majestatis, which regularly, and of common right do belong to the Sovereign
power of that State; unless Custom, or the provisional ordinance of that State
do otherwise dispose of them: which Sovereign power is potestas suprema, a
power that can control all other powers, and cannot be controuled but by it
self

It will not be denied that the power of imposing has so great a trust in It,
by reason of the mischiefs may grow to the Commonwealth by the abuses of it,
that it has ever been ranked among those rights of Sovereign power.

Then is there no further question to be made but to examine where the
Sovereign power is in this Kingdom; for there is the right of imposition.

The Sovereign power is agreed to be in the King: but in the King is a twofold
power; the one in Parliament, as he is assisted with the consent of the whole
State; the other out of Parliament as he is sole, and singular, guided merely
by his own will. And if of these two powers in the King, one is greater than
the other, and can direct and control the other; that is Suprema Potestas,
the Sovereign power, and the other is subordinata.

It will then be easily proved, that the power of the King in Parliament is
greater than his power out of Parliament, and does rule and control it; for
if the King make a grant by his Letters Patents out of Parliament, it binds
him and his successors, he cannot revoke it, nor any of his Successors; But by
his power in Parliament he may defeat and avoid it; and therefore that is the
greater power.

If a judgment be given in the Kings Bench, by the King himself (as may be,
and by the Law is intended) a writ of Error, to reverse this judgment, may be
sued before the King in Parliament, which writ must be granted by the
Chancellor, upon bill indorsed by the King himself, 1 H. 7.19 6. Lib. Intrac.
fol. 302. c. 1.
as the book is 1 H, 7.19.6. And the form of the writ of Error is, that it
being directed to the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Quia in recordo and
pricessu, ac etiam in redditione judicii loquelae, quae suit in Curia nostra
coram nobis, Error intervenit manifestus ad grave damnum, etc. Nos errorem (si
quis fuerit) modo debito corrigi, and partibus praedictas plenam and celerem
justitiam fieri volentes, in hac part vobis mandamus, quoa Recordum and
processum loquelae illius cum omnibus ea tangentibus, in praesens Parliamentum
nostrum sub sigillio tuo distin^^e and aperte mittas and hoc breve, ut
inspectis, etc. nos de Consilio and advisamento Dominorum spiritualium and
temporal^um, ac Communitatis in Parliamento nostro praedicto existentis,
ulterius pro errore illo corrigendo fieri faciamus quod de jure and secundum
legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae fuerit faciendum. So you see the
Appeal is from the King out of the Parliament, to the King in Parliament; the
writ is in his name; the rectifying and correcting the errors is by him, but
with the assent of the Lords and Commons, The book is not so, that the Commons
should meddle.
than which there can be no stronger evidence to prove, that his power out of
Parliament is subordinate to his power in Parliament; for in Acts of
Parliament, be they laws, grounds, or whatsoever else, the Act and power is
the Kings, but with the assent of the Lords and Commons, which makes it the
most sovereign and supreme power above all, and controulable by none. Besides
this right of imposing, there be others in the Kingdom of the same nature: As
the power to make laws; the power of Naturalization; the power of erection of
arbitrary Government; the power to judge without appeal; the power to
legitimate: all which do belong to the King only in in Parliament. Others there
be of the same nature, that the King may exercise out of Parliament, which
right is grown unto him in them, more in those others by the use and practice
of the Commonwealth: as denization, coynage, making war: which power the King
has time out of mind practiced, without the gainsaying and murmuring of his
subjects: But these other powers before mentioned have ever been executed by
him in Parliament, and not otherwise, but with the reluctation of the whole
Kingdom.

Can any man give me a reason, why the King can only in Parliament make laws?
No man ever read any law whereby it was so ordained; and yet no man ever read
that any King practiced the contrary: Therefore it is the original right of
the Kingdom, and the very natural constitution of our State and policy, being
one of the highest rights of Sovereign power: So it is in naturalization,
legitimation, and the rest of that sort before recited.

It has been alleged that those which in this Cause have enforced their
reasons from this Maxim of ours (That the King cannot alter the Law) have
diverted from the question.

I say under favor they have not; for that in effect is the very question now
in hand; for if he alone out of Parliament may impose, he alters the Law of
England in one of these two maine fundamental points. He must either take his
Subjects goods from them, without assent of the party, which is against the
Law; or else he must give his own Letters Pattents the force of a Law, to alter
the property of his Subjects goods, which is also against the Law.

That the King of England cannot take his subjects goods, without their
consent, it need not be proved more than a principle; it is jus indigenae, an
old homeborne right, declared to be Law by diverse statutes of the Realm: 34 E.
3. c. 2.
As in 34. E. 3. cap 2. That no office of the Kings, or of his heirs, shall
take any goods of any manner of person without the assent and good will of the
party, to whom the goods belonged. The same is declared in many other Statutes
made against prisages and purveyances. Neither have ever any Kings attempted to
go plainly and directly against that right, but have devised certain legal
colors and shadows for their wrongful doing in that kind, which I do find
were of three sorts: Commissions, Loans or Privy Seals, Benevolence.
by way of Commission; by way of Loan; by way of Benevolence Commissions of all
other were the most insolent; for they went out (as it were by authority to
levy aid of the people upon great necessity of the Commonwealth.) These were
condemned in Parliament. 21 E. 3. Number. 16. upon a grevious complaint made of
the use of them by the Commons, unto the King in Parliament: wherein the people
do pray the King, that he would be pleased to remember how at the Parliament
held the 17 year of his reign, and at the last Parliament, That is, the
Parliament.
it was then accorded, and granted by their said Lord the King and his
Council, that there should go out no Commissions out of Chauncery for
Hobbeleries, Archers, and other charges to be levied upon the people, if they
were not granted in Parliament; which ordinances were not observed: by reason
whereof the people were impoverished aed decayed, for which they prayed the
King that he would be pleased to take pity of his people, and the ordinances
and grants made to his people in Parliament to affirm and hold; And that if
such Commissions go out without assent of Parliament, that the Commons, which
are grieved thereby, may have writs of supersedeas, according to the said
Ordinance, and that the people be not bound to obey them.

To this the Kings answer is.

Si ul tiel imposition fuit fait per grand necessity, and ceo del assent des
Prelates, Countes, Barons, and aut grandes and ausomes des Commons adonque
presents, Neant moins nostre Seignior le Roy ne voet que tiel imposition non
duement fait, soit treit in consequence, eins voet que les ordinances don't cest
petition fait mention soit blenment garoes. The last time that ever King
attempted that course of exaction was 17 H. 8. Stowes annals. 17. H. 8.
upon the taking of the French King at Pavia, by the forces of Charles the
fifth: Cardinal Wolsey having a purpose to put the King into a war about that
quarrel, and finding his cophers empty, advised this way, to send out
Commissions, and by them to levy aid of the people, according to the value of
their estate; But this gave such discontent to the whole Realm, that it caused
in many places an actual rebellion: and the Cardinal being called to give an
account of this bad advice, did justify this fact by the example ot Joseph,
who advised Pharaoh to take the fifth part of his subjects goods: But when he
saw that would not serve the turn, he falsely laid it upon the Judges,
informing the King, he did it by their advice, being resolved by them of the
lawfulness of the fact. So you see that great Churchmen found more safety in
matter of government of our Commonwealth, in making a false report of a point
of the Common Law, then in a true Text of the Scripture. And if any Church men
will endeavor by application of the Text of Scripture, to overthrow the
ancient Law and Liberties of the Kingdom, I would advise them to be admonished
by the ill success of the Cardinal, in this particular action, and by the
miserable catastrophe of his whole life and fortunes.

Loans and Privy Seals.
Loans and Apprests were those which we call Privy Seals, which though they
were more moderate in show, yet being made against the good will of the
parties, were as injurous indeed as the other. The Commons in Parliament, 25. E
3. Number. Rot. pat. 25. E 3. number. 16.
16. made a grievous complaint to the King against the use of them, and prayed,
that none from thenceforth should be compelled to make Loans against their
will, and they gave this reason, in their petition for that it is against
reason, and the franchise of the land, and prayed that restitntion might be
made to those that have made such Loans.

To this the Kings rescript was; It pleases our Lord the King it be so.

Lastly, Benevolence.
Came in those kind of exactions, which were termed by the fair name of
Benevolences; but they became so odious, as they gave the occasion of a good
Law to be made against themselves, and against all other shifts, and devices,
by what new terms soever imposed upon the Subjects: 1 R. 3. c. 2
the Law is, 1 R. 3. cap. 2 and is thus; The King remembering how the Commons of
this his Realm, by new and unlawful inventions, and inordinate covetise,
against the Law of this Realm, have been put to great servitude and important
charges and exactions, and especially by a new Imposition called a Benevolence,
enacteth by the advice, etc. that the Subjects and Commons of this Land from
henceforth shall in no wise be charged by any such charges, or impositions
called the Benevolence, nor by such like thing.

But if you will deny, that the King does in this case take the goods of his
Subject without his assent, then you must other fall upon mine alternative
proposition, That the Kings Patent has in this case the power of a Law, to
alter property; for how can he recover the imposed by a legal course of
proceeding, and by judgment in his Court, but upon a title precedent him,
before the action brought, which title must be a property in the same imposed?
and how comes he by that property, but by his own Letters Patents, by which
he declares he will have that same as an imposition? For the Judgment gives
not the right, but only does manifest and declare it, and gives execution of
it: So in this point the question is, whether the Kings Patent has the force
and power of the Law, or not; for if it be not maintained that it has, it can
never be concluded that he can transfer the property of his Subjects goods to
himself, without the assent of them; for quod meum est, sine facto meo alterius
fieri non potest. And if you give this power to the Kings Patent, you subject
the Law, and take away all rules and bounds of settled government, and leave in
the Subject no property of his own, neither do you by this advance the Kings
power and prerogatjve, Bracton, l. 1. c. 8.
but you make him no King; for as Bracton says, Rex est ubi dominatur lex, non
voluntas.

So we see that the power of imposing, and power of making Laws are
convertibilia and coincidentia; and whosoever can do the one, can do the other;
And this was the opinion of Sir John Fortescue that reverend and honorable
Judge, a very learned professor of the Common Law, and Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, Fortesc. de laudibus Leg. Ang. c. 9.
in the time of Henry 6. His words are these in his Book, De laudibus Legum
Angliae, cap. 9. Non potest Rex Angliae ad libitum leges mutare regni sui;
principatu namque nedum regali, sed and politico ipse dominatur: Si regali
tantum praeesset iis, leges mutare posset; tallagia quoque, and caetera onera
imponere, ipsis inconsultis, quale dominium leges civiles indicant, cum dicunt
quod principi placuerit, legis habet vigorem; sed long aliter potest Rex
politicis imperans, quia nec leges ipse sine subditorum assensu mutare poterit,
nec subjectum populum renitentem onerare peregrinis impositionibus. In which
place I must interpret unto you, that peregrinae impositiones be not strange
and unheard of impositions, as was urged by the worthy Gentleman that spoke
last; but impositions upon traffic into, and out of forain Countries, Fortesc.
de laud. Leg. Ang. cap. 36.
which is the very thing in question: Further in the thirty sixth Chapter, he
says of the King of England, Neque Rex ibidem per se aut ministros suos
tallagia, Subsidia, aut alia quaevis onera imponit ligeis suis, aut leges little
mutat, vel novas condit, sine concessione vel assensu totius regni sui in
Parliamento. So he makes these two powers of making Law, and imposing to be
concomitant in the same hand, and that the one of them is not without the
other; he gives the same reason for this, as we do now, but in other words,
because (as he says) in England it is principatus mixtus, and politicus, the
King has his sovereign power in Parliament, assisted and strengthened with the
consent of the whole Kingdom; and therefore these powers are to be exercised by
him only in Parliament. In other Countries they admit the ground of the Civil
Law, quod principi placuerit, legis habet vigorem; Because they have an
absolute power to make Law, they have also a power to impose, which has the
force of a Law in transferring property. Ph. Com. l 4. cap. 1. l. 5. cap. 8.
Philip Comines, that lived at that time, in his fourth Book, the first
Chapter, the fifth Book the eighth Chapter, takes notice of this policy of
England, and commends it above all other States, as settled in most security:
And further to our purpose lays this ground, That a King cannot take one
penny from his Subjects without their consent, but it is violence. And you may
there note the mischiefs that grew to the Kingdom of France, by the voluntary
impositions first brought in by Charles the Seventh, and ever since continued,
and increased to the utter impoverishment of the Common people, and the loss of
their free Council of three Estates: And if this power of imposing were quietly
settled in our Kings, considering what the greatest use they make of assembling
of Parliaments, which is the supply of money, I do not see any likelihood to
hope for often meetings in that kind, because they would provide themselves by
that other means. And thus much for my first reason grounded upon the natural
constitution of the Policy of our Kingdom, and the public Right of our Nation.

2 For the point of Common Law, Com. Law.
which is my second reason, it has been well debated, and nothing left
unspoken that can be said in it; and therefore I will decline to speak of that,
which other men have well discussed, and the rather, for that there is nothing
in our Law-book directly, and in point of this matter; neither is the word
(imposition) found in them, until the case in my L. Dier. 1. Diec. 1. E. 165.
Eliz. 165. for we shall find this business of an higher strain, and always
handled elsewhere, as afterward shall appear: yet I will offer some Answers to
such Objections as have been made on the contrary in point of Common Law, and
have not been much stood upon by others to be answered.

The Objections that have been made are these; That from the first Book of the
Law to the last, no man ever read any thing against the Kings power of
imposing: No Judgment was ever given against it, in any of the Kings Courts at
Westminster: Other points of Prerogative as high as this, disputed and debated,
his excess in them limited, 42. Ass. p. 9.
as in the book of 42. Ass. pl. 5. where the Judges took away a Commission from
one that had power given by it to him under the great Seal, to take ones
person, and to seize his goods before he was indicted: So Master Scrogs case.
1, and 2 E. Dier. 175
1, and 2. El Dier. 175 the power of the King in making a Commission to
determine a question of right, depending between two parties notably debated,
and ruled against the King, that he could not grant it.

To this I answer, That cases of this nature (of which the question now handled
is) have ever been taken to be of that extraordinary consequence, in point of
the Common right of the whole Kingdom, that the States would never trust any of
the Courts of ordinary Justice with the deciding of them; but assumed the
cognizance of them unto the high Court of Parliament, as the fittest place to
decide matters so much concerning the whole body of the Kingdom, as 2. Ed. 3.7.
it appears that Ed. 1. had granted a Charter to the men of Great Yarmouth, that
all the ships of Merchants, coming to the Port of Yarmouth, should land their
goods at their Haven, and not at any other Haven at that Port, as at Garneston,
and Little Yarmouth, which were members of that Port. This was very
inconvenient for the Merchants, and a great hurt to Traffic, and therefore the
Charter was questioned in the time of Ed 2. and adjudged good by the Council:
But the parties not contented with this judgment, in the second year of King E.
3. by an order in Parliament made upon a Petition there exhibited against this
Grant, brought a Scire facias out of the Chancery returnable in the Kings
Bench, to question again the lawfulness of the Patent, and in that Suit the
cause was notably debated, and those Reasons much insisted upon that have been
enforced in this case; as that of the Kings power in the custody of the Ports:
But the matter so depending in the ordinary Court of Justice, a Writ came out
of the Parliament, and did adjourn it thither again; where it gave occasion of
a good Law to be made to prevent the like Grants, and to make them void
notwithstanding any Judgment given upon them, and to make such Judgments also
void. The Statute is, 9: E. 3. c. 1. And in the Parliament Rolls, 9. E. 3. c.
1. Every Alien and Denizen may carry his Merchandise where it pleases him,
notwithstanding any Charter granted, or Judgment thereupon. 16, and 17. R. 2.
2 H. 4. number 109. we find a notable Record, which gives warrant for the
proceeding in Parliament, in this manner as has been in this Case,
notwithstanding the Judgment in the Exchequer, and declares to the Kingdom,
that notwithstanding the great wonder made by some men, nothing has been done
in this business by those that serve in the Parliament, but in imitation of
their worthy Predecessors in the like case. In the second year of H. 4. the
Commons show that in the time of R. 2. by the means of John Waltham, Bishop of
Salisbury, Treasurer of England, wrongfully, without authority of Parliament,
and by reason of a Judgment given in the Exchequer, 16, and 17. R. 2. by the
Barons there, against certain Merchants of Bristol, and other places, passage
had been taken for Wines otherwise then in ancient times had been, and
therefore they prayed, they might pay their prise Wines in the manner they had
used to pay, notwithstanding any Judgment given in the Exchequer, or other
Ordinance made by the said Treasurer, contrary to the ancient usage; which
Petition the King granted, and the Judgment thereupon became void, and the
prisage Wine has been paid contrary to the Judgment ever since.

In 1. El. Dier. 165. 1. El. Dier. 265.
upon the complaint, made by the Merchants, of the impositions set upon Cloth
by Queen Mary by her absolute power without assent of Parliament; The Cause was
thought too weighty to be decided in any one Court; but (as it appears in the
Book) it was referred to all the Judges of England, who diverse times had
conference about it. So it may well be, there is nothing against it in our year
Books, for there is nothing of it.

Another Objection was this, which was made in the last argument, viz. That
Custom is originally due by the Common Law of England; it can then have no
other ground or cause, but merely by the Kings royal Prerogative, as a right
and duty originally belonging to his Crown: which if it be, it must necessarily
follow he may impose, for that is but the exercising of that right. To prove
this was alleged the case 39. 39 E. 3.13.
E. 3.13. by which case it appears, that King John had a Custom of eight
pence on a Tun of Wine in the Port of Southampton, but the Book does not tell
you that the King had it by prerogative, and he might have it as well
otherwise; as by prescription, or convention, which shall rather be intended,
by reason of the certainty of the sum paid; for if it were by prerogative, he
might take sometimes more, sometimes less at his will, the right being
indefinite, and the quantity limited only by his own discretion. A common
person may have such a custom certain, as 18. El Dier. 352. The Mayor of London
has the twentieth part of Salt brought into the City by Aliens, 18 El. Dier.
352
which is a great Imposition, but is good by prescription originally, and has
received greater strength since, by Acts of Parliament made for the
confirmation of the Liberties and Customs of the City of London. So it
appears that John of Britain had Custom of the ships that arrived at his Port
of Little Yarmouth, Dier. 43.
worth twenty pounds per annum. And these instances do inefer, that a Custom
may be otherwise then by prerogative, and therefore it is no good argument to
conclude, the King had such a custom, Therefore he had it by Prerogative.

The Book in 30. H. 8. Dier. 43. 30 Hen. 8 Dier. 43.
was much pressed on this point, which says that Custom belonged to the King
at Common Law, and does instance in Wool, Wooll-fells, and Leather begun at
the Common Law, but abridged by the Statute of 14 E. 3. ca 21. stat. 1. 14 Ed.
3. c. 21. stat.
but this appears to be a great error, and mistaking in the Book; for we do
find that that Custom of Woolls, Wooll-fells and Leather was begun by a Grant
in Parliament, as appears in Statute 15 E. 1. cap. 7. The words be granted to
us by the Commonalty aforesaid; and the last mention before was that the King
had granted to the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Land,
etc. November. 3. Ed. 1. The Kingrecited in his Letter Patents That Prelati,
magnates ac tota communitas mercatorum Regni, granted this new Custom. And so
the ground and motive of that opinion being false all grounded upon that must
needs be erroneous.

It was objected, That the King holds at this day the increase of four pence
in the pound, over due Custom, paid by Merchants Aliens according to the
purport of the Charta mercatoria 31 E. Rot. char. 31. E. 1. number. 42. in Turri.
1. by mere right of Prerogative at the Common Law; for by that Grant of the
Merchants he cannot hold it, they being no Body Politic at the time of the
Grant; and therefore the Grant is merely void to bind in succession, and yet
the Merchants Aliens do pay it at this day.

It is agreed, That by the Common Law a contract with a number not incorporate,
binds not succession; but we must take notice, that they by whom that Grant
was made, of the augmentation of Custom, by three pence in the pound, and other
increases, 31. E. 1. were Merchants Aliens, who by the Law of Merchants, and
Nations may contract to bind their successors in matters of Traffic: For their
contracts are not ruled by the Common Law of the Land, but by the Law of
Nations, and per legem Mercatoriam, as the Book case is, 3. Ed. 4.10. and there
was a good consideration given them by the King for this increase of Custom: as
discharge of prise Wines for two shillings the Tun, and other Immunities, which
all Merchants Aliens hold and enjoy at this day, by force of that contract
made, 31 E. 1. For a stranger paieth now but two shillings the Tun for prisage,
whereas it stands an Englishman in much more; so as the rule of commutative
Justice makes the contract available to the King against the Merchants,
because he parts with part of his prisage to the Merchant, and makes it
available to the Merchant against the King, because he gives him increase of
Custom above that is due by Law. But the Statute of 27 E. 3. cap. 26. 27 E. 3.
cap. 26.
heretofore cited does make this point clear without scruple, which confirms
the Charter of 31. E. 1. entirely, and by that the increase of Custom by three
pence in the pound, which is by name mentioned in the Statute, is now due by
Act of Parliament.

If you will have the King hold this increase of Custom by Prerogative, you go
directly against his meaning; for it appears by that which presently followed
this Grant, that the King took this increase of Custom by way of contract
only, and not by way of Prerogative; for the same year following he directs
his Writs to the Officers of his Ports, reciting the contract made with the
Aliens by Charta Mercatoria, adding further that some Denizens were willing to
pay the like Custom, upon the same Immunities to them to be granted, and does
assign his Officers to gather it, but with this clause, Si gratanter and absque
coertione solvere voluerint, ita quod aliquem Mercatorem de regno and potestate
nostra ad praestationes and custumas hujusmodi invito solvendas nullatenus
distringatis. Nothing can more plainly express, that the Kings intention was
not to demand this by way of Prerogative, but by force of the contract. If
there were such a Prerogative in the Crown, as of right to have Custom, how
comes it to pass this Prerogative never yet had fruit or effect? for this I
can maintain, That the King of England has not one penny Custom or Imposition
upon Merchandises, elder then the fourth year of Queen Mary; that he holds
not by Act of Parliament, and by the peoples grant: The eldest that he has is
that of Woolls, Wooll-fells and Leather, and that is by Act of Parliament, as
appears in the Statute 25 E. 1. cap. 7. 25 E. 1. cap. 7.
the Tonnage and Poundage by Parliament in the first year of every Kings reign.

The Aliens increase of Custom by Parliament 27 E. 3 cap. 26. 27. E. 3. cap 26.
Then this Prerogative has been much neglected, that it was never called on to
be put in execution, until now of late years.

Concerning the Statutes made for restraining our Kings, Statute 3
from the exercise of this pretended Prerogative, which is the third matter I
stand upon: Those that have maintained the Kings Prerogative in this point,
have endeavored to interpret those Statutes, to extend only to restrain him
from imposing upon Wool, Wooll-fells, and Leather, which are staple
commodities: And the reason they give for this restraint more then for other
goods, is because the King, by Statute, is restrained to a Custom certain for
those commodities, as the half Mark a Sack of Wool, and half a Mark three
hundred Wooll-fells and thirteen shillings four pence a Last of Leather; and
therefore great reason he should not exceed this Custom in these Commodities.

This Objection receives many Answers: First it appears both by the express
letter of diverse of the Laws made in this point, by the occasion that induced
the making of the Laws, and by the execution of them, that all other Wares and
Merchandises, as well as those of the staple, were within the purpose and
intent of those Laws: Secondly The reason alleged why there should be
restraint for the staple Commodities, rather then for the other, is mistaken;
for the Lords and Commons did grant to E. 1. by Act of Parliament the custom of
the half Mark for Wool, Wooll-fels, and Leather, which was matter of mere
grace and liberality, and includes no restraint in it, but rather a favorable
extention, quite contrary to the sense of the Objection; according to that rule
of interpretation, Gratiosa ampliari decet, odiosa restringi. And admit some
Laws be made expressly to restrain impositions upon Wool, Wooll-fells, and
Leather, by reason that the occasion of making such Laws was the actual
imposing, upon those goods at that time, shall we not by good construction,
Secundum mentem extensivam legis, extend this Law to other Wares and
Merchandises that are within the same mischief? If we look to the reason of the
Law, we shall make no doubt of it; for that is because the impositions were
without assent of Parliament, not because they were upon such, and such
Commodities. Besides those Laws so made are declarativae juris antiqui, non
introductivae novi.

In the enumeration of those Statutes, which I conceive make directly to this
purpose, I will endeavor rather to answer the Objections made against them,
then to enforce the sense and meaning of them, which is very plain and open,
and needs no interpretation. The first Statute enforced is, Mag. Charta cap 30.
made in the ninth year of H. 3. by which it is enacted, that all Merchants
shall have free egress and regress, out of, and into this Realm, with their
goods and merchandises, to buy, and sell, sine omnibus malis tolnetis per
antiquas and rectas consuetudines: In which words we may infer, that both the
use and right of imposing are absolutely excluded, and debarred; for
Consuetudo, which in this case is to be taken for Usage, which is mos (not
improperly for Portorium, a duty paid in money, as our English word Custom, in
one sense does signify) implies a beginning, and continuance by consent, and
will of the parties, not by power and enforcement, which cannot be a Custom;
and therefore it cannot be an Imposition: for that arises merely out of the
will and power of their imposer, and is against the will of him upon whose
goods it is set: But take Consuetudo either for Mos or Portorium, the epithites
with which it is qualified, antiquum, and rectum, do describe it to be of that
nature, that it cannot be an Imposition: for antiquum, in legal construction,
is that which is time out of mind, that is not an Imposition: for then by
continuance of time it should grow a right by prescription, and were
justifiable: Rectum implies a limited right, which infers there may be a
wrong, and exceeding of that right which is not in impositions: for if there be
a right in the King to impose, the quantity, time, and other circumstances are
in his discretion; the right is illimited: And if he set on never so great an
Imposition, there is as much right in it, as if it be never so small: the
excess makes it a burden, but not a wrong.

We may further observe, that in the Statute, Malum tolnetum, which is evil
Toll, is set down by way of antithesis to antiqua, and recta consuetudo; by
which is inferred, that exactions upon Wares and Merchandises, not qualified
with these two properties of antiquum and rectum, are evil and unjust. This is
made more evident by a Record in the Tower of the sixteenth year of H. 3. which
was a Mandat sent by the King to the Customers of his Ports for the execution
of this Law made in 9 H. 3. whereby it is commanded, Rot. claus 16. H. 3. number.
Quod emnibus Mercatoribus in portum suum venientibus cum vinis, and aliis
merchandizis, scire faciant, quod salvo and secure in terram Angliae veniant
cum vinis and merchandizis suis, faciendo inde rectas and dubitas
consuetudines, nec sibi timeant de malis tolnetis, quae iis faciat Rex, vel in
terra sua fieri permittat. By this record the word Consutudo is interpreted to
be mos, not portorium; otherwise it should have been solvendo consuetudines,
not faciendo. Also these words entiquum and rectum in the Statute in this Writ
are rectum and debitum, which does more enforce a certainty of right and duty,
which by no means can be intended in impositions.

Objections against this Law were made in the last Argument. First, That it was
made for Aliens: This is true; the words of the Law do plainly show it was made
for Aliens: But if the State was so careful to provide for them shall we not
judge that with Denizens it was so already? And that this Statute was made to
extend that liberty by Act of Parliament to Aliens, which Denizens had by the
Common Law, succeeding times did so conceive of it, as appears by the Statute
of 2. 2. E. 3. cap. 9.
E. 3. cap. 9. the words are, that all Merchants, Strangers and Princes may go
and come with their merchandises in England after the tenor of the great
Charter, and that Writs be thereupon sent to all the Sheriffs in England, and
to Mayors and Bailiffs of good Towns, where need shall require.

A second Objection was made in the last Argument, out of these words of the
Statute of M. Char. that Merchants might freely traffic, nisi public antea
prohibiti fuerint: by which was enforced, that the King had power to restrain
and prohibit Traffic; therefore to impose. It is agreed, there may be a
public restraint of traffic upon respects of the common good of the Kingdom;
but whether that which is called publica prohibitio in the Statute, be intended
by the King alone, or by Act of Parliament, is a question: For such restraints
have still been by Parliament. But admit the King may make a restraint of
traffic in part for some public respect of the Commonwealth, he does this in
point of protection, as trusted by the Commonwealth, to do that which is for
the public good of the Kingdom; but if he use this trust to make a gain and
benefit by imposing, that is a breach of the trust, and a sale of government
and protection. But more of this shall be hereafter spoken in the answering of
the main Objections.

The next Law is that notable Statute of E. 1. 25. E. 1. cap. 7.
in the 25 year of his reign, made upon the very point in question; the words
are these. And forasmuch as the most part of the Commonalty of this Realm find
themselves sore grieved with the male toll of Woolls, that is, to wit, a toll
of forty shillings for every sack of Wool, and have petitioned to us for to
release the same; We at their request have clearly released it, and have
granted for us and our Heirs, that we shall not take such things, without their
common consent and good will, saving to us and our Heirs the Customs of Woolls,
Skins, and Leather granted before by the Commonalty aforesaid.

Against the application of this Law, to the question now in hand, many
Objections were made; some out of matter precedent to the Law, some out of the
Law it self, some out of matter subsequent and following after the Law: For
matter precedent; It was objected out of Thomas Walsingham, Tho. Walsingham in
E. 1. fo. 71, 72, 73. edit. per W. Camb. impres. Francof. 1603.
an Historiographer of good credit, that writ of that time when the Statute was
made, That in the Petition of grievances given to King E. 1. by the people in
the 25 year of his reign, upon which petition the Statute was made, that they
found themselves not grieved in point of right, but in point of excess; the
words are, Communitas sentit se gravatam de vectigali lanarum, quod nimis est
onerosum. viz. de quolibet sacco 40 s. and de lana fracta septem marcas; so
they express the cause of their grief, that it was too heavy; which is to be
applied to the point of excess, not of right.

To this I answer, that if the words had been (quia est nimis onerosum) this
construction might have been made out of them; because the word (quia) had
induced a declaration of the cause of that which was formerly affirmed: but the
words are (quod nimis onerosum) which does only positively affirm that the
imposition, de facto, was intolerable for the greatness of it, which does not
therefore admit that it is tolerable, in respect of the right the King had to
impose. But this is made clear by the general word precedent in the preamble of
the Petition which does evidently infer, they grounded their complaint upon
point of right, not upon point of excess; the words are these, Tota terrae
communitas sentit se valde gravatam, quia non tractantur secundum leges and
consuetudines terrae, secundum quas tractari antecessores sui solebant habere,
sed voluntary excluduntur. After which preamble, among the particulars, this
of forty shillings upon a sack of Wool is ranked, but with a dependency of
that expressed in the preamble for the point of right. But seeing we light upon
History, which though it be of small authority in a Law argument yet being the
History of our own Realm, has fit and proper use in the common counsel of the
Realm, Matthew Westminster. fo. 430. Edit. per H. Savile mil. Francofurti 1601.
I will pursue it a little further. Out of Matthew. Westminster. a Writer that lived
much nearer the time of the Law made, then Thomas Walsingham, he says, That
the Commons by their petitions required, Ne Rex de caetero tallagia usurparet,
and voluntarias super his inductas exactiones de caetero quasi in irritum
revocaret; by which it appears, that the point of the complaint was, that the
exactions laid on them were voluntary, that is, at the Kings will, without
assent of Parliament. Out of the Law it, self it has much been pressed, as
first the Commons made petition to the King, whereupon they infer out of the
nature of the word (petition) that their proceeding was by way of grievance,
for the excess and inconvenience, as a matter of grace, not in course of
justice for the wrong

To this I answer, That considering the quality of the parties to this action,
it being between the King and the Subject, duty and good manners does induce
gentleness and humility of terms, without blemish or diminution of the force of
right. It is according to the demeanor of Job, cap. 9. v. 15. Job 9.15
Though I were just, yet would I not answer, but I would make supplication to
my Judge. But in our forms of Law, be the right of the Subject never so clear,
manifest, and acknowledged by all; yet if his own be detained from him by the
King, he has no other Writ or Action to recover, but a mere petition,
Supplicat Colsitudini, etc. So as if the word Petition to the King infer defect
of right in the Petitioner, there can be no case where the King can do the
Subject wrong.

A second Objection out of the body of the Law is that the King does release
that imposition of forty shillings, which implies a right settled in him. But
to this I answer, That it is no necessary inference, wheresoever a release of
right is: for it is used for claim only, or where possession was, though
wrongful, and that in majorem securitatem, quia abundans cautela non nocet; but
in this case, a Release was very expedient, and for some respect necessary, to
extinguish a right the King had in this imposition against the Merchants
themselves: For this imposition, though it were not set on by assent of
Parliament, yet was it not set on by the Kings absolute power; but was granted
to him by the Merchants themselves who were to be charged with it: so the
grievance was the violation of the right of the people, in setting it on
without their assent in Parliament, not the damage that grew by it; for that
did only touch the Merchants, who could not justly complain thereof, because
it was their own act and grant. This appears by two notable Records, 22. E.
1. Origin. in Scac. Rem. These.
the one 22. E. 1. A Writ to the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer in
Ireland, to discharge the Merchants there of impositions on Woolls; in which
the King recites, Licet in subsiaium Guerrae Regis pro recuperanda terra
Vasconia, mercatores gratanter concesserunt per biennium vel triennium, si
tantum duravit Guerra, de sacco lanae, etc. In 26. E. 1. mem. Scac. Rem. These.
The other Record is the Writ of publication, that in 26. E. 1. went out after
the Statute of 25. in which Writ the King recites thus, Cum nos ad instantiam
Communitaetis Regni nostri remiserimus custumam 40 s. nobis nuper in subsidium
Guerrae noctrae contrae Regem Franciae concessum etc. A third Objection made
out of the body of the Statute, by those which have argued on the contrary
part, was upon these words, that the King would take (no such things) without
common consent; by which words they conceived the intention of the Law was
limited precisely to impositions set upon Wool, and not on other commodities,
which are not such things, but other: and for this they allege this reason,
That it was not probable when the complaint was only for an imposition on
Wool, that the King would give a remedy for other things not spoken of, for
which there was no cause of complaint.

To this a full answer is given many ways: First, out of the (Saving) in the
Act, which extends to other things then to Wool, as to Wooll-fells and
Leather; therefore the purview of the Act by these words (such things)
extends to more then the Wool; for there needs no saving, but for that which
is contained in the purview. Secondly, The reason alleged, that no more by
likelihood should be remedied but for Wool, because only that was complained
of, is false: For the complaint of the Commons was not only for this
imposition on Wool, but diverse other burdens and grievances of the like
nature. And this will appear if we compare all the parts of the Law, the one
with the other: For this Law is in the form of a Charter written in French, and
begins, Edward by the Grace of God, etc. and is an entire grant, and
Instrument without Fractions, Sections, and Chapters, as it is now printed, and
contains in it, next before this last clause concerning the impositions on
Woolls, which in the printed Book is Cap. 6. That the King, for no business,
from thenceforth, will take no manner of aids, mises, nor prises, but by common
assent. This word (mises) in French signifies properly impositions, derived of
the word mitto, in Latin (to put) so the word (such things) is a conclusion to
all the premises, and has relation not only to that which is made, Cap. 7. by
the Printer, and concerns the male toll of Woolls; but to that precedent
which is (all other aids) impositions, and takings.

The Writ of publication of this Statute sent out to all parts in 26. E. 1.
Mem. Scac. in 26. E. 1. Rem. These.
makes plain this construction; the words of it are, Concedentes quod custumam
illam vel aliam, sine voluntate vel communi assensu non capiamus: These words
(vel aliam) are indefinite, and extend to any other whatsoever, besides that of
Woolls. The Writ does further discharge Merchants for the commodities of
Wooll-fells, and Leather, which are not complained of by name in the Statute;
and therefore the Law was intended to other impositions as well as to those
upon Woolls.

The Objection made out of matter subsequent to the Statute was this, that
notwithstanding this Law of 25 E. 1. impositions that before the Statute had
been set on other Merchandise then Woolls, were still answered after the
Statute; and for instance of this, was alleged, 16. E. 1. Orig. R. These.
that whereas 16. E. 1. an imposition of 40 s. the Tun was set upon Wines
brought into the Kingdom, an account was made of this in the Exchequer in 26.
E. 1. as by the Records there appears; by which it seems that the Law of
25. E. 1 was not taken to extend to Wines, and such other Commodities, other
then Woolls named in the Statute. It is true, such an imposition was set on by
E. 1. in the sixteenth year of his reign, 25, and 26 E. 1. de count. T. Mich.
R. These.
and an account made for it 25. and 26. But it appears by the Record of the
account, that it was made for the time ended before the Statute made: As from
the eighteenth of May, 16. E 1. to 23 Jul. 22. E. 1. But there is no Record,
that ever any account was made for any money received for that imposition for
the time after the Statute made; neither was it very willingly answered before;
for it appears by the Record that it was ten years after the setting of it.

The third Statute alleged on the behalf of the Subject is that 34. E. 1. c.
1. 34. E. 1. cap. 1.
the words are these, No tallage or aid shall be taken or levied by us, or our
heirs in our Realm, without the good will and assent of our Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other freemen of the Land.
Against this was objected, That this Statute was intended only upon the Taxes
and impositions of things; The word Auxilium makes it clear, that it is to be
intended further then of things within the Realm; for Tallagium is commonly
intended of Domestical Taxes, but Auxilium is the most usual term for
impositions upon goods imported and exported, as by the Acts of Parliament by
which such impositions are given to the King in which they are called most
commonly by the name of Aids, as proceeding of good will and benevolence.

The fourth Statute alleged on this part is that of 5. 5. E. 2. cap. 14. Rot.
Ordin.
E. 2. c. 14. just in point of the matter in question; and therefore I will set
it down as I find it Verbatim in the Record in the Tower, Ensement novelles
customs sont levies, and ancients enhaunces come sur levies drapes, vine, aver
du pois, and aut chooses purquoy les Merchantes veynont pluis vilement, and
meynes de bien, menynont en la terre, and les Merchants estrangers demurront
pluis longment que ils soleyent faier, pur le quel demoure le chooses sont le
pluis enhaunces que ils ne soloyent estre, al damage de roy, and de son
people. Nous ordonomus que tout manners de male tolls levies puies de
Coronement de Roy Ed. faier de Roy Henry soyent entirement oustes, and de tout
estreints put tout jours, nient contristeant le Chartre que le dict Roy Ed fist
us Merchants aliens, pur ceo que il fuit fair contra le grand. Char. and
encountre le Franchise de la City de Londres, and sans assent de Baronage, etc.
Savant neque don't al Roy le custom de leynes, peulx, and de quirs, etc. si
aver les doet.

By this Law is recited. That by the levying of new Customs, and by the raising
of old, Traffic was destroyed, and all things made dear; And therefore all
new Impositions and Customs were discharged Charta Mercatoria, by which Custom
that was increased on Aliens, was taken away, and the reason alleged; Because
it was sans assent de Baronage, and against the great Charter. And this is
further with this clause, Saving to the King his Custom of Wool, Woollfells
and Leather, Si aver les doet. Great wars have been raised against the credit
of this Law in the Parliament House and Three things have been especially
objected against it:

First, That it is no Law; for it was enforced upon the King, by some of the
Nobility that were too strong for him, the Realm being then in tumult and
mutiny about the quarrel of Pierce of Gaveston, so never had the Kings free
consent; but he gave way unto it for fear of greater mischief.

Secondly, That in it self it is unjust, as in taking away the Custom granted
to the King by Charta Mercatoria, 31. E. 1. and in making doubt whether the
King should have the Custom of Woolls, etc. by those words, Saving it to him,
Si aver les doet.

The third Objection is, That if it were a Law, it is repealed.

To these I give particular Answers.

To the first: That this Statute was made both at the instance of the King and
people, with a purpose and intention on all parts to settle things in a stay
and order, both in the Kings house and Commonwealth; the King and his Nobles
standing in good terms, when this business was taken in hand; and it was begun
and ended with great solemnity and ceremony: For the King in the third year of
his reign gave Commission under his Great Seal to 32. Com. 16. Mar. 3. E. 2.
Rot. ordin. 5. E. 2.
Lords spiritual and temporal; of which there were eleven Bishops eight Earls
and thirteen Barons; they being as Committees of the higher House to devise
Ordinances for the good government of his house and his Realm. In which
Commission he does for the honor of God, the good of him, and of his Realm, of
his freewill grant to the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and others elected by
the whole Kingdom, full power to ordain the State of his house and Realm by
such Ordinances as by them should be made, to the honor of God, the honor and
profit of holy Church, the honor of himself, the profit of him and his people,
according to right and reason, and the oath he made at his Coronation.

These joining with others of discreet Commons in Parliament, and taking every
of them a solemn oath for their sincere demeanor in the business, did make this
and other Ordinances, which were so well liked of by the King, that after they
were made, he took an oath to observe them, and caused them to be published in
Paul's Churchyard by the Bishop of Salisbury, by denouncing Excommunication
against all that should wilfully infringe them: Pullic. 3. Kal. Oct. 5. E. 2.
R^t. ord. Pat. 5. Oct. 5. E. 2. Rot. ordin.
And by his Letters Patents dated 5. Oct 5. regni sui, did send them through
the Realm to be published, and from thenceforth to be observed, thereby
signifying his great liking and approbation of them; after which they had the
force and power of Laws given unto them in the Parliament, in the fifth year of
his reign.

The second Objection, which is the injustness of the Law, instanced in two
points; The taking away of Charta Mercatoria, and the doubting of the Kings
right to the Custom of Woollfells, and Leather, etc. To the first of these, I
deny it to be unjust, but to be according to the Law of England, and liberty of
the Kingdom: for that Charter did contain in it diverse grants of things which
were not in the power of the King to grant without assent of Parliament; the
trial per medietatem linguae, and other things tending to the alteration of the
Law, and burdening of the people; and therefore that Charter never had his
undoubted and settled force, until it was confirmed by Act of Parliament, but
lay asleep almost twenty years together, without being put in execution,
between 5, E. 2. and 27. E. 3. when it was confirmed; for the doubt that is
supposed to be made in the Statute of the Kings right to the Custom of Wool,
Wooll-fells and Leather, I take it, there is no such doubt made: For the words
(Saving the Kings right to the Custom of Woolls, si aver les dort) have this
construction, that is, at such times as he ought to have it: so the word (si)
has the signification of (quando) for it had been a folly to have made a
Saving of that, of the right whereof they had doubted, neither is it likely but
that they would have taken it away, if it had not been lawful; but there was no
color to doubt of the right of it, for it was given by Act of Parliament, and
ever continued in force without challenge or exceptions to the lawfulness of it.

The third Objection is, That this Statute is repealed: To this I plead, Nullum
valet recordum. If it be repealed, it must be by Act of Parliament, for unum
quodque dissolvitur iisdem modis quibus est colligatum: I and others have
searched the Records of the Realm, and endervoured by all means to inform our
selves of the truth herein, and we can find no Act of Parliament of repeal: The
truth is, some Kings finding these Laws not to sort to their wills and humors
have endeavored to suppress them, but they did never yet obtain a repeal of
them by Act of Parliament.

But it is further urged, That although there were no formal repeal of the Law,
yet it was never put in execution as a Law, but even presently upon the making
was rejected, and use and practice went quite against it: and for instance
hereof, a Record was vouched that E. 2 held himself so little bound by it, as
that in the 11. year of his reign he set an Imposition without assent of
Parliament upon Wool, Wooll-fells, Leather, Wines, Cloth, Aver de pois, and
diverse other kind of Merchandises. To this I answer, that if it were true, that
a distinct and impotent King, as he was, did contrary to the Law, does this
make the Law void, and no Law? But if we look into the whole Record, and scan
this action of E. 2. from the beginning of it unto the end, we shall find it a
very good instance to prove the practice and execution both of this Law of 5.
E. 2: and of that in 25. E. 1. for it is true that E. 2. in the eleventh year
of his reign did borrow of the Merchants a certain sum of money above the due
Custom of Woolls, Wooll-fells, Wine, Averdepois, Leather, and such other goods
imported and exported; but it appears by the Record, he took it but for one
year; he took it by the advice and counsel of the Merchants, and he took it per
viam mutui, as a loan. Rot. claus. 11. E. 2.
The direction of the Writ is, Collectoribus mutui nobis per mercatores
alienigenas and indigenas de certis rebus and Merchandisis usque ad certum
tempus faciendi. This was done in good terms, he did not claim it as his right,
but did borrow it, which I do think is a good evidence against his right: But
what became of this? the State would not abide it, for all these fair shows.
And therefore afterward the King sends out other Writs by which he
discharges all Merchandises of this Loan, saving only Wool, Wooll-fells, and
Leather; and for the Loan taken upon those Commodities, it was limited to
continne but until Michaelmas after, and good security was given to the
Merchants by the Customers to pay themselves by way of defalcation out of the
Customs which should be due after Machaelmas, those sums which were so borrowed
of them. Rot. finium 11. E. 2.
The words of the Record are worth the observing, Cum pro expeditione guerra
Scotiae, and aliis arduis and urgentibus necessitatibus nobis multipliciter
incumbentibus, pro quarum exoneratione quasi infinitam pecuniam refundere
oporobit, pecunia plurimum indigeamus in praesenti, and nuper pro eo quod
exitus regni and terrarum nostrarum simul cum pecunia nobis in subventione
praemissorum tam per Clerum quam Communitatem regni nostri concessa ad sumptus
praedictos cum festinatione qua expediret faciendos, non sufficient,
exquirentes vias and modos quibus possemus pecuniam habere commodius and
decentius pro praemissis, de consilio and aavisamento quorundam mercatorum tam
alienigenarum quam indigenarum viam invenimus infra script. viz. And so sets
down the manner of the loan, and the security for the payment of it: This (I
take it) was neither an Imposition nor a wrong in any respect. Also by the
first Record it appears, that the Loan set on Wines, Averdepois, and such
other Commodities, besides Wool, Woll-fells and Leather, were presently
discharged by E. 2. which shows they were taken to be within the intent of
the Statute of 25 E. 1.

The fifth Statute alleged on the behalf of the Subject is that 14. E. 3. Stat
1. c. 21. 14. E. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 21.
by which the Commons pray the King to take no more then the old Custom of the
half Mark. The King prays aid of the Commons for a time above the Custom upon
his necessity of Wars. And the conclusion is, that by that Act the King does
grant that after the Feast of Pentecost, twelve months following, he will take
no more of Woolls, Wooll-fells and Leather, but the old Custom, and does
promise to charge, set, or assess upon the Custom but in manner as aforesaid.

The sixth Statute is 14. E. 3. Stat 2. 14. E. 3. stat. 2. c. 1
cap. 1. The King does grant by way of Charter to the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
Commons, Citizens, Burgesses and Merchants, that they be not from henceforth
charged nor grieved to make any aid or sustain charge, if it be not by the
common consent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men, and Commons
of the Realm, and that in Parliament.

These two Statutes grew upon an occasion of an Imposition set on Wool by the
King without assent of Parliament: Little has been objected against them, but
only to the first, that it was obtained of grace, and not upon instance of
right, which they gather out of the words of the Law, which are, The Commons
pray the King that he would stablish, that from henceforth no more then the old
Custom be taken. The like reason may be made against the King out of the same
words in the same Law: for the King in the same Act prays the Commons to give
him an Imposition upon Woolls for a time above the old Custom: but the Record
of the Petitions exhibited in Parliament on which these two Laws are made,
clears the objection.

The first was delivered by the Lords in this form, Rot. Par. 13. E. 3. number. 5.
Les grands volunt, that the male toll set on Woolls newly, be altogether
abated, and that the old Custom be held, and that they may have this in point
of Charter, and by inrolment in Parliament. This word (volunt) had been too
high for a fuit of grace, and therefore must be intended of right. The Commons
Petition in form is somewhat humble, but in effect and purpose is rough and
stern: The words are these, Rot. Par. 13. E. 3. number. 13.
The Commons pray that the male toll of Woolls be taken as it was used in
ancient time, which is now enhanced without the assent of the Commons, and
(grandes) as we conceive, and that if it be otherwise demanded, that every one
of the Commons may arrest them without being challenged. According to these
Petitions, the first of these two Laws is by inrolment in Parliament: the
second is in form of a Charter; the first does express some special
commodities: The second does reach generally at all.

The seventh Law directly touching this point, is that 14. E. 3. Stat. 2. cap.
2. 13. E. 3. stat. 2. c. 2
The King does grant according to the Great Charter, that all Merchants,
Denizens and foreigners may without let safely come into the Realm of England
with their goods and Merchandises, and safely tarry, and safely return, paying
the Subsides, Customs and other profits reasonably due. Upon the words of this
Law, was great advantage taken, in this, that besides Custom and Subsidy, which
comprehend all the certain and ordinary duties the King has upon the wares and
goods of Merchants, there are other profits spoken of to be due: These they
affirm cannot be understood but of Impositions by the King without assent of
Parliament.

To this I answer; if they were not duties due to the King besides Custom and
Subsidy, which might satisfy the intention of these words, this objection
might have had some color in it; but it is plain that besides these two, there
are other profits due to the King upon Merchants goods, as Scavage, Tonage, and
the like.

And you shall find a Petition in Parliament, Rot. Par. 50. E. 3. nu. 163.
50. E. 3. against the raising of these above the old rate.

The eighth Law is, 15. E. 3. stat. 2. c. 5
E. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 5. whereby it is enacted that every Merchant may freely
buy and sell, and pass the Sea with their Merchandises of Wool and all other
things, paying the Custom of old time used, according to the Statute made in
the last Parliament in Midlent, which was the Stat. 14. E. 3. stat. 2. cap. 2.
This Law does expressly exclude the novelty of Impositions.

The ninth Law is that 18. 18 E. 3. stat. 1. c. 3
E. 3. stat. 1. ca. 3. whereby it is enacted, That the Sea be open to all
manner of Merchants to pass with their Merchandises where it shall please them.

The tenth is, 27. E. 3. stat. 2. c. 2
27. E. 3. stat. 2, cap. 2 for the assurance of Merchants-strangers and other,
the King does will and grant for him and his Heirs, that nothing shall be taken
over the due Customs, not taken of them to his use by color of suit, or in
other manner against their wills.

The eleventh is, 38. E. 3. cap. 2. 38. E. 3. cap. 2.
that all manner of Merchants aliens and Denizens may buy and sell all manner
of merchandises, and freely carry them out of the Realm, paying the Customs and
Subsidies thereof due.

The last is 22. H. 8. cap. 8. 22. H. 8. cap. 8.
by which it was enacted that Tables should be set up in Ports, by which the
certainty and very duty of every Custom, Toll, and Duty, or sum of money to be
demanded and required of Wares and Merchandises shall and may plainly appear
and be declared, to the intent that nothing be exacted otherwise then in old
time has been used and accustomed.

By this late Law it appears that the judgment of the whole Parliament was at
that time, That nothing was due upon Wares and Merchandises, but that which
which was certain: and had been anciently due, by which Impositions are
excluded, whose qualities are novelty and incertainty, as being set on, as
present occasion moves, and proportioned for quantity and other circumstances,
as the will of the King directs.

These are the Laws which I conceive most directly tend to the restraining the
Kings of England from the exercise of that irregular power of imposing, at the
first offered by them to be put in execution, yet not pressed as their right,
and never practiced but upon opposition of the whole State, and at last
deserted and given over until of late; as by that which follows in the fourth
place will appear.

My fourth and last assertion is, Custom 4
That this practice of imposing without assent of Parliament, is contra morem
Majorum. In this I will make an historical perlustration of the times past,
whereby I will discover and make known what passages have been in this business
in this Kingdom, and especially in the high Court of Parliament for the space
of 300 years and more last past, since the beginning of the reign of E. 1
sithence which time, and not before, this Kingdom has grown into the glory and
reputation of foraigne traffic. And as a worthy Gentleman of the Kings
learned Council, made certain considerations upon this question, framed and
strengthened out of the greatness of his wit and reason: so I grounding my self
upon the practice of former times, which is the safest rule whereby to square
the right both of King and people in this Commonwealth, where their right is
jus consuetudinarium, a right that grows by use and practice, I will propose
unto you certain observations out of the action and experience of former times
until the reigns of the two late Queens: by which you may the better ground
and frame your judgments in the determination of the right in this question.

My first observation is in point of circumstance, that there never was any
Imposition set, but in time of actual war, and duplicatis vexillis: they were
set on very rarely and sparingly, but for a short time, and that certain and
definite, and upon some few commodities, and that by the assent of the
Merchants that were to bear the burden. In our time the occasion not so
sensible, the continuance to be perpetual, the number many hundreds, almost no
kind of Commodity spared. I will give you some few Instances of these
circumstances out of the Records themselves.

The maletole of Wool set on by King E. 22. E. 1. orig. Scacc. Rent. These. 22.
E. 1. mem. Scac. R. These. T. Mich. Rot. parl. 17. E. 3.. nu 28.
1. which gave the occasion, of the Stat. 25. year of his reign, was given by
Merchants. The Record says, Mercatores gratanter concesserunt in subsidium
guerrae Regis. It further shows, it was for his necessity of War, which
then was great also.

For the time of F. 3. there need not many instances; for his whole reign was
almost an actual warfare; As in the sixth year of his reign for his war in
Scotland and Ireland. In the thirteenth year of his reign for his war in
France, several Impositions were set on

In the seventeenth year of E. 3. the Record in the Tower mentions that forty
shillings Imposition was upon a sack of Wool by the grant of Merchants, Rot.
parl. 50. E. 3. nu. 38.
and it was in the time of War.

In the twentieth year of King E. 3. it appears in the Record, that the
Imposition then put upon VVools, was by the assent of Merchants for two years,
for the necessity the King had in his passage over the sea, to recover his
right, and to defend the Realm.

My second observation is, Never any Imposition was set on by the King out of
Parliament, but complaint was made of it in Parliament; and not one that ever
stood after such complaint made, but remedy was afforded for it; Et quod Rex
inconsulto fecit, consulto revocavit, his Sovereign power controlled his
subordinate. In which it is a thing very notable, that the King in no one Case
ever claimed, or so much as ever named his right or prerogative, which no doubt
would have been done, if it had been thought due, but gave satisfaction to the
complaint by one of these three ways; Either by discharging them quite, and
making some good Law against them.

Secondly, by entreating the people to hold them some short time by their favor.

Thirdly, by waving his present possession, and taking that of their gift by
Act of Parliament, as an aid which he had set on by his absolute power as an
Imposition.

Instances of the first 25. 25. E. 1. ca. 7. Rot. parl. 38. E. 3. n. 26. 38. E.
3. cap. 2. 45. E. 3. cap. 4. 18. E. 3. cap. 10, 11. R. 18. E. 3. cap. 3. l. 1
21. E. 3. n. 11. R. Parl. 25. E. 3. n. 22. rot. Parl.
E, 1. the Impositions of Wools taken off, and a Law made against it, and the
King undertook for him and his successors to do so no more: 38 E. 3.26. the
Imposition of three shillings four pence on a sack of Wool put off upon
complaint, and a Law made against it, 38 E. 3. ca. 2. the like Statute 45 E. 3.
c. 4. upon a complaint of an Imposition on Wools made in Parliament, 45. E. 3.
n. 42. Rot. Parl.

Instances of the second 21. E. 3. nu. 11. a petition upon an Imposition of 2.
s. upon a sack of Wool, 2. s upon a tun of Wine, and six pence upon aver de
pois, all discharged presently, saving the two shillings upon a sack of Wool,
and for that entreated that it might stay till Easter following, and so it did,
and was then taken away.

Instance of the third 25 E. 3. nu. 22. the Commons made petition against an
imposition of forty shillings upon a sack of Wool granted to the King by the
Merchants, showing that they ought not to be bound by their act. The King did
not claim right or justice, but because his wars were great, upon his
request had it granted unto him for two years by Act of Parliament, and
pretended no title of Prerogative, neither was it ever spoken of.

My third observation is that our Kings have acknowledged that it is not their
right. E. Orig. in Scau. 31. E. 1. R. These.
1 in his Writs he sent to the Officers of his parts to levy three pence on
the pound over the old custom, or the Denizons as well as of the Aliens, and
to suffer the Denizons to enjoy those privileges the Aliens did enjoy by the
payment of the increase of Custom, does give this direction expressly. That
they should not take it of Denizons against their will. The words of the Record
express it very fully, Cum mercatores extranei and alienigenae pro quibusdam
libertatibus eis per nos concessis and priscis nostris quibuscunque remissis,
nobis de bonis and merchandisis suis quibuscunque infra regnum and potestatem
nostram adducend. ultra antiquas custumas dare concesserint praestationes and
custumas subscriptas, viz and so sets down the increases, and amongst the
rest this three pence upon the pound, and so proceeds, Ac quidam mercatores
de regno nostro and potestate nostra, ut ipsis dictis libertatibus and
immunitatibus uti and gaudere, and quod de prisis nostris quieti esse possiut,
praestationes and custumas hujusmodi de bonis and merchandisis suis nobis
solvere velint, ut accepimus, assignavimus vos, etc. ad custumas and
praestationis praedictas de mercatoribus de regno and potestate nostra
colligend. qui eas gratanter and sine coercione solvere voluerint. Ita tamen
quod aliquem mercatorem de dicto regno and potestate nostra ad praestationes
and custumas hujusmodi nobis invito solvend. nallatenus distringatis. Surely if
E. 1. had claimed the prerogative of imposing, he would never have given these
cautions in the requiring of that which he had taken to be his due, as that
they should not exact it of any of his subjects that were not willing to pay
it, nor trouble nor distraine them for it.

In the twelfth year of E. 3. we find the Record of certain letters written
from the King being then at Barwick in the Scottish Wars, Rot. Alem. 12. E.
3. dorm. 21. in turr*
unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, in which letters the King seems to have
a great confidence in the devotion of the Archbishop, and therefore earnestly
entreats him to further his enterprises with his prayers to God, and then
adds further;

Ad hoc pater, cum populus regni nostri variis oneribus, tallagiis and
impositionibus hactenus praegravetur (quod dolenter referimus) sed inevitabili
necessitate compulsi de eisdem oneribus ipsum adhuc relevare non valemus dictum
populum, ut tautam necessitatem nostram humiliter and benign patiatur and
caritative sustineat, and priorem (quam penes nos concepit de cetero instanter
in orationibus and eleemosynis suis, oneribus praedicts, quae non ex malitia
vel presumptione voluntaria ipsum gravant, non obstantibus) exhibeant
caritatem, indulgentiam muneribus and aliis modis, quibus secundum Deum
videbitis piis exhortationibus inducatis, and nos penes eundem excusetis;
speramus namque per Dei gratiam, cujus manus cunctis indigentibus sola
sufficiens, and largiflua comprobatur, beneficiis compensatius dictum populum
visitare and consolari pro loco and tempore opportunit. The principal thing I
note out of this Record upon the very point of this my third observation, is
that the King intending to excuse himself of the burdens by him laid on the
people, and to avoid the blemish of wrong and injustice in laying thereon,
says they were not onera ex presumptione voluntaria, that is, burdens that he
presumed to lay on at his own will, whereby he condemns impositions without
assent of Paliament, which are (onera ex voluntate Regis) to proceed of
presumption, which does clearly exclude clame of right, and disproveth the
lawfulness of the Act. But there are diverse other notable passages in the
Record worthy our marking; As out of the word (praegravantur) used by the King
we may gather he did account these Impositions a grievous burden to his
people, which shows his own pity of them. He says further, Dolentes
referimus, showing his grief and remorse at it, and inevitabili necessitate
compnlsi, he did it constrained by unavoidable necessity, showing he was forced
to it against his will, by that which violateth and breaks all law which
infers, he would not maintain his action by law; Adhuc relevare non
valemus; this insinuates, he would ease them in good time; caritatem
exhibereut, they should afford him charity in the bearing of them, as if so be
in point of justice or right they need not, Penes eundem excusetis, the Bishop
should excuse him to the people. By this he did clearly leave the point of
justification and so of right: lastly he promises he would visit and comfort
them beneficiis compensativis, would give them recompense for those sums he
had so raised of them; which shows that he claimed them not as due, for then
he needed not give recompense for them.

In the one and twentieth year of E. Rot. Parl 21. E. 3. n. 16.
3. a petition was exhibited in Parliament, that Levies be not made by
Commission (so they be in this case) nor other things laid upon the people
unless they be granted in Parliament. The Kings answer is, If any such
impositions were made, it was by great necessity, and with assent of the
Prelates, Barons and some of the Commons present; yet he will not that such
Impositions not duly made be drawn in consequence. Here the King acknowledges
an Imposition not to be duly made, though with the consent of the Higher House,
and some of the Commons, because it was not in full Parliament: much rather he
would have thought so, if it had been by the King alone.

King E. 4. (that was a rough and warlike Prince, and was more beholding to his
sword in the recovery of his right to the Crown then to the affection of the
people) at a Parliament held the seventh year of his reign made a Speech to
the Commons, Sir John Say being then Speaker, in which Speech is contained very
notable matter, and very pertinent to our purpose; and because the Record is
not in print, I will set down the Kings Speech verbatim as it is entered upon
the Parliament roll, Rot. parl. 7. E. 4. The Record begins, Memorandum quod die
veneris. 3. die Parl.
and then I will make a paraphrase upon it; John Say, and ye Sirs come to this
my Court of Parliament for the Commons of this my Realm; The cause why I have
called and summoned this my present Parliament, is, that I purpose to live upon
mine own, and not to charge my subjects but in great and urgent causes,
concerning more the Weal of themselves, and also the defense of them and of
this my Realm, rather than mine own pleasure, as heretofore by Commons of
this Land has been done, and borne unto my progenitors in time of need;
wherein I trust that ye Sirs, and all the Commons of this my Land will be as
tender and kind unto me in such cases as heretofore any Commons have been to
any of my progenitors. And for the good will, kindness, and true hearts that
ye have borne, continued, and showed to me at all times heretofore, I thank
you as heartily as I can: also I trust ye will continue in time coming; for
which by the grace of God I shall be to you as good and gracious a King, and
reign as righteously upon you as ever did any of my progenitors upon Commons
of this my Realm in days past, and shall also in time of need apply my person
for the Weal and defense of you, and of this my Realm, not sparing my body
nor life for any jeopardy that might happen to the same.

Out of this we may observe first the Kings Protestation to live of his own,
and not to charge his subjects; by which I gather he did acknowledge a certain
and distinct property of that which way his subjects from that which was his
own, which excludes the right to impose at his will; for if that be admitted,
the subjects property is proprietas precaria, not certain how much of his is
his own: for that is his which the King will leave him; for there is no limit
or restraint of the quantity, the right being admitted, but only the Kings
will.

The second thing I observe is this, that in charging of his subjects he would
confine himself between these two bounds; the one, it should be in great and
urgent causes concerning more the Weal of them, and the defense of them and
his Realm, than his own pleasure; wherein he condemns those occasions that
grew upon excess of private expense by over great bounty, or otherwise, and
admits only such as grow by reason of wars, or other such like public
causes concerning the whole State: the other bound or limit is, that those
burdens should be secundum morem majorum, as heretofore had been done and borne
by the Commons to his ancestors in time of need.

The third thing I observe is, that he acknowledged these burdens did proceed
out of their good will and kindness, and not out of his right and prerogative;
out of these words, that he trusted they would be as tender and kind to him
in such cases as heretofore any Commons had been to his Progenitors: And lastly
we may note the recompense promised by the King to his subjects, for their
good wills and kindness, his goodness and grace, his just and righteous
government; the jeopardy of his body and life for their Weal and defense Did
this King assume to himself a right to lay burdens on his subjects at his own
will without their assents, that offered to buy them at his need with the price
of his blood, the most sacred relic in the kingdom?

My fourth observation is that in all petitions exhibited by the Commons in
Parliament, against Impositions, the very knot of their grief and the
principal cause of their complaint has been expressed in those petitions; that
the impositions have been without assent of Parliament: by which is necessarily
inferred, that their grief was in point of right, not of burden.

In 11. Rot. parl. 21. E. 3. nu. 11.
E. 3. nu. 11 the complaint of the Imposition of two shillings upon a sack of
Wool, two shillings upon a Tonne of Wine, six pence upon aver de pois, the
cause of grievance expressed because it was done Sans assent de Commons.

25 E. R. Pari. 25, E. 3. n. 22.
3. n. 22. In a petition the Commons complain that an imposition upon Wools
was set by the consent of the merchants; they pray that Commissions be not
made upon such singular grants, if they be not in full Parliament; and if any
such grants be made, they may he held as void.

17 E 3. R. Parl. 17. E. 3. n. 28
n. 28. The Commons in their petition inform the King, it is against reason
they should be charged with impositions set on by assent of Merchants, and not
in Parliament.

My fifth observation is, that whenever any petition was exhibited against
impositions, there was never any respect had of the quantity, but they were
ever entirely abated, as well where they were small, as where they were great;
no request ever made to make them less when they were great, nor excuse made of
their ease when they were exceeding small; which shows that it was not the
point of burden or excess was respected in their complaint, but the point of
mere right.

25 E. 3. nu. 22. R. Parl. 25. E. 3. nu. 22.
Forty shilling set an imposition upon a sack of Wool, upon complaint, all
taken off, and no suit to be eased of part because it was too great.

36. E. 3. nu. 26. ibid. 38. E. 3 n. 26 21. E. 3. n. 11.
Three shillings and four pence upon a sack of Wool, all taken off, and no
excuse made for the smalness; for 21 E. 3. nu. 11 two shillings a sack, two
shillings tonnage, and six pence poundage.

50 E. 3. nu. 163. R. Parl. 50. E. 3. nu. 163.
A great complaint was made in Parliament by the Commons that an imposition of
a penny was set upon wools for Tonage over and above the ancient due which was
but a penny, and so the subject was charged with two pence.

Also that a penny was exacted for Mesonage, which was but an half penny;
which Impositions the Record does express did amount to an hundred pounds a
year.

This petty imposition was as much stood upon in point of right, as the other
great one of forty shillings, and was taken off upon complaint in Parliament,
without either justification or excuse for the smalness of it.

My sixth observation is, that those which have advised the setting on of
impositions without assent of Parliament, have been accused in Parliament
forgiving that advice, as of a great offense in the State, and have suffered
sharp censure and great disgrace by it.

Neither do I find that the quality of the person has extenuated the blame,
as 50. E. 3 William L. Latimer Chamberlain to the King, and one of his private
Council, was accused by the Commons in Parliament of diverse deceits and
extortions and misdeeds, and among other things, that he had procured to be set
upon Wool, Wooll-fells and other Merchandises, new Impositions, to wit, upon a
sack of Wool eleven shillings, which the L. Latimer fought to excuse, because
he had the consent and good liking of the Merchants first: But judgment was
given against him that he should be committed to prison, be fined and ransomed
at the Kings will, and be put from being of the Council; and this procuring of
Impositions to be set on without assent of Parliament is expressly set down in
the entry of the judgment for one of the causes of his censure.

Richard Lions a Farmer of the Customs in London the same year was accused in
Parliament for the same offense; Rot. Par. 50. E. 3. n. 17, 18, 19, 20.
he pleaded, he did it by the Kings command, and had answered the money to the
Kings Chamber: Yet was condemned and adjudged in Parliament to be committed to
Prison, and all his Lands and Goods were feifed into the Kings hand; and at the
last the hate against these authors of Impositions grew so that 50. E. 3. in
the same Parliament, a petition was exhibited in Parliament to make this a
capital offense; The Record is very short, and therefore I will set it down
verbatim. Item pry le dit Common que scit ordain per Statute en cest present
Parliament de touts ceux queux cy en avaunt mittont ou font pur lour singular
profit novels Impositions per lour authority demesne accrocheants al eux any ul
power de riens que soit establi en Parliament, sans assent de Parliament, que
ils eyent judgment de vie and member, and de forisfacture. To this rough
Petition the King gave a mild and temperate Answer, Courre la Common ley come
estoit al avaunt use.

My seventh Observation is, the cessation between 50. E. 3. after this censure
in Parliament, and 4. Mariae almost two hundred years, during which time no
King did attempt to impose without assent of Parliament: And yet we find in
the Parliament Rolls, that there was not one of those Kings that reigned in
that time, but had Impositions granted him upon fit occasion by Act of
Parliament upon all Goods and Merchandises, and at diverse times during their
reigns, sometimes more, sometimes less upon the Ton and pound, but ever for a
time certain, and indefinite; so the use of them was not given over, but the
power of Imposing was so clearly and undoubtedly held to be in the Parliament,
as no King went about to practice the contrary.

But to this cessation that was of great weight and credit in our evidence, a
color was given by the other side to avert the inserence made upon it, against
the Kings right, that is, that during that time there was so great a Revenue
grew to the Crown by double Custom paid for all Merchandises both in England
and at Callis, by reason of an Act of Parliament made 8. H. 4. which was, that
no goods should be carried out of the Realm but to Callis, and by reason that
the Merchants paid Custom both there and here for the same goods, that in the
seven and twentieth year of Henry the sixth, the Custom of Callis was 68000.
pounds the year, a great sum, if you consider the weight of money then, what
price it bare, and by reason hereof Princes not delighting to charge their
murmuring Subjects but when need is, being so amply supplied otherwise, did not
put that Prerogative in practice. To this I Answer, That if that were true that
was urged, it might be some probable color of the forbearance of imposing; but
I find it quite contrary, and that by Record: For there was no such restraint
of all Commodities not to be transported to any place but Gallis, but only
Woolls, Woolfells, Leather, Tinn, and Lead, that were staple Wares, which by
the Statute, 37, E. 3. were to be transported thither, and not to any other
place, and the staple continued at that place for the most part from that time
until long after, 27. H. 6. but there was no double Custom paid both here and
there by the same owner: but the yearly profits of the Customs of Callais at
those times were so far short of that which has been alleged in 27. H. 6.
that it appears in an Act of Parliament, 27. H. 6. cap. 2 printed in the book
at large, 27. H. 6. cap. 2.
That the Commons do complain, That whereas in the time of E. 3. the Custom of
Callais was 68000 pounds per annum, at that time, which was 27. H. 6. by reason
of the ill usage of Merchants, it was fallen to be but 12000 pounds the year;
so then there was great cause in that respect to have set on Impositions by
reason of that great abatement of Customs, and yet it was not then offered to
be done without assent of Parliament. But if you look a little further into the
extreme necessities of those times, you shall find there never was greater
cause to have strained Prerogatives; for it appears in an Act of Parliament
28. H. 6. that it was then declared in Parliament by the Chancellor and
Treasurer, who demanded relief of the people for the King. both for payment of
his debts, and for his yearly livelioood, that the King was then indebted
372000. pounds, which now by the weight of money amounts to above 1100000.
pounds, and that his ordinary expenses were more then his yearly revenue by
19000. pounds yearly: so if ever there was cause to put a King to his shifts,
it was then; yet we see they did not venture to put in practice this supposed
Prerogative. It further appears in that Statute that the people among those
reasons they alleged why they were not able to retain the King, gave this for
one, that they had so often granted him Tonnage and Poundage upon Merchandises,
by which it appears he took nothing of Merchants by imposition without grant;
for if he had, no doubt they would not have stuck to have put him in mind of
it. But I pray consider what became of this motion of the Chancellor and
Treasurer: The proposition had depended in Parliament many years; the effect
was, the people entreated the King to resume all grants he had made from the
beginning of his reign until that time, being the twenty eighth year of his
reign, excepting such as were made upon consideration valuable, that he might
so enable himself by that mean by which he had impoverished himself and the
whole Kingdom: This took effect, and the Statute of Resumptions was thereupon
made the same year, which Record because it is not in print, and declares
these things with great gravity and authority: I will set down the very Text of
it, so much as is material to our purpose.

Prayen your Commons in this your present Parliament assembled to consider,
That where you Chancellor of your Realm of England, 28. H. 6. Stat. de Resump.
in Turri Land. not printed.
your Treasurer of England, and many other Lords of your Council, by your high
commandment to your said Commons, at your Parliament holden last at
Westminster, showed and declared the State of this your Realm, which was that
ye were indebted 372000 l. which is grievous, and that your livelihood in
yearly value was but 5000 l. And forasmuch as this 5000 l. to your high and
notable State to be kept, and to pay your said debts, will not suffice:
Therefore that your high Estate may be releived. And furthermore it was
declared. That your expenses necessary to your household without all other
ordinary charge came to 24000 l. yearly, which exceeds every year in expense
necessary over your livelihood 19000 l. Also pleases it your Highness to
consider, that the Commons of your said Realm be as well willing to their
power, for the releiving of your Highness, as ever was people to any King of
your Progenitors that reigned in your said Realm of England: But your said
Commons been so impoverished, what by taking victual to your household, and
other things in your said Realm, and naught paid for it, and the quinzime by
your said Commons so ofren granted, and by the grant of Tunnage and Poundage,
and by the grant of Subsidy upon Woolls, and other grants to your Highness, and
for lack of execution of Justice, that your said poor Commons be full nigh
destroyed; and if it should continue longer in such great charge, it would not
in any wise be had, ne born: Wherefore pleases it your Highness, the premises
graciously to consider, and that ye by the advice and assent of your Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and by the authority of this your present Parliament,
for the consideration of your high Estate, and in comfort and ease of your poor
Commons, would take, resume, seize and retain in your hands and possession all
honors, etc.

This was very plain dealing by the people with their King, and this is the
success of the demand of supply and support had in those days, being required
in point of gratification, without any recompense or retribution for it. Thus
then we have cleared this point, that between 50. E. 3. and 4. Mariae, there
was not one Imposition set without assent of Parliament.

Queen Mary in the fourth year of her reign, upon the Wars with France, set an
Imposition upon Clothes for this consideration, That the Custom of Woolls was
decayed, by reason for the most part they were made into Clothes, which
afforded little Custom; for that which in Wool, paid for Custom and Subsidy 40
s. made into Cloth paid but 4 s. 4 d. To recompense this by an indifferent
equality, there was set upon a Cloth 5 s. 6 d. which Imposition did not make up
the loss sustained in the Custom of Wool, by 13 s. 4 d. in 40 s. This was
Justum, but not Just. This religious Prince environed with infinite troubles
in the Church and Commonwealth, and much impoverished by her devotion, in
renouncing the profits of the Church Lands that were in the Crown by the
suppression, was the first that made digression from the steps of her worthy
Progenitors, in putting on that Imposition without assent of Parliament; for
that very consideration of the loss of Custom, by turning of Wool to Clothing,
came into treaty in the 24. year of E. 3. when the art of Clothing began first
to be much practiced in this Kingdom, and then in the recompense of the loss
so, sustained in the decay of Custom of Woolls, there was set upon a Cloth by
Act of Parliament above the old Custom, 14 d. for a Denizen, and for an Alien
21 d. This is recited in a Record in the Exchequer, 48. E. 3. Rot. 2. R. These.
in origin. But I pray you examine how this Imposition of Queen Mary was
digested by the people. We see in the case of my Lord Dier, 1. Eliz. fol. 165.
That the Merchant found great grief at it, and made exclamation and suit to
Queen Elizabeth to be unburdened of it: Orig. in Scac. 48. E. 3. Rot. 2. R.
These 1. Eliz. Dier fo. 165.
The very reason of their grief expressed in that case is, because it was not
set on by Parliament, but by the Queens absolute power; So that was the ground
of that complaint, the very point of right.

This cause was referred to all the Judges, to report whether the Quimight fet
on this Imposition without assent of Parliament: They diverse times had
conference about it, but have not yet made report for the King; which is an
infallible presumption, that their opinions were not for him; for it is a
certain rule among us, that if a question concerning the Kings Prerogative, or
his profit, be referred to the Judges, if their opinions be for the King, it
will be speedily published, and it were indiscretion to conceal it; but if
there be no publication, then we make no doubt, but that their opinions are
either against the King, or at least they stick, and give none for him.

The same Queen Mary upon restraint of bringing in of French Commodities
occasioned by the then wars with France, set an Imposition upon Gascoyn Wines,
which continues yet: So the Kingdom of England by the injustice of that Prince
was clogged with these two heavy Impositions contrary to the right of the
Kingdom, and the Acts of her Progenitors

Queen Elizabeth set on that upon sweet Wines, which grew also upon the
occasion of the troubles with Spain. That upon Allome was none, it was rather a
Monopoly to Master Smith the Customer of London, for the engrossing of all
Allomes into his own hands, for which privilege he gave a voluntary Imposition
upon that Commodity: It was like the privilege granted to John Pechey of the
sweet Wines by E. 3. for which the Patentee was called into the Parliament
House, 50. E. 3. and was there punished, and his Patent taken away and
cancelled.

What Impositions have been set on in the Kings time, I need not express, they
are set down particularly in the Book of Rates that is in print; they are not
easily numbered: The time for which they are raised is not short; the Patent
prefixed to that book bearing date 28. Julii, 6 Jacobi, will instruct you
sufficiently in that point, they be limited to the King, his Heirs and
Successors: which I suppose is the first estate of Fee simple of Impositions
that ever man read of.

My eighth and last Observation is upon Tunnage and Poundage given to the King
of this Realm, upon Wares and Merchandises exported and imported, which is an
Imposition by Act of Parliament, and as it will appear, was given out of the
peoples good will, as a very gratification to the King, to enjoin him thereby
from the desire of voluntary Impositions, and to conclude him by that gift in
Parliament from attempting to take any other without assent of Parliament; for
after the ceasing of voluntary Impositions, these Parliamentary ones were
frequent in the times of the King that succeeded; but they were never given but
for years, with express caution how the money should be bestowed, As toward
the defense of the Seas, protection of Traffic, or some such other public
causes: Sometimes special sequestrators made by Act of Parliament, by whose
hands the money should be delivered, as 5. R. 2. cap. 3. in a printed Statute.
5. R. 2. Rot. Par. 7. R. 2. n. 13. 10. R. 2. n. 12. 7. R. 2. n. 12.
The Rates that were given were very variable, sometimes 2 s. Tunnage, and 6 d.
Poundage as 7. R. 2. 3 s. Tunnage, and 12 d, Poundage, 10. R. 2. which grants
were not to endure, the longest of them above a year; 18 d. Tunnage, 6 d.
Poundage; in 17. R. 2.3 s. Tunnage and 12 d. Poundage granted to H. 4. in the
thirteenth year of his reign for a certain time, in which Statute there is this
clause, That this aid in time to come should not be taken for an example to
charge the Lords and Commons in manner of Subsidy, unless it be by the wills of
the Lords and Commons, and that by a new grant to be made in full Parliament in
time to come. This clause in good and proper construction may be taken to be a
very convention between the King and his people in Parliament, that he should
not from thenceforh, nor any of his Successors set on Impositions without
assent of Parliament. The like Imposition was granted to H. Rot. Par. 1. H. 5.
n. 17.
5. in the the first year of his reign for a short time toward the defense of
the Realm, and safeguard of the Sea, upon condition expressed in the Act, that
the Merchants Denizens, and strangers coming into the Realm with their
Merchandises, should be well and honestly used and handled, paying the said
Subsidy, as in the time of his Father, and his noble Progenitors Kings of
England, without oppression or extortion: In the end of which Act the Commons
protested, being bound by any grant in time to come, for the purposes aforesaid.

H. 6. Rot. Par. 31. H. 6. 12. E. 4. c. 3. 6. H. 8. c. 12. 1. E. 6. c. 13. 1.
Mar. c. 18. 1. Eliz. c. 19. 1. Jac. c. 33.
in the one and thirtieth year of his reign, had Tunnage and Poundage given him
for his life. E. 4. had it given him the third year of his reign, as it
appears in a Statute 12. E 4. cap. 3. H. 8. in the sixth year of his reign,
and all since in the first year of their reigns have had it given them for term
of their life, and being now so certainly settled, do reach further at that,
from which they are in couscience and honor excluded, by this voluntary
gratification: For can any man give me a reason, why the people should give
this Imposition of Tunnage and Poundage above the due Custom upon all
Commodities, if the King by his Prerogative might set on Impositions without
assent of Parliament? and were not that a weak action in a King, to take that
of his people as a benevolence from them, with limitation of the same, and in
what it should be employed, and how they will be used for it, and for what time
he shall have it, which he might justly take without their consents, unclogged
of these unpleasing encumbrances?

The Statute of Tunnage and Poundage made in our times, that are altogether
inclined to flattery, do yet retain in them certain shows and rumors of those
ancient Liberties, although indeed the substance be lost, 1. Jac. c. 33.
as in the Statute 1. Jac. cap 33. We declare that we trust, and have sure
confidence of his Majesty's good will toward us, in and for the keeping, and
sure defending of the Seas, and that it will please his Highness, that all
Merchants, as well Denizens as strangers coming into this Realm, be well and
honestly entreated and demeaned for such things whereof Subsidy is granted, as
they were in the time of the Kings Progenitors and Predecessors, without
oppression to them to be done. By this clause, as it now continues, the true
intent of this Statute appears to be, that there ought no other Imposition to
be laid upon Merchants besides these given by this Statute, and this intention
has been well interpreted by use and practice from the time of E. 3. to the
time of Queen Mary, as before is declared.

Thus much of this last reason made from observation, and the action of our
Nation. I will answer now such main objections as have been made against the
peoples right, and have not been touched by me obiter in my passage through
this discourse.

That which has been most insisted upon is this, that the King by his
prerogative Royal has the custody of the Havens and Ports of this Island,
being the very gates of this Kingdom; that he in his royal function and office
is only trusted with the keys of these gates; that he alone has power to shut
them, and to open them when, and to whom he in his Princely wisdom shall see
good: that by the Law of England he may restrain the persons of any from going
out of the Land, or from coming into it: That he may of his own power and
discretion prohibit exportation and importation of goods and Merchandises; and
out of his prerogative and pre-eminence, the power of imposing, as being
derivative, does arise and result: for Cui quod majus est, licet, and ei quod
est minus licitum est: So their reason briefly is this; the King may restrain
the passage of the person, and of the goods; therefore he may suffer them not
to pass, but sub modo, paying such an Imposition for his sufferance, as he
shall set upon them: For the grounds and propositions laid in this objection, I
shall not be much against any one of them, others of them must be qualified ere
they be confessed; but the inference and argument made upon them, I utterly
deny; for in it there is mutatio hypothesis, and a transition from a thing of
one nature to a thing of another: As the premises are of a power in the King
only fiduciary, and in point of trust and government, the conclusion infers a
right of interest and gain; Admit the King had Custodiam portuum; yet he has
but the custody, which is trust, and not Dominium utile; he has power to open
and shut upon consideration of public good to the people and State, but not to
make gain and benefit by it; the one is protection, the other is expilation.
The Ports in their own nature are public, Portus sunt Publici.
free for all to go in and out; yet for the common good this liberty is
restrainable by the wisdom and policy of the Prince, who is put in trust to
discern the times when this natural liberty shall be restrained. In 1. H. 7.
fol. 1. H. 7.10
10 in the case of the Florentines for their Allome, the Lord Chief Justice
Hujsey does write a Case, that in the time of E. 4. a Legate from the Pope
being at Calice to come into England, it was resolved in full Council (as the
Book says) before the Lords and Judges that he should not have license to come
into England unless he would take an Oath at Calice, that he would bring
nothing with him that should be prejudicial to the King and his Crown.

The King by the Common Law may send his Writ, Ne exeas regnum, to any Subject
of the Realm; but the surmise of the Writ is, Quia datum est nohis intelligi,
quod tu versus parts exteras absque licentia nostra clam destinas te
divertere, and quam plurima nobis and coronae nostrae prejudicia prosequi,
Fitzh. N. B. 85. b. Fitzh. N. B 15. ^b.
So in point of Government, and common good of the Realm, he may restrain the
person: But to conclude, therefore he may take money, not to restrain, is to
sell Government, trust and common Justice, and most unworthy the divine Office
of a King. But let us compare this power of the King in foraign affairs, with
the like power he has in Domestic Government. There is no question but that
the King has the custody of the gates of all the Towns and Cities in England,
as well as all the Ports and Havens, and upon consideration of the Weal public
may open and shut them at his pleasure; as if the infection of the sickness be
dangerous in places vicine to the City of London, the King may command that
none from those places shall come into the City: May he therefore set an
Imposition upon those that he suffers to come into the City? So, if by reason
of infection he forbid the bringing of Wares and Merchandises from some Cities
or Towns in this Kingdom to any great Fare or Mart, shall he therefore restrain
the bringing of Goods thither, unless money be given him by way of Imposition?

The King in his discretion in point of equity, and for qualifying the rigor of
the Law, may enjoin any of his Subjects by his Chancellor from suing in his
Court of Common Law: May he therefore make a benefit by restraining all from
suit in his Courts, unless they pay him an Imposition upon their Suits? 2. E.
3.7.
In 2. E. 3. in the case of the Earl of Richmond before-cited, the King had
granted unto the men of great Yarmouth, that all the Ships that arrived at the
Port of Yarmouth, which consisted of three several Ports, Great Yarmouth,
Little Yarmouth, and Gerneston, should arrive all at Great Yarmouth, and at no
other place within that Port. The lawfulness of this Patent being in question
in the Kings Court, it was reasoned in the Kings behalf for the upholding of
the grant, as it is now, that the King had the custody of the Port, he might
restrain Merchants fron landing at all in his Kingdom: Therefore out of the
same power might appoint where, and in what Haven they should land, and no
other: The Patent was demurred on in the Kings Bench, as being granted against
the Law; but the Case depending, was adjourned into Parliament for the weight
and consequence of it, and there the Patent was condemned, 9. E. 3. cap. 1.
and a Law made against such and the like grants.

The Presidents that were vouched for maintenance of this power of restraint in
the King, were four produced almost in so many hundred years, Rot. Par. 2. E.
1. n. 16. Rot. fin. 2. E. 1. n. 17. To. claus. 10. E. 3. dor. 31. To. claus.
17. H. 6. in dors.
whereof two were in the second year of E. 1. one in the tenth year of E. 3.
another in the seventeenth year of H. 6. since which time we hear of none but
by Act of Parliament, as they had been usually and regularly before. To these I
will give answer out of themselves, out of the common Law, out of diverse
Statutes, and out of the practice of the Commonwealth. The restaint in the time
of E. 1. the one of them was to forbid the carrying of Wool out of the Realm,
the other was to forbid all Traffic with the Flemings. That of 10. E. 3. was
to restrain the exportation of Ship-timber out of the Realm. That of 17. H. 6.
to prohibit Traffic with the Subjects of the Duke of Burgundy. These
presidents are rare, yet they have in them inducements out of public respects
to the Commonwealth; for the rule of Common Law in this case, I take it to be
as the reverend Judge Sir Anthony Fitzherbert holds in his Writ of Ne exeas
regnum in Not. Fitzh. N. B. 85.
Br. that by the Common Law any man may go out of the Kingdom, but the King may
upon causes touching the good of the Commonwealth restrain any man from going
by his Writ or Proclamation, and if he then go, it is a contempt. This opinion
of his is confirmed by the Book, 1. Eliz. fol. 165. Dier. 12. Dier. 1. El. 165.
Dier. 13. El. 296.
and 13. Eliz. Dier. 296. In like manner if a Subject of England be beyond sea,
and the King send to him to repair home, if he do it not, his Lands and goods
shall be seized for the contempt; and this was the case of William de Britain
Earl of Richmond, 19. E. 2. He was sent by the King into Gascoyne on a message,
19. E. 2.
and refused to return, for which contempt his Goods, Chattels, Lands and
Tenements were seized into the Kings hands: 2, and 3. P. and M. Dier. 128
The Record is cited 2, and 3. Phil. and Mar. in my L. Dier. fol. 128. B. and
the Law there held to be so at that time upon a question moved in the Queens
behalf against diverse that being beyond the Seas refused to return upon
commandment sent unto them to that purpose: The same is again for Law confirmed
in the Duchess of Suffolk, Case 2 Eliz. Dier. 2. El. 176. 5 R. 2. c. 2
Dier. 176. But the Common Law was altered in this point by the Statute of 5.
R. 2. cap. 2. by which the passage of all people is defended that they may not
go without license, except the Lords and other great men of the Realm,
Merchants, and Soldiers: So for the Merchants, which are the people dealt
withal, in the business in hand, the Common Law remains as it was before the
Statute, Dier. 12. El. 196.
and so it was held, 12. El. Dier. 196. where the case was. An English Merchant
being a Papist went over-sea, and being there, did settle himself to remain
there, for the enjoying the freedom of his conscience: It was moved here in
England, that his going without license should be a contempt, because he went
not to traffic as a Merchant, but for the cause of Religion: It was resolved,
no such averment would be taken in this case, for that the very calling and
vocation of being a Merchant did give him liberty to go out of the Kingdom when
he would, and therefore the secret intent of his going was not to be enquired
after; Sed lex inspicit quod verisimilius. Therefore it was in this case held
no contempt, but at this day the Law is as it was before, 5. R. 2. cap. 2. for
that Statute is repealed, 4. Jac. cap. 1. 4 Jac. c. 1
And all men whatsoever are now at liberty by the Common Law to pass out of the
Realm. There is only against this inconvenient liberty a Proclamation dated at
Westminster, 9. Jul 5. Jac. Proclam. 9. Jul. 5. Jac.
To the very same effect in point of restraint of passage with the Statute of
R. 2. So the Subject is in this much the more at ease and liberty then he was
before: That his going over-sea without license does not induce any forfeiture,
but only incurreth the censure of a contempt and therefore it were to be
wished that some firm Law might be made in the case, both for the execution of
so good a point of policy, and for the more quiet of the State, in knowing the
certainty of the punishment for the offense.

This liberty and freedom of Merchants has been strenthened and confirmed by
many notable Laws before recited, as 14. E. 2. stat 2. cap. 2.15. E. 14. E. 3.
st. 2. c. 2.15. E. 3. st. 2. c. 5.18. E. 3. st. 1. c. 3.
3 stat. 2. cap 5. 18 E. 3. stat. 1. cap. 3. and diverse other, and therefore
though it be admitted that the King may restrain persons and goods, yet it may
well be denied, that he has power of himself alone without assent of
Parliament simply and indefinitely to restrain all traffic in general, or to
shut up all the Havens and Ports, and to bar the vent and issuing of Wares and
Merchandises of the whole Kingdom, as appears plainly that this has been
done this three hundred years, or near thereabouts by Act of Parliament only,
and that the Kingdom of England made this matter of Traffic so tender a case
to deal in, as that it has ever held it a matter fit for the consultation of
the great Council of the Kingdom, and for no other.

In 11. 11. E. 3. cap. 1.
E. 3. The exportation of Woolls was prohibited by Act of Parliament, in which
Statute there was this clause, Until that by the King and his Council it be
thereof otherwise provided: which power so given to the King to be used for the
good of the Commonwealth, gave occasion to him to abuse it to his profit and
commodity, by giving licenses of transportation to all that would give forty
shillings upon a Sack of Wool above the due Custom. This appears in the
Records in the Exchequer, 13. E 3. Rot. 2 Rem. These. 13. H. 3. R. These. rot. 2.
I will describe the Record that you may perceive the ground of it the better,
Rex collectoribus Custumae in portu magnae Jermouth salutem. Quia concessimus
dilecto and fideli nostro Hugoni de Wriothsley, quod ipse viginti and septem
saccos lanae and dimid. de lanis suis propriis in portu praedicto carriare, and
eas usque Antwerpe ad stapulam nostram ibidem ducere possit, solvendo ibidem
dilecto Clerico nostro Willielmo de Northwel custodi guarderobae nostrae 40 s.
pro quolibet sacco pro custuma and subsidio inde nobis debitis, etc. vobis
mandamus quod praedict. Hugon. dictos viginti septem saccos lanae and dimid. in
portu praedicto carriaere permittatis, etc. And another the same year. 13. E.
3. rot. 12. R. These.
Rex collectoribus custumae, etc. Cum nuper ordinaverimus quod passagium
lanarum, etc. apertum existeret, and quod sigillum nostrum quod dicitur Coket,
quod prius claudi and sub serra custodiri mandavimus ape iretur, and apertum
teneretur, ideo vobis mandavimus quod sigillum praedictum in portu praedicto
aperiri, and apertum tenerifaciatis, and omnes illos qui hujusmodi lanas
carriare and ducere velint permittatis, receptis prius ab iisdem, viz. de
mercatoribus and aliis indigenis 40 s. de quolibet sacco lanae. Diverse other
such sales of Traffic occasioned by this Parliamentary restraint were made
between 11. E. 3. that the restraint was made, and 14: E. 3. that this
inconvenience being espied, the Sea was opened by Statute, 14. E. 3. st. 2. c.
2. 15. E. 3. c. 5. st. 2.
and the restraint removed, 14 E. 3. stat 2. c. 2. 15. E. 3. cap. 5. stat 2.
and this forty shillings so exacted was complained of as an Imposition in
Parliament, and the occasion and the effect were both taken away together by
Act of Parliament, 14. E. 3. c. 21. st. 1. st. 2. c. 1.
14. E. 3. stat. 1. cap. 21. and stat. 2. cap. 1.

It followed in all Kings times sithence the death of E. 3. that this opening
and shutting of the Havens, restraining and enlarging of Traffic was done by
Act of Parliament.

I will give one instance in the reign of every King, 5. R. 2. c. 2. st. 2.
5. R. 2. cap. 2. stat. 2. For the passage of Wool, Wooll-fells, and Leather,
6 H. 4. c. 4 2. H. 5. c. 6. st. 2.
6. H. 4. cap. 4. For the Traffic and Commerce with Merchants Aliens, 2. H.
5. cap. 6. stat. 2. For the restraint of Staple Commodities to places certain,
and for the Traffic of the Merchants of the west. 27. H. 6. cap. 1. 27. H. 6.
c. 1.
that is enacted in Parliament which is contained in the Proclamation, 17. H.
6. cited for a president, that is, because the Duke of Burgundy made an
Ordinance whereby the Traffic of the English Nation was restrained, that
therefore the Englishmen should not traffic with the Subjects of the Duke of
Burgundy. The same thing enacted upon the like occasion, 4. E. 4. c. 1. 19. H.
7. 4 E. 4. c. 1 19. H. 7. cap. 21.
c. 21. The importation of diverse Commodities forbidden as being prejudicial to
the Manufactures within the Realm, 6. H. 8. cap. 12. 6. H. 8. cap. 12.
The exportation of Norfolk Woolls out of the Realm forbidden, 26. H. 8 cap.
10. 26. H. 8. cap. 10.
Power is given to the King to order and dispose of the Traffic of Merchants
at his pleasure, and the reason is given, because otherwise the Leagues and
Amities with foreign Princes might be impeached by reason of restraint made by
diverse statutes then standing on foot, whereby it appears that it was not
then taken to be Law, that the King had an absolute power in himself to order
and dispose of the course of Traffic without help of a Statute. 2. E. 6. 2 E.
6. c. 9
cap. 9. Exportation of Leather restrained, 1, 1, and 2. P. and M.c. 5.
and 2. Ph. and Mar. The exportation of Herring, Butter, Cheese, and other
Victuals forbidden, 18. Eliz. cap. 8. The exportation of Tallow, 18. El. c. 8
Raw Hides, Leather. So in all times no use of Proclamations in matters of this
nature, but Acts of Parliament still procured: Wherefore in mine opinion it
behooves them that do so earnestly urge this argument, (the King may restrain
Traffic, therefore may impose,) to prove better then they have done, that the
King may restrain Traffic of his own absolute power: For as the natural policy
and constitution of our Commonwealth is, we may better say, that is Law which
is de more gentis, then that which flows from the reason of any man guided by
his general notion and apprehension of power regal, in genere, not in individuo.

The last assault made against the right of the Kingdom, was an Objection
grounded upon policy, and matter of State, as that it may so fall out that an
Imposition may be set by a foreign Prince that may wring our people, in which
case the counterpoise is, to set on the like here upon the Subjects of that
Prince, which policy, if it be not speedily execucuted, but stayed until a
Parliament, may in the mean time prove vain and idle, and much damage may be
sustained that cannot afterward be remedied.

This strain of policy makes nothing to the point of right; our rule is in
this plain Commonwealth of ours, Oportet neminem esse sapientiorem legibus: If
there be an inconvenience, it is fitter to have it removed by a lawful means,
then by an unlawful: But this is rather a mischief then an inconvenience, that
is a prejudice in present of some few, but not hurtful to the Commonwealth: And
it is more tolerable to suffer an hurt to some few for a short time, then to
give way to the breach and violation of the right of the whole Nation: For that
is the true inconvenience; neither need it be so difficult or tedious to have
the consent of the Parliament, if they were held as they ought, or might be;
but our surest guide in this will be the example of our Ancestors in this very
case, and that in the time of one of the most politic Princes that ever
reigned in this Kingdom, 7. H. 7. 7. H. 7. cap. 7.
cap. 7. you shall find an Act of Parliament, in which it was recited that the
Venetians had set upon the English Merchants that laded Malmeseys at Candy four
ducats of gold upon a But, which in sterling is eighteen shillings the But. It
was therefore enacted that every Merchant stranger that brought Malmsey into
this Kingdom should pay eighteen shillings the But over and above the due
Custom used; this Imposition to endure until they of Venice had set aside that
of four ducats the But upon the Englishmen.

Much has been learnedly uttered upon this argument in the maintenance of the
peoples right, and in answering that which has been pressed on the contrary;
but my meaning is not to express in this Discourse all that has or may be said
on either side, but only to make a remembrance somewhat larger of that which I
my self offered as my symbolum toward the making up of this great rekoning of
the Commonwealth, which if it be not well audited, may in time cost the
Subjects of England very dear. My hope is of others that labored very worthily
in this business, that they will not suffer their pains to die, and therefore I
have forborne to enter into their Province. I will end with that saying of that
true and honest Counselor Philip Comines in his fifth book, the 18. chapter,
Ph. Com. l. 5. c. 18.
That it is more honorable for a King to say, I have so faithful and obedient
Subjects, that they deny me nothing I demand, then to say, I levy what me list,
and I have privileges so to do.

After the Kings Right to Impose had been thoroughly examined in Parliament, and
there determined not to be in him alone, without assent of Parliament, among
other Petitions of grievance given unto his Majesty, this hereafter was
concerning Impositions.
THe policy and constitution of this your Majesty's Kingdom, appropriates unto
the Kings of this Realm, with assent of Parliament, as well the sovereign power
of making Laws, as that of taxing or imposing upon the Subjects Goods or
Merchandises, wherein they justly have such a propriety, as may not without
their consent be altered or changed: This is the cause that the people of this
Kingdom, as they have ever showed themselves faithful and loving to their
Kings, and ready to aid them in all their just occasions with voluntary
contributions: so have they been ever careful to preserve their own Liberties
and Rights, when any thing has been done to prejudice or impeach the same: And
therefore when their Princes, either occasioned by War, or by their overgreat
bounty, or by any other necessity, have without consent of Parliament set on
Impositions either within the Land, or upon Commodities exported or imported by
the Merchants, they have in open Parliament complained of it, in that it was
done without their consents, and thereupon never failed to obtain a speedy and
full redress, without any claim made by the Kings of any Power or Prerogative
in that point. And though the Law of Propriety be originally and carefully
preserved by the common Laws of this Realm, which are as ancient as the Kingdom
it self, yet those famous Kings for the better contentment and assurance of
their loving Subjects, agreed that this old fundamental Right should be further
declared and established by Act of Parliament, wherein it is provided that no
such charge should ever be laid upon the people without their common consents,
as may appear by sundry Records of former times.

We therefore your Majesty's most humble Commons assembled in Parliament,
following the example of this worthy care of our Ancestors, and out of our duty
to those for whom we serve, finding that your Majesty without advice and
consent of your Lords and Commons, has lately in time of peace set both
greater Impositions, and far more in number then any your noble Ancestors did
ever in time of War, do with all humility present this most just and necessary
Petition unto your Majesty, That all Impositions set without assent of
Parliament, may be quite abolished, and taken away, And that your Majesty
likewise in imitation of your royal Progenitors will be pleased, that a Law in
your time, and during this Session of Parliament may be also made to declare
that all Impositions of any kind set, or to be set upon your people, their
Goods, or Merchandises, save only by common consent in Parliament, are and
shall be void: Wherein your Majesty shall not only give your Subjects great
satisfaction in point of their Right, but also bring exceeding joy and comfort
to them who now suffer, partly through the abating of the price of native
Commodities, and partly through the raising of all foreign, to the overthrow of
Merchants and Shipping, the causing a general dearth, and decay of all wealth
among your people, who will be thereby no less discouraged then disabled to
supply your Majesty when occasion shall require.

FINIS.
Books Printed or sold by William Leak, at the sign of the Crown in Fleetstreet
between the two Temple gates.
YOrks Heraldry, Fol* A Bible of a very fair large Roman Letter. 4 Orlando
Furioso. fol. Perkins on the Laws of England. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs.
Farsons Law. Mirror of Justice. Topics in the Laws of England. Dellamans use
of the Horizontal Quadrant. Wilbeys second Set of Music, 3, 4, 5, and 6 parts.
Corderius in English. Dr. Fulks Meteors, with Observations. Malthus Fireworks.
Nyes Gunnery and Fireworks. Cato Major with Annotations. Mel Heliconium, by
Alexander Ross. Nosce te ipsum, by Sir John Davis Animadversions on Lillys
Grammar. The History of Vienna and Paris. The History of Lazarillo de Tormes
the wit^y Spaniard. Hero and Leander, by George Chapman, and Christopher
Marlow. The Posing of the Accidence. Guilliams Heraldry. fol. Herberts Travels.
fol. Man become guilty, by John Francis Senalt, and Englished by Henry Earl of
Monmouth. Aula Lucis, or the house of light. Christ's Passion, A Tragedy written
by the most learned Hugo Grotius, and Englished by Geo Sand. Mathematical
Recreations, with the general Horological Ringe and the double Horizontal Dyal,
by William Oughtred. The Garden of Eden, or an accurate description of Flowers
and Fruit, by Sir Hugh Plat. Solitary Devotions with man in glory, by the most
reverend and holy Father Anselm. Archbishop of Canterbury. Book of Martyrs.
fol. Adams on Peter, fol. Willet on Genesis and Exodus. fol. Elton on the
Colossians. fol. Theseveral opinions of sundry learned Antiquaries, viz. Mr.
Justice Doddridge, Mr. Ager, Francis Tate, William Cambden, and Joseph Holland,
touching the Antiquity, Power, Order, State, Manner, persons and Proceedings of
the high Court of Parliament in England. The Idiot, in four Book. Exercitatio
Scholastica. The Life and Reign of Hen. 8. by the Lord Herbert. France painted
to the life, the second Edition. 8. Sken de significatione verborum. 4. The
Fort Royal of Holy Scripture, by J. H. the third Edition. 8. Callis learned
Readings on the Stat. 21. Hen. 8. chap. 5. of Shewers.
PLAYS,
Philaster. The Wedding. The Holleder. The Merchant of Venice. The strange
discovery. Maids Tragedy. King and no King. Othello, the Moor of Venice. The
grateful Servant.
FINIS.

