A Wildfire PLOT* Found out in IRELAND: SHOWING How the REBELS Would have
consumed the City of Dublin with Wildfire.

Also how three Lords were taken Prisoners, and committed to the Castle.

Also how the Scots have joined Battle against the Rebels.

Together with the names of those Lords which led the forces, and took the
Rebels prisoners, with their number of forces, both of horse and foot.

With the exact Coppies of two Letters, sent from two Merchants in Ireland, one
to Mr. Walterhouse, Citizen in London, and the other to a worthy Divine,
concerning all the proceedings of the Plots, which the Rebels ever did intend
to this very day.

London Printed for Thomas Bates, 6641.

A WILDFIRE PLOT found out in Ireland.
IF there were ever found deadly enemies to true Christian Religion, they are
now found out in Ireland, that Mother of all treachery, and Nurse of treason.
For their inveterate malice is now grown to the full perfection of disloyalty:
and what they could not perfect in one nefarious plot, they did now intend to
perform in another. Their late pretended Gun-powper plot is not unknown to
all men, which they being frustrated of (having much powder by that means
ready by them) did make therewith many balls of wildfire, with which they
intended to burn the whole city of Dublin with a vast inflation. The number of
all the Rebels are conceived to be for certainty about 30000. and their
multitude increases daily: many of them lie in Caves of the earth, some others
are in Dandalke, which they took the 30 day of October, others are in the
counties of Vester, Canney and Cavin, but especially in the county of Manahom
in great number: But not to wander thus from my intent, I will speak more
largely of the wildfire, which they plotted very lately for the tuine of the
whole Kingdom. About the dead time of Thursday night, being th 11. of Nov* 500
of them or thereabout, came out of the Caves in the earth with balls of
wildfire in their hands, casting and tossing them over the city walls of
Dublin. There were five houses burnt down thereby equal to the ground, and
the fi^e took hold of many other houses, but (as it was Gods great mercy) they
were suddenly quenched by the great labor of the people, and thanks be to
Almighty God, no more hurt was done by them.

There was an English Merchant lived in one of those houses, that were burnt,
whose estate, was supposed to be no less then 35000l and he lost most part of
his estate there. The rest were all Protestants, men of very good fashion, and
reputation: but by the reason of that calamity, now scarce worth any thing: all
whose estates we do much deplore, and commiserate. But there are a 1000, men
do guarde the City day and night: who hearing of this combustion, did
immediately march out of the Gates, and took three Lords, Lord Casmahawne, L*
Mackamaveire, L. Bohoune, with about the number of fifty other Rebels, whom
they committed all to the Castle, the other fled, and ran about the fields and
woods, and raised a great number of the Rebels presently; whowere about nine
thousand the next day, and marched against the city: but the Lords and Justices
having some suspicion before thereof, did that very night send a Post into
Scotland, and some English colonels, who very lovingly did assist them. There
came from Scotland, and the Northern parts of England* 4000 foot men, and 400
horsemen, who did in some manner qualify them. Sir Francis Willoughby
Governor of the Castle comman^ed 50 pieces of Ordinance to be brought out,
which were discharged against the Rebels, he had 200 men under him. My Lord
Moore ^ame from Broghed^ vith 700 foot men, Sir H. Iuckbourne with ten foot
Companies in complete Arms, Sir Charles Coot with 1000 foot. So that in all
the number of the Rebels that were slain, were about 3000 and 80, besides many
Armss, which the English, Scottish, and Irish protestants did take from them.

The rogues are very resolute, for they put both man, women, and children to
the sword, wheresoever they meet them, without any distinction of sex with
cruel tyranny. But they very sildome appear armed; so that sometime they are
not known, and so under pretense of Protestants, they cut their throats; for
they bury all their armor in Caves in the woods, Wherefore all things are most
excessive dear in the city, neither can they scarce buy any thing for their
money, for the Country dare not venture to bring in any Commodities to the
City, for fear the Rebels should assault them, wholly in ambush almost every
where thereabout. They dare nor travel in the day, much less in the night,
for then the Rebels are most obvious, and do range more frequently about. So
that things of mere necessity can scarce be had in the city to the great
relief of the Inhabitants thereof.

O egregious treachery! or rather treason to the King, and Kingdom! These
things would make a very Democritus to cry out in doleful exclamations. But
let those that delight thus in such fire, fear lest they fall into an
everlasting fire: and let them take heed lest a sudden fire descend from
heaven, and consume them Praecipitiously, like as the fiery Serpents did the
Israelites.

The true Copy of a Letter sent from Mr. Joseph Watson Merchant in Dublin, to
Mr. Watterhouse Citizen in London dated November the 4. 1641.
Mr. VVatterhouse*
After our loves remembered unto you, hoping of your good health which the Lord
in his mercy long continue: this is to certify you concerning our condition. I
doubt not, but you have heard of the Papists which are risen in Rebellion, but
God did deliver our City from their bloody device: else we had not a man of us
been alive this day. For they had intended to take the Castle, where all the
strength of the Kingdom was, and then they would have ruinated us, and all the
English in the Kingdom; had not God miraculously delivered us. The discovery
was but at ten of the Clock on Friday night: and the next morning they might
have took the Castle, had not one in company revealed it to the Lords: and
though we seem to have been delivered, yet we are still in great fear; for
we know not who are our enemies, and friends. Many enemies we have amongst us
in the City, that should have bin the fi st, that should have cut our throats,
as it has been in the Country in one of the best plantations of the English,
that is now in the County of Manahom, and Cavin* and orher Counties. The whole
County of Manahom the Irish thereof are in Rebellion, and many English are
destroyed, and loit their lives, and all their means; some worth ^ 1000.
pounds over night, and not a rag to cover them the next day. There is by
Relation, 500 people of them now in our City, all stripped of their clothes: no
difference between rich and poor, only the Rich were worse dealt with. Now
our Lords have sent out y^terday an Army down, and the Scots in the North
parts are risen to meet them. But it is thought the Scots have met with them
ere this, and have driven them from one place, but there are a great number of
them, but not a quarter of them armed men, but they have good store of Arms:
We hope the Lord will stay them. Many of them are taken, and more every day,
but it will be a great while before they be suppressed: and our Soldiers prove
many false, and still we every day and night watch them. There is above 500 men
in Arms watch our City every night, Householders and other men, are I may say a
1000. We have in our out Stee^s 200. they would have set our Town on fire, for
they are maynly enraged,, and daiely Trecheries are found out, which is Gods
great mercy to us. By this means we have no trade in our City more then needs
require, that is for victuals, and candles, and such like things, which men
cannot be without, and we can get in no debts, for men will pay no moneys.
For my part I shall be a great loser by these times, for we are at a great
charge, it is one man's work to watch, and there is great distraction.

Thus with my love to you, desiring your prayers, which I know are not wanting,
for us, I ever rest

Your loving Friend Joseph Watson.

The Copy of another Letter sent to a worthy Divine in this City etc.
Worthy Sir.
AFter my best respects recommended unto you I think it expedient to acquaint
you of all affairs, that belong to our Irish business. My Lord Moore is in
Dro^heda with 700. foot and a Troop or two; Some of my Lords children are
already come hither, and we expect my Lady Moore and their children this night:
my Lord has sent hither several trunkes: they are this day put into the
Castle to be safely preserved.

There is 200. Soldiers in the Castle victualled for 12. months and about 50.
pieces of Ordinance, mounted to keep the City in awe. Sir Francis Willoughby
is governor, and Sir John Borlasse lodges therein.

The Justices sit at Cork-house to free the Castle from recourse of people
thereto. This morning have marched toward Drogheda 10. foot companies in
complete arms, under the command of Sir Henry ^^ckbourn. Dandalk^ was taken on
Sunday. And the Scots and some English have come upon the Rebels, and have
restrained the New^^e from the Rebels with the loss of a few men* 80* of the
Rebels are slain, with good stoore of Arms. The Scots and English from the
North are 4000. foot, and 400, horse and their army increases: There are in
the County of Cavan under the command of Sir Charles Coot a 1000 foot. We are
in good hopes that the Lords of the Pole will prove true, for they are here
offering their service daily. Great in number the Rebels are, and daily
increasing both in Vester and Carney. My Lord Moors Troop have lately taken
about 60. of the Rebels, and killed 3. or 4. and rescued 7. score head of
cattle from them. We do not as yet hear of any rising in Mountser, or
Lemster: so as we hope these broils will cease when the English army as well
as the Scots fall upon them. Thus hoping I have satisfied you herein, I commend
you to God and rest.

Dublin November. ^. 1641. Your loving Friend, H. L.


