A SERMON PREACHED UPON SUNDAY THE THIRD OF MARCH In St Mary's OXFORD, BEFORE
The Great Assembly of the Members, OF THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF COMMONS There
Assembled.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1643.

(...) contribute, such as I have, (Qui non potest Agnum, Columbam ferat:)
Offering up a Stone, how Rough and vnpollish'd soever, to the Building of this
Temple: Which Stone, if any man shall go about to asperse with his untemper'd
Mortar, not suffering it to be laid (as the stones in Solomon's Temple were)
without Noise; Let him know, that He, who has already sacrificed his whole
Fortunes, (such as they were,) and is ready with all Cheerfulness to lay down
his Life, will not be unwilling to Expose his Name; if hereby, he may be made
able, in the least measure to promote the Glory of his God, and the Welfare of
his Brethren.

Sir, This is That which I plead for in the Pulpit, though, I confess, with
more Zeal, then Learning; and this is That which you Fight for in the Field,
with no less Courage then Loyalty. I have the honor and happiness to be a
witness of your Compassion toward your Brethren, and of your Zeal toward
God: And therefore, while I see You bear in one hand a Sword, 1. Sam. 13. 20.
sharpened in Israel, not among the Philistims, against the Rebellious Sheba;
and in the other a Stone, hewn out of the Spiritual Rock, for Sacrilegious
Achan* I hope, this Your known detestation of Rebellion and Sacrilege; Your
clear and unbiac'd pursuit of Religion and Liberty; will encourage that in
Another, which You Practice Your self. The confidence whereof invites Me to
beg Your Protection to this Sermon, and the Author of it,

SIR, Your most observant,

PSALM. 122. Verse. 8, 9. For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say,
Peace be within thee.

Yea, Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy Good.


THat there may be an Unjust Peace, and that there may be a Just War, is so
clear and evident a Truth, that in most ages of the World, we shall find it
written with the point of a sword, in Characters of Blood; And as clear it is,
that we are bound to Pray against them both: Against such a Peace, as only
skins the sore, but repairs not the body; a Peace that promises a subtle
superficial Quiet in the Fathers days, but threatens the Sons with an
intestine and more lasting War: And against all War; if not for the many
sins which List themselves even with the justest Cause; yet at leastwise, for
the Temptations sake, which in the holiest War too often assault the bravest
Champions: And we are bound to pray against all Temptations in what kind soever.

I am not, dare not be of his Religion, who said, that Gunpowder in the Field
gave as sweet a Perfume, as Incense at the Altar: And yet, such may be the
case, and such now it is, that the Incense at the Altar burns the sweeter for
the Gunpowder in the Field. The smoke of the Canon is good or bad, as the cause
is so; and that which proves a stench, an odious stench in the nostrills of the
Almighty, when it is fired to blow up a State, when it is fairly exercised to
defend Religion, then it smells like the precious Ointment upon Aarons Head.

I presume, the Socinian is not here, who subscribes to the unlawfulness of
all war; so subtlely taught the Anabaptist once, till he had compassed a
mighty strength, and a Power of resistance: He taught so, till he made Germany
reele with his thundering Legions, borrowing that very argument to beat down
the sword of War, which the Jews at this day make use of, to cry down the
Savior of the World, and the Prince of Peace, as not yet come; viz. That in
the time of the Gospel all Nations are required to beat their Swords into Plow
shares, Esa. 2. 4.
and their Spears into Pruining hooks. Mic. 4. 3.
Whereas indeed the Prophets do hereby commend unto us, not the Practice of
Christians, but the Doctrine of Christ. If we would put on the Lord Jesus, that
same love and meekness, which we ought to do, and become such men, as Christ
in his Gospel charge us to be, there would be no need of the Sword then; we
should be greater strangers then to the loud reports of War, then we are now
to the sweet sounds of Peace.

But now, the Almighty, who is himself the Lord of Hosts, as well as the God
of Peace, has put a Sword into the hand of the supreme Magistrate, a sharp
edged Sword, not a painted Dagger; and Wars well grounded are naught else
(says my Author) but suits of Appeal to the great Consistory of Heaven.
However, it will appear that Israel found not so much comfort in David's
victorious Laurel, as under Solomon's ever peaceful Vine. There may dwell more
of Honor in a scarrified face, but in a smooth skin there shines more of
Beauty; this a work of Creation, and that of chance. We must still prefer the
Olive to the Ivy. David one of the three Worthies of Israel did so: Whose
sword, though it were drunk with the blood of Gods enemies; yet you shall
never find him to begin the Quarrel with them; he was forced in a manner to
Fight for the Peace of Jerusalem; and to show how great an Enemy he was to
War, (which most commonly has been an Enemy to Religion and Liberty) he not
only called upon his Brethren to Pray for that Peace, but for their sakes is
resolved to lead them the way.

For my Brethren and Companions sake I will now say, Peace be within thee.

Because of the House of the Lord onr God, I will seek thy good.

Religion and Liberty, those two Atlantes, the Pillars upon which Jerusalem
stands, and which are now so much pretended by our Enemies, so much sought
after by us, are the two motives in my Text, which here first set a good King
upon his knees to pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; and then set him upon his
legs again, (if need be) to fight for that Peace.

For my Brethren and Companions sake: there is his Charity; or, you may call it
in a larger sense, the Liberty of the Subject. For which we have the Royal
word of a King; I will now say (says he) Peace be within thee; or, I will wish
thee Prosperity: as some read it. Now Peace without Liberty, Prosperity and
Bondage are they not inconsistent?

But secondly, Because of the house of the Lord our God: Behold here his Piety;
behold here, the Religion of our David; and for which (O Jerusalem) he will
more then Wish, he will endeavor thy good. So that, if either his Heart or his
Brain, if either his Pen or his Sword can purchase the Peace and Prosperity of
his Brethren, together with the pure worship of his God, we have his full and
Princely Resolution. I will say, and I will seek.

The words then in brief contain in them a double Act enforced from a double
motive: an Act of wishing, and an Act of seeking. The first relates unto the
Heart and the Tongue, Loquar de Pace tua; I will pray for thy Peace, or I will
wish thee Prosperity: The second imployes the Brain and the Hand, indeed all
the members, Quaeram bonum tibi. I will Study, I will seek thy good.

Corresponding to which double Act, we have a double Motive.

1. For my Brethren and Companions sake; a Motive of Community and Compassion.
2. Because of the house of the Lord our God; a Motive of Piety and Religion.
I begin at the double Act: which I shall twist together into one discourse,
and (as I am able) discover unto you a good King laboring both in Word and
Deed for the Peace of Jerusalem.

I will now say, Peace, etc. I will seek thy Good.
And here to faciliate the clerenesse of this point; let us first take a view
of the State of the Kingdom in the seasonablenesse of the wish. I will Now
say. Which instant of time, though in the strictness of King David's Chronicle,
it reflect only upon the returning of the Arc unto Jerusalem from the hands of
the Philistines; yet, because his scrutiny and search after Peace, was eminent
throughout all his persecutions, both from Foreign and domestique Enemies;
and because this Psalm of Degrees, was in lieu of a Te Deum, set and tuned for
his Harp, to be sung upon every solemn Feast day, and at all times whenever
he or his People approached the Courts of the Lord: Therefore we shall take
leave to run this Now through each several trouble of holy David's Reign. I
will Now say.

Now, that you have drank deep of the dregs of Gods wrath; Now, that you have
seen with horror, and rued with loss the cursed Counsels of Ahithophel which
yet you hearkened unto, 2. Sam. 16. 23.
as unto the Oracles of God: Now, that so many Israelites have fallen and
perished in the unnatural Rebellion of Absolon and Sheba; Now, that the house
of David waxes stronger and stronger, 2. Sam. 3. 1.
and the house of Saul waxes weaker and weaker: Now, that the multiplied
successes of a rightful sword, might entitle me to a more absolute Dominion,
and invite me to expect a perfect and full signal Conquest over my Subjects;
promising a double right to a Throne, as well through your Blood, as by Samuels
Oil, yet Now am I ready to embrace a Treaty of Peace: and to evidence unto the
World, that the prosperity and welfare of Jerusalem, is the prime aim of its
Sovereign, I will Now say, Peace be within thee.

I will forget how Shimei cursed the Lords Anointed; 2. Sam. 16.
and how my Messengers whom I sent to Hanun with an Olive Branch in their
mouths were villenously entreated by the Princes of the Children of Ammon: 2.
Sam. 10.
I will forget all this; and I will forgive moreover the Churlishness of
Nabal, 1. Sam. 25^
and the false suggestions of Ziba: 2. Sam. 16.
my household Servants who eat bread from the Kings Table, they shall not for
all their Apostasy, be forced (as their Master was) to eat the bread of
Affliction.

And though the Ziphites and the Keilites, 1. Sam. 13.
whom I rescued from danger, and protected by my presence, would secretly have
betrayed me into the hands of mine Enemy; yet I will pass an Act of Oblivion
upon this their treachery: I will Now say Peace be within thee. Nay, were that
Arch-Rebell now living, who stole the hearts of the men of Israel from me; and
who under pretense of doing Justice, seized first upon the Judicature; (There
is no man deputed of the King to do right; and therefore, O that I (says he)
were made Judge in the Land, that every man which has any suit or cause, might
come to me, and I would do him Justice. 2. Sam. 15. v. 3. 4.) And then under a
color of Religion, v. 7. seizes next upon the Militia; who went in their
simplicity, and they knew not any thing, v. 11. but afterward by a continual
increase, grew up unto a great Rebellious Army, to take away not only the
Crown and Dignity, but the very life of their Liege Lord. 2. Sam. 17. 2. 4.
Yet neither should he be exempted from Repentance and Pardon (if he would lay
hold of it) I would Now say, Peace be within thee.

It Is true, that Peace carries as glorious a presence with it, as harmonious a
sound, as full a train of Epithites, as (I think) any blessing under Heaven,
(...), in Aristides: Loud expressions all of them: yet they all come short of
him, who fancied a kind of malaciousnesse even in an unjust Peace: Injustam
Pacem Iustissimo Bello: the only place, that ever the Term unjust, served to a
good sense. But still we are too shallow. The blessings of Peace are beyond
both Greek and Latin Oratory: the Gospel, and Christ's most precious blood
must come in to rate them. Our Peace, Pax nostra Christum valet, it cost God no
less then an Incarnation, and a Crucifixion too: whereby he achieved the
Title and honor, not only of being the Author of Peace. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 25. but
is the Prince of it. Esa. 9. Prince of that Peace, which is it self a
Princess; if Saint Paul have any skill in Principalities and Powers: who
therefore calls upon us for our Allegiance, to be Loyal Subjects, and to
suffer with all thankfulness the Peace of God to Rule in our Hearts: (...),
Imperet, says he, Coloss. 3. 15, Let it have Dominion over you; and therefore
at least, a Princess. A puissant victorious Princess, Quae Superat omnem
intellectum: a Wise and valiant Princess, Quae munit and custodit corda
vestra. And the Peace of God (a Peace which I am confident David wished to be
within Jerusalem, as well as an external Prosperity) And the Peace of God
which passes, (...), which subdues and Conquers all understanding, shall keep,
(...), which is a military word, shall entrench and guard, your hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus. Philip. 4. 7.

But these, however convincing arguments in their own nature, (and me thinks
the Gospel should need no Second, no other Spokes man then the Messiah) yet
when they encounter ours so perverse and stubborn, they win but weakly upon
our affections. The only Masculine Logic now lies in the Sword; and we must
have unto the Camp for a true definition of Peace.

When once we begin to find the sword stealing from a Neighbors Bosom to
lighten in our faces, and to lodge in our Bowels; Then presently we advance
into an ecstasy of Expression, blessing those former days, now forfeited by
our sins, wherein we could call somewhat our Own; our Estates and Fortunes
our Own; our Children and Servants our Own; our Own Bodies, yea and our
Consciences they were our Own: For even in Religion we can remember the day,
when we had a Propriety in that too. Then we can say, O thrice happy Peace,
wherein we might see the King and Subject so incorporated each into other, as
that Salus Populi, was not distinguished into frenzy, or put upon the rack to
make an argument for Rebellion; Nor yet Praerogativa Regis, raised as a step or
staire to Tyranny: But were both of them like the two eyes in the Body,
shedding equal light, and darting forth a comfortable shine to the head and to
the inferior members. Compare these times with what we have lost, and our
Fathers days will run the danger of an Vtopia; be deemed rather the sport of a
luxuriant Fancy, then any real truth. Then, when the King seemd rather a
Steward for the people, then a Lord over them; and when the People were so
endeared into the favor of the Prince, as if there had been an holy kind of
Anarchy in State, and every man had been both a King and a Subject: well may we
ingeminate the Rapture, and Cry, O thrice happy, O thrice blessed Peace.

And yet to redeem those times, and to recover that Peace, the blessings
whereof we have learned so thoroughly from the miserable effects of War; God
knows how few there be who are contented to spend more then an empty Prayer, a
little wholesome breath, and a cheap wish: I will wish thee Prosperity; and I
will now say, Peace be within thee. If words could make the purchase, should we
not all be buyers? But, I will seek thy good; seek it through fire and water;
engage my Life and Fortune for the Peace of Jerusalem; I doubt me this will
prove a hard Chapter to those, who through avarice, laziness, or Cowardice,
have causelessly resolved before hand, we shall be all undone; and therefore
make it their only shifting study, how to fall last in the Field. Whereas
indeed God may justly challenge the very spring of our Actions; and therein is
to be invocated and petitioned, not only with the Heart and Tongue, but
likewise with the Hand, or what other member we can find more Active, for the
procurement of our Peace. For otherwise, to Pray with the Lips, and unpray
with the Hand, i. e. to beg Peace at Gods hands, and scarce stretch out our
Own to take it, what is this, but to play handy dandy with our maker? We would
have Peace, but not yet, Lord; or, we would have Peace but are loath to Buy it;
Or, if Buy we must, will not a little Sweat serve the turn? This marketting
and chaffering for Gods blessing, which was wont to be cheap at the price of
Blood; is to dally with his mercy, and calls assuredly for his Justice.

How much better therefore that posture of the men of Judah, whom we find with
a Petition in their mouth, and a sword in their hand? They cried unto the Lord
their God, and Fought with their enemies. 2. Chron. 13. 14. and 14. 11. indeed,
as the Kings (...), in the last verse of this Psalm, signifies a through
Seeking, a Search with Prayer; so at the sixth verse, the Peoples (...), is a
through Praying, a Prayer not without Seeking; and in both words we read great
endeavors.

It seems, the Peace of Jerusalem was lost, as does appear by David's seeking
for it: And he sought it in the Wilderness, at Nob, in Gath; he sought it at
the hands of friends and Strangers; nay, he saught it most passionately from
them who had least reason to deny it. And, think we, he would have parted with
his Wives, his Jonathan, his friends and servants, (and you know, all this he
parted with afterward, out of a pure love to Peace) would he have fled from
the great City to Mahanaim, and changed the Royal Palace for the Cave Adullam?
1. Sam. 22. 2. Where we read, that every one that was in distress, (to wit,
for a good conscience sake) and every one that was in debt (i. e. beggared and
undone, they and their Children, by the rage of a prevailing Enemy) and every
one that was discontented, or bitter of soul (to wit, to see the Lords
anointed so maliciously traduced and persecuted) gathered themselves unto him,
and he became a Captain over them: and there were with him about four hundred
men: not above four hundred men at first, when he defended himself from
Assassines; and but six hundred men at first, to shield him from the Rebellion
of Absalom, 2. Sam. 15. 18. And (think we) he would have endured all this, and
have set up with a handful of men against the many thousands of Israel, had it
not bin by some particular Item and encouragement from Heaven, to go in quest
for some such rare public blessing, as the good and prosperity of Jerusalem?

I (says he) will seek thy good* as if he had said: Well, I see how bloodily
Doeg that Edomite, 1. Sam. 22.
is bent against the Prophets of the Lord: I hear of a Trumpet blown by the
treacherous Sheba to unite Ephraim and Manasseh against loyal Judah. 2. Sam.
20.
Ahithophel too, who plots how to dry up the Holy Oil wherewith I was
anointed, 2. Sam. 17.
and so consequently to alter the very Ordinance of God, and to bring Confusion
upon Jerusalem; let him plot and contrive still: But mark the end of him. ^.
23.
And though Ioab and Abner should be so little touchd with the feeling of Gods
instant judgments, as to sport in Blood; (Let the young men now arise and Play
before us. 2. Sam. 2. 14. a strange bloody kind of Play, for every man to
thrust his sword in his brothers side, verse. 16.) could they have the heart to
hackny out this Kingdom, to Husband the present War, and to spinne out the
sword, only for their own Profits sake: Yet, believe me, O Jerusalem, and take
it upon the word of a King, I will seek thy good. Nay, take it under my Hand;
Which is the greatest security I can give thee for the present, against the
disloyal and unsubjectly diffidence of some distrustful Israelites; Who
though they slander us with an intention to subvert the Peace of Jerusalem in
her Liberty and Religion;

Yet we say (and he would have his Subjects to Remember it) we say, His
Majesty's answer to a Remo^strance or Declaration, May 26. 1642. page 7.
with a clear and upright conscience to God Almighty, whosoever harbors the
least thought in his Breast of ruining or violating the public Liberty or
Religion of this Kingdom let him be Accursed: And he shall be no Counselor
of Ours, that will not say Amen.

Now time was, when a Kings word, and the Handwriting of a King, would have
passed without other security: (I enquire not what they will do now) and
whatsoever the King did, pleased the People. 2. Sam. 3. 36. His bare example
was both a Law and a Demonstration. Vita Principis censura est: the very Life
and Conversation of a chaste Prince, is a good Sermon, and Preaches downright
at the Libidinous Subject: His yea and nay strikes dumb the Blasphemer: and
Gods House is still the fuller for the presence of the Royal Majesty. It were
a reproach to our Nation to let the King be the sole Pacifique.

It Is true (and to your lasting Honors it will be spoken) that you have not
suffered your David to tread the way of Peace, alone. Witness the Dove which
you sent at first from this floating Arc; which, though it returned not home
unto you with an Olive Branch; (as you might expect) though they answered your
Dove with a Raven; The Covenant as is pretended of both Kingdoms.
which you expected not; yet we have heard of your sending the Dove abroad, a
second time, to discover whether the Waters be abated; (those Waters which King
David complains of, that they overwhelmed him; and which in time, would rot and
quite sink the Arc it self) and to learn, whether the Deluge of Blood,
which has now prevailed more then an hundred and fifty days twice told, may
yet find some hopes to fall, or run into an Inundation of joy.

However, if They, who first imbarqued this Kingdom for a Tempestuous sea,
have not only torn down the sails, but cut off the Anchor; as if it were all
one to them, sink or swim: If they, who first drew the Sword, have quite
thrown away the Scabbard, with intent never to sheath it more, unless in the
Bowels of their poor Brethren; yet this whole Kingdom, even all, whom
ignorance, or malice have not left desperately blind, do plainly see, and can
cheerfully attest, how pressing You are to rebuild the Walls of Jerusalem, and
the Temple of Peace, (if it may be) with the Trowell only, Nehem. 4. 17
without the supplement of a Sword. Yea, and they greatly rejoice to see, how
unanimously You are inclined to compassionate your Brethren; to preserve their
Religion, and so, (that I may speak to you in your own words) to Boy up this
Church and State from ruin and Desolation.

Indeed, your Brethren, they are your Brethren, the sons of your Mother, who
now Bleed in every Vein of this Kingdom: The Fortunes of your Brethren, which
are now wounded and sacrificed to the present fury of the Sword: The Wives and
Children of your Brethren which are menaced with an ensuing Famine: yea, and
many your poor Brethren Themselves, who are already overtaken with it, now
crying aloud unto you for bread; Upon occasion of their Petition, which was
made known in the Church and accordingly the Charity of the Congregation
implored.
(do you not hear them from Lambeth and from London hither?) and who being
imprisoned for no other Crime but their Loyalty and Allegiance, are there ready
to starve for the Testimony of a good Conscience. O let your Charity be heard
anon to out-voyce, and to cry down their hunger! and that too, in some measure,
for Their sakes, who are our Prisoners veriest Enemies; viz. that they may nor
be guilty of Murdering them in cold Blood: They also are your Brethren,
according to the Flesh; and we have no warrant to promote or wish any man's
damnation. But you have other Brethren in that great City; who are more at
Liberty in their Bodies, but nothing so free in their Souls: I mean such who
adhere outwardly to the Rebellion, though in their Hearts they daily curse the
Authors and Fomenters of it; Those who deny Christ for their Wives and
Childrens sake; and comply with the Times, not for Love, but out of Fear; just
as the Romans who deified Diseases, or, as the Indians who now worship the
Devil, Non quod amant, sed ne noceat, that he may do them no hurt. Yet these
poor timorous Souls deserve some Compassion; They are your Brethren.

And then secondly Religion, it is Religion that now runs Retrograde; Religion
that now lies a bleeding. The pure Service of our God blasted and scandalized
with the name of Anti-christianisme: The House of our God converted into a
Den of Thieves; or, whatsoever Den else you know more savage: The Navy of
our God crucified and torn to pieces; and that too, I wish I could not say,
as well by Royalists, as by Rebels. And therefore, I hope you shall not need a
stronger conjurement then this: indeed I know not who can find a stronger then
Brother and Maker: For my Brethrens sake, and for Gods sake.

We read at the first of Kings and the twentieth Chapter, that when Benhadad,
and his two and thirty Kings had drawn out into the Field, and besieged
Samaria, that Benhadad sent Messengers to the King of Israel, in a manner, to
demand his whole Kingdom. Thy Silver and thy Gold is mine, thy Wives also and
thy Children, (thy Servants) even the goodliest are mine, v. 3. Now can we
imagine it to stand with the Honor of a King of Israel, to yield to so
unequal Conditions? And yet yield he did. According to thy saying (says he) I
am thine, and all that I have, v. 4. Yet this (as God would have it, who can
draw Good out of Evil) would not content Benhadad and his 32 Kings. For
perceiving the easiness of the King, and with what Facility they had obtained
thus much, They make this grant but a step to a fresh Demand; and now, they
must have more: Even his men of War, his strongholds, his Cities, his Forts
and Magazines; yea, and the house of his God; Whatsoever was most desirable
and pleasant in the eyes of the King, v. 6. Whereupon he begins now to consider
the unreasonablenesse of their demand: collects Himself; summons the Princes,
the Nobles, and the Elders of Israel, v. 7. whose general Vote it was, by no
means to yield to such inequitable and unprincely Conditions: And all the
Elders, and all the People said unto him, Hearken not unto them nor Consent, v.
8. He did so, as they advised him: and the next news is, The Syrians are
smitten twice by the sword of Israel, v. 20. and 29.

If either the Liberty of our Brethren, or the worship of our God be demanded
as a Prey and spoil for the railing Rabshakeh or imperious Benhadad; the
promise of private ease and an effeminate Peace, must not lock up the Sword
within the scabbard; But let the King say then, as Nehemiah did, unto the
Nobles, and the Rulers, and to the rest of the People, Nehem. 4. 14. Be not ye
afraid of them; Remember the Lord, which is great and terrible, and fight for
your Brethren, your Sons and your Daughters, your Wives and your Houses; and
for the house of the Lord.

Thus did Nehemiah; who sought for Peace, and was forced upon a posture of
War: And thus did David; who ever prayed for Peace, though sometimes with a
Sword in his Hand. And that, For his Brethren and Companions sake: and because
of the House of the Lord his God. Which leads me from the double Act to the
double Motive. A Motive of Community and Compassion; and a Motive of Piety and
Religion. But first of the Motive of Community and Compassion.

[For my Brethren and Companions sake.] That is, (as I told you at first) for
the Liberty of the Subject. A thing which at this day is invaded, nothing more;
and yet nothing so much pretended to make the Invasion good. Liberty, which is
so often acknowledged from the Quill of an Eagle to be the proper Birthright of
every true Subject (indeed though David offer us a kindly shelter from the
scorching heat, under the Branches of his Royal Oak; yet he denies us not the
shade of our own Fig tree: And then, is it not fit, that we again should
convey some sap and moisture to the Root of that Oak, that so his Branches may
still flourish and protect us? Is it not fit, that we should return and afford
him some shade, yea, and reach him some Fruit too from our Figtrees? Thou can
not be said to rob thy self, when thou give Caesar his due; Tribute does no
way diminish or undermine Liberty.) I say, Liberty (notwithstanding the former
Benefit) is now armed to cut the Throat of Liberty, and made the only stale to
bring in Slavery.

Quidam ut Imperium subvertant Libertatem proferunt; si subverterint, Ipsam
aggredientur. The Historian writes as a Prophet of these times.

Now Liberty, In Paradox.
it is ill defined by Cicero to be Potestas vivendi ut velis; to be a Power of
doing whatsoever seems best in our own eyes, without Check or Control. (and
such a time there was once in Israel; but 'twas, when there was no King there)
no: true Liberty consists in an orderly subjection of the will to Law and
Equity. It is indeed (as the Civilians tell us) a Natural faculty, Faciendi
quod cuique facere libet; L. libertas.
but then with this following restriction, nisi si quid vi aut Iure
prohibeatur. F. de stat. hom.
And Excepto si quid Masuri Rubrica vetavit; so Persius. And then, as Seneca
informs us, speaking of the state of Rome, in the times of Julius and
Augustus, Salva esse Roma non poterat, nisi beneficio servitutis; So, give me
leave to construe Servitude into a Subjectly Obedience, and I will say, that
neither can this Island ever be safe, but through the benefit of such a
Subjection.

Indeed, take away the Boundary of the Laws; and what is this but to erect a
Tyranny within every breast? if that question be rightly put, (as I conceive it
is) What is Tyranny, but to admit no Rule to Govern by; but our own Wills?
Take away our sub and supra; the Power of Dominion, and the Right of
subjection: change but Liberty into Licentiousness; and you open the floodgate
to that impetuous Torrent, and that now justified and experienced truth, which
has been twice or thrice Honored with the Quotation of a Prince, though to the
great Dishonor of the Author; viz. Lust will be a Law unto it self, Incest
will be a Law, and Theft will be a Law, and Rapine will be a Law, and Murder
will be a Law. Incest and Theft, and Murder, are these the wholesome good Laws
which we have so long looked for? Yes, these are the unlucky, the illegitimate
brats and spawne of our teeming Rebellion. Silent inter Arma Leges, Fides
Pietasque. If at any time, it is now, that we may behold the Triumphs of
Sedition and Heresy, Profaneness and Blasphemy enthroned; and the High-noon of
Violence and Oppression: Which since they cannot but fall heavy upon David's
Brethren and Companions; therefore is it especially that he so earnestly prays
and sues for Peace upon Jerusalem: For my Brethren and Companions sake.

He calls them Brethren who yet was their Father, and deignes to be a Companion
to those whose Master he was. As Majesty does become the Person of a King, so
likewise does Affability. The Men of Mexico, who dare no longer look their
Sovereign in the Face, after the Solemnities of the Inauguration are passed
over; what do they hereby, but Rob the King of his Humanity? And those on
the other side, who think a little d'offing off the Hat, and a Good morrow for
all day, Respect and Reverence enough for the Lords Anointed; do not they
Pillage him of his Divinity? Princes are Gods, to teach us, not to Play with
that holy flame which at an awful distance Warms, but Burns upon too near and
bold Approaches: But Princes, they are Men too; to teach them from the Humility
of their own mould to Compassionate, and not to overlook their Brethren.

Now our Pity and Compassion is a rich endowment, and choice affection of the
Soul, becoming us both as Men and Christians; and of which the very Beasts
are Capable: insomuch that if Balaam smite his Ass without a cause, the dumb
Ass does not want a Tongue to reprove him of Cruelty. How much more then ought
we to Compassionate our languishing brethren, when we are bound to be merciful
to our fainting Beasts? For my Brethren and Companions sake: me thinks this
verse carries an Especially in it: Especially to Pray for Peace, because of
Them. For howbeit that Christian Love be due to all from all men; yet is not
Grace so thwarting and Cross to Nature, but that it will allow our Affections
to settle more upon One, then upon another. There is an Especially to them of
the Household of Faith. Galat. 6. 10. Especially do good to them.

You that sit here to heal up the Wounds, and to repair the Breaches of a
Kingdom; Yet, so far as it does not impair the Honor and safety of the
Republique, you are to be allowed and cherished in your more singular Care and
Affections for the Peace of your own particular Counties. We may be very Loyal
Subjects, and yet be very Loving Neighbors; even Christ, who was a most
indulgent and tender Master to All his Disciples, had yet his Beloved John; nor
does his Bosom lie open for every one to lean upon. If at any time you find
him Bemoaning the Unthankfulness of Corazin and Capernaum; yet you shall see
Him downright to Weep over the Ingratitude of Jerusalem. We are bound by the
Badge of our Christian Profession, to Compassionate the miseries of Gasping
Germany: We have Brethren there, whose sad and woeful estate implores and
Commands our Pity and our Prayers for them. And yet That hindered not, but
that we might, ere while, have advanced our Compassion over the miserable
Condition of Bleeding Ireland. Nor does This hinder but that we are still to
keep a Choice Reserve of Tears and Prayers, for the Peace of our distressed
Mother England. England at this day, you may behold her weeping for her Father
and her Sons; for her Head that is crowned with Thorns; for her Two eyes, the
Universities of this Land, which grow dim and darkish; (God keep them from
being quite put out!) for her Hands, the Courts of Justice, which are
Palsy-shaken, and scarce able to hold the Scales and the Sword, for her Feet
viz. the Common People, who are carried away like Sheep without a Shepherd,
Non qua eundum, sed qua Itur; wandering up and down in the Bypath of
Ignorance and disobedience. O ye that pass by, All ye that bear good will
unto Zion; Come, and lend us here your Tears and your Prayers; For your
Brethren and Companions sake, O Pray for the Peace of this Jerusalem.

1. For my Brethrens sake, My Brethren, not only those who dwell within the
Walls of Jerusalem; but also those who Visit her from abroad. The Faithful, be
they of what Place or Country soever, never so high, or mean in their
Condition, they are all Brethren, and Christ himself is but our Elder Brother:
the Root of this our Consanguinity (if I may so call it) and near Alliance unto
Christ, springing from our obedience to his Fathers Will. For whosoever (says
he) shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the same is my Brother
and Sister and Mother. Mat. 12. 50. For my Brethrens sake therefore; i. e.
inclusively, for Christ's sake too, (a strong melting conjurement) for Christ's
sake, let us Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, But then secondly, For my
Companions sake. And here is another Especially; a Gradation above Brother.
Indeed, every one that I acknowledge to be my Brother, I do not presently
think it meet and necessary to make him my Companion. All men are not made for
Ionathans; nor does a nearness of Blood conclude infallibly a nearness of
Affection: And though in latter ages there have still been such, who under the
name of Gavestons have gone about to tear even the most faithful Servants,
from the side of Majesty; yet certainly, as it is Wisdom in Princes to admit
Favorites near them, who may receive the shafts of Envy upon Themselves, which
otherwise would light upon the sacred Person of the King; (there being no
Kingdom upon Earth, without its Male Contents,) So is it but Justice in Us to
submit, that they may freely Choose their own Companions: Least by forcing the
contrary, we bereave them of a Right which Nature grants unto every Creature;
and deprive them of that Liberty, which the meanest of their Subjects do
enjoy. Some time or other, it must prove ill with that State, where the Prince
is necessitated to such Companions, whom he cannot but suspect for Spies.

But King David's Companions were not such; But Those, who, when Rebellion had
driven him from the Gates of Jerusalem, 2. Sam. 15. 23.
forcing him to Pass over the Brook Kidron, and so toward the way of the
Wilderness; stuck close to their Lord the King; and followed him both with
their Lives and Fortunes, like so many most Loyal Ittai's: each of them
Protesting, Verse. 21.
as good Ittai did. As the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King lives, surely
in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in Death or Life, even there
also will thy servant be. And therefore for these his Companions sake, that
Their Loyalties might be remunerated, and their Fortunes, which in maintenance
of the Kings Honor have been Plundered, Sequestered, Sold; That These may be
again Repaired; no marvel, if David so heartily wish for Peace.

Which Motive answers tacitly to an Objection, wherewith some of the Malignant
ones were armed. For what? say they; does He pray for the Peace of Jerusalem?
and would he have Us pray for it too? it is wisely and politiquely done of him.
It seems then, he would gladly change his Bramble into a Cedar; and have the
needles picked out of his Crown; enjoy his Wives again, his Baths, his
Vineyards, all quietly unto Himself, and sit upon an unmolested Throne: He
does not like these Absoloms, these uncircumcised Philistines; nor would he be
troubled with more Goliahs or another Saul. To this King David answers, and
testifies to all the World, that he Wishes and Seeks for Peace; not so much
for his Own sake, as for his good Subjects: not so much that He might enjoy his
Ease, as that God might have from Him and Them, a greater measure of Glory and
Worship. Which leads me to my second Motive, and the more eminent of the
twain, a Motive of Piety and Religion: as being Asterisk'd with a Yea of
specialty and Gradation above all the Rest,

{Yea, Because of the House of the Lord our God.}

The first Motive looked nakedly upon the State: This second most properly upon
the Church: unto both which we are all bound in duty, by so near a Relation,
that, it is observed, the self same men, which in a Temporal respect make the
Commonwealth, do in a spiritual build up the Church. The Church and State;
they are the Moses and the Aaron of Israel: Or, what if we should call them
the two Tables? Cut off the Church, and you lay your selves open to that
Reproach of being, only, second Table men; Cut off the State, and you pretend
to give God so much, that there is nothing left for your poor Neighbor.

But there is Domus Davidis, and there is Domus Dei; both in this Psalm: Gods
House, and the Kings are joined together by that wise Builder, Solomon; Nor
shall he stand in need of any Curse, that goes about to Divorce them. Pro Aris
and Foris, The Roman Eagle was never taught to speak other Language in the
Field: And that more Christian Impresse of our Chavalry, Pro Regno and
Religione, it were a shame for us, only to wear so right a Motto in our
Ensigns. No: they who ingeminate that Cry, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple
of the Lord: let them Silence the latter voice, and Proclaim in its Room, the
Gates of Jerusalem; The Temple of the Lord, and the Gates of Jerusalem, they
are not so long-winded a Note, nor so large a Cry, but we may speak and link
them in a Breath. Preface to King James, before his Book against Sacrilege.
Then only can we expect it should go well with a Kingdom when in the Phrase
of learned Sempil a Scottish Knight, (and I would to God that all his
Countrymen were of his mind) When the Church Courteth it, and the Court
Churcheth it. And you will say, there is as little Treason in those words of a
most Reverend Father in our Zion, who, like Saint Paul still preaches it in
his Bonds, calling earnestly upon You, That when You sit down to Consult, for
the Commonwealths sake, Archbishop of C^nt. in his Sermon upon Psalm. 122. 6.
You forget not the Church; And as earnestly upon Us, that when we Kneel down
to Pray, for the Churches sake, we forget not the Common wealth.

Indeed a Commonwealth without a Church, without Religion, even the very
Atheist will cry this down for Paradox. Who though with David's Fool, He
himself say in his Heart there is no God; yet he is Wiser then to speak it
out, among the common People. Religion, he takes it for a convenient Property
at least, a necessary State-Bugg-Beare; and if the ignorant multitude should
not be Awed (thinks he) with the pretended notion of a Deity, it were
impossible to keep up the Port of public Societies. No Flourishing
Commonwealth then, by the Confession of Atheists, without this Palladium,
without Religion. And as for Religion, it is the Voice of all Christendom, that
it will starve and dye, unless it find a support and nourishment from the
Commonwealth. The Vine which only Creepes upon the Ground, how subject is it
to be trampled on, and trod under Feet by the Caledonian Boar? Whereas when it
is erected and propt up with Poles, or climbes upon the Branches of an Elm, it
does not then, only Lodge its Grapes in a safe Bed, but likewise helps to
Build up an Arbor with its Leaves, for each Israelite to sit under.

The Truth is; Preach we may till our hearts ache; Preach at both kinds of
Rebellion, as well that against the King, (and it is possible such an one may be,
whatever some teach to the contrary) as the other against God; Command
Obedience to Gods Laws; yes, and to the Kings: But then our Power of
Commanding is not Coercive, in the Kings Name, and Under pain of loosing Life
or Liberty: But Declarative, in the name of God, and under pain of loosing
Body and Soul. Which denouncing yet (such is the blindness and hardness of
man's Heart) is undervalued to the Former; and will prove but Brutum Fulmen,
unless you that are Masters in Israel do Countenance the Ministers of the
Gospel: and surely, that is not done by making them Poor and Contemptible.
Should you shave the Crown of the Prophets, and denude them of their Ornament:
Children would hardly be kept from calling them Bald-pates; and then how shall
God be kept from sending his Bears among those Children? The Pulpit must be
backed and seconded with the Tribunal, or both will sink. And if the great
Courts of Justice, as well as the Holy Mount of God; If the grave Magistrate,
as well as the painful Minister, do not now especially plead the Cause of
Religion, Actum est, I pray God we do not shortly come to that miserable
Comfort, of an Angliam Fuisse: Time was when We were a Church; time was, when
this was a Kingdom.

I hope there are none here, who long to hear an O-yes in the Market place, or
to see a Si Quis, set upon the Doors of Gods House, inviting any man that can
but read distictly, to take this House into his Cure. None here (I hope) who
wish a Reverse of those days in the first of Queen Elizabeth, Injunct. 53.
when (as we may read in her Injunctions) some Ministers (because they were but
mean Readers) were enjoined to peruse over before, once or twice, the Chapters
and Homilies, to the intent they might read to the better understanding of the
People. And since there are none such here; I hope again, they will not the
least way countenance or suffer them any where else, who go about to rob the
Bride of her Dowry (as Saint Chrysostom calls the maintenance of the Church)
and to bring in Beggary into Gods House; which will bring in Ignorance, which
will bring in Barbarism. For, is not that Religion like to prove a fine Child,
which has Ignorance for it is Mother, and Poverty for it is Nurse?

And here (Fathers and Brethren) let me tell you, it is happy for your Zion,
that David and his Worthies become her Champions. For should Ye of your selves;
If the Sons of Levi should become the only Advocates for their poor Mother; If
they alone should Petition for the House of the Lord, that it may not be
thrown out at the Windows; But that the just Rights and Ceremonies of holy
Church, which preserve even the Substance it self, (as the Bark the Tree, or
as the Hedge the Field,) may be Themselves preserved from Violence and Ruin;
should They alone Petition, in the behalf of their Maker; that the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, who has given to all Creatures, not only whereby to Live,
but wherewith to Frolique; (Figge-leaves could serve to cover our Forefathers
nakedness; yet he has given the Silk worm, and the Golden Fleece to thee:)
That this Liberal Creator may not be pinched, put to Boardwages, pittanced and
Dieted in his Service and Servants: should They alone sue for this; as also
that no impious Belshazzar may be suffered to seize upon the Vessels, and
sacred Vtensils of the Temple; There would be those, to take them short, with,
Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi; and have invented a Scarre-crow,
ycleaped Sacrilege, only to keep up and secure your Own Pomp and Luxury.

But consider we a while, the Vanity of these men; For does not Saint Paul tell
us roundly of such a sin as Sacrilege; ranking it in the same Equipage with
Idolatry, if not Above it? Romans 2. 22. Do not the Primitive Fathers with one
voice declaime highly against the sin of Sacrilege? and of latter days, has
not many a pious Founders Curse, in the heavy Judgments of God, Preached
woefully against the sin of Sacrilege, proving the truth of Solomon's saying
from the ruin of whole Families, viz. That it is a Snare to the man who
devoureth that which is Holy? Pro. 20. 25. And lastly, does not that learned
Antiquary (whom therefore I do the rather quote, because he was no Clergyman)
in his De non temerandis Ecclesiis (a Book, it is pity it is locked up so from
the World, and made of no more public view, by a Reprinting) does not he
prove at large there, and most pithily, that there is scarce a word in all the
83. Psalm, but strikes against those that take the Houses of God in
Possession; This being the Center of that Psalm, and wherein all the Lines of
the Prophets invectives do precisely incur? Daniel in the life of King
Stephen.
Our English Tacitus reports it of the Reign of King Stephen, that,
notwithstanding the miseries of War which continued in an eminent Height
throughout all his days, yet there were more Religious Houses built in his
Reign, then in an hundred years before. Which shows (says he) though the
times were Bad, they were not Impious. And so zealous were they in after ages,
in promoting this kind of Piety, that if there had not been a timely Remora
found out (as in like case there was once by Moses at the building and
beautifying of the Tabernacle) by way of Mort-maine, 7. Edw. 1. It Is conceived
they would have decked all places with their hallowed Temples, and converted our
whole Island into Holy Ground.

Now I think there is no man, but will grant that this same stop might seem as
just in King Edward, as in the Emperors, Constantine and Valentinian; who did
almost the very same before them: to preserve unto the Crown that Homage and
those services of the Subject, which began to lessen by Laymens entering
themselves into Religious and Ecclesiastical Courses. And I conceive, it will
not be denied, neither, That which is acknowledged by a Loyal Pen in this
University, Preface before the true Subject to the Rebel.
That the Means as well as the Ministers of the Church, as they are Liable to
notorious Abuses, should submit to a Reformation. Mistake me not, a
Reformation, I am sure, he means, not such an one, (if any such there can be)
as Alienates from the Church, but which Rectifies in it. Why, that great
Courtier and Politician of his Time, within this last Century, who was so
earnest to raise himself a Name upon the Ruins of the Church, could not
prevail so far, even with the then prevailing Faction, as to get them to
subscribe, That the Lands of the Church, which they unjustly labored to
Alienate unto Themselves, might yet be Alienated from the Church. And again,
should submit to a Reformation, not such an one as would Feed all the Lamps of
the Sanctuary, with Oil alike, making no distinction between a Torch and a
Taper, between the Golden Candlesticks and the Brazen ones; But such an one, as
takes Order that every Lamp may have proportionably its Oil and Light in due
Measure and in due Season.

Great talk has been of Abuses and of Reformation. But, Woe unto such who make
Beams of our Moates; who call every spot in the Moon a total Eclipse, and cry
up every Peccadillo in a private Member for no less then Capital to the whole
Body. But then again, much more We unto such, who fancy and find Abuses where
there are none; Who being well read in the Florentine, accuse the Church, for
no other end but to get her Means. Let them take heed, that the Jews do not
rise up in Judgment against the men of this Generation, for They only Bought
and Sold in the Porch of the Temple, they did not Buy and Sell the Porch and
the Temple too. It is not for me to plead in this Place, that we are the Kings
Subjects, as well as Gods Ministers; And, that the Laws of the Land have not
the spread-Eagles two necks, nor Ianus his two Faces, to look East upon the
Rising Laity, and to reflect a Westernly Glance upon the declining Clergy: No.
The Great Charter of England casts an equal Eye, and gives a just Protection
to us Both: Though (with humbleness, and in all submission be it spoken)
Jacobs Right hand seems to be laid (though some, Genesis 48. 17.
as once Joseph did, call to him to remove it thence) upon the younger Child;
viz. the Church: (the Church is they younger Child: Ecclesia est in Republica,
non Respublica in Ecclesia; is Optatus; And Nature first calls us Men, ere
Faith speaks us Christians:) And the first blessing in the very first lines
there, Compare this with the Kings Oath throughout, taken at His Coronation, as
it is cited out of the Records of the Exchequer, by His most sacred Majesty
Himself, in his Answer to the fore-quoted Declaration.
is Deo and Ecclesiae; We have Granted to God, and by this our present Charter
have confirmed for us and our Heirs for Ever more, that the Church of England
shall be Free, and shall have all her whole Rights and Liberties inviolable.
But proofs of this Nature come not so properly, perhaps, within my sphere.

My chief business therefore shall be, to Remember you, that, not without the
Great hand of Providence, these Houses of the Prophets (as in diverse former
Parliaments, so now especially) have been miraculously Reserved for You. Now,
how can you look upon the Houses of the Prophets, and Forget the Sons of the
Prophets? They that sit and Consult in Naioth, cannot, they cannot but Remember
Bethel. And when the Master is pleased to come into the Harvest field, surely
it is not to Rob the Laborers, but to Remunerate them.

For otherwise should you go about (as God forbid I should dare to think so)
to barter away the Glory of Gods House, to buy the Peace of your Own; should
you seek to destroy with a Breath, a work of sixteen hundred years; And
endeavor to appease Simeon and Levi with the Thraldom of Jacob, the Rage of
your Brethren with the Ruin of our Fathers, bringing their Gray Heads with
sorrow unto the Grave; How Cheap soever at first you might think your Bargain,
I am afraid to tell you, how dear at last you would find the Covenant.
Judgment, you may begin it at the House of God; but then it will never Rest,
till it have over run the Commonwealth. A Parity in the Church, will usher in
an Anarchy in the State; and the Multitude, that innovating, unseltled,
inconstant Creature, will find in time, as little use of a Peerage as of a
Prelacy. Yea, and what if they should Ask you, as once they did, Where was the
Gentleman, when Adam eat his Bread in the sweat of his Brows? I fear me this
Knot, if they should tie it once, would cost you all the drawing of your Swords
to Cut it. Deuteronomy. 33. 11.
For my part when I consider how Moses upon his Deathbed, Blessed the substance
of the Tribe of Levi, in bestowing a Curse, even the Curse of the Sword upon
its Enemies: I cannot forbear, but I must make this Application, and think,
That therefore God now suffers us to endure the longer banishment by means of
the Sword, from our Own Houses; because, when time was, we were so cold and
feeble in defending His. (...), a Kyrke or Church, the very name of the House
speaks the Lord and Master of it: Which since it is a name too, imposed (says
Eusebius) not by man, but by Himself, who is Lord over all; methinks we should
never mention, nor never look upon a Church, but with joy and Reverence we
should be mindful of the Owner: David's Companions did but name it unto him,
and presently it puts him upon a Iubilee. I was Glad, I was glad; when they
said unto me, we will go into the House of the Lord. verse. 1. It was joy
enough (one would have thought) for him to see his Brethren so at Unity among
Themselves; but to find them thus at amity with their God too; This makes him
Tune his Harp unto a higher Key; '(...), I was exceeding Glad at this. Indeed,
it is the House of the Lord, and our meeting here, which makes the name of
Brother and Companion sweet unto us.

In a word. You see, how that Gods House was an especial motive unto David,
both to Pray and Seek for Ierusalems Peace: And you see again, how this House of
God has been made by some a black Incentive for a most unnatural War. Are
there not those who cruelly go about to dye the Churches white Garments in the
Gore Blood of her Sons? And God put it into your Hearts, that when this War
is at an end, she may never find cause to wash them in her own Tears: unless
they be in Tears of Joy and Thanksgiving. Are there not such who think it a
mean Sacrilege to steal Flesh only from the Altar? And therefore have they
not in diverse Places ravished thence the Priest too? O Let it be your Pious
and Worthy Care, to restore them Both. Methinks I see here, so many men almost
so many Obed-edoms: Be ye therefore like that good Obed edom; Do but receive
Gods House into Yours, and God shall one day receive Your House into His. Do
but ye admit Christ and his Disciples to come under Your Roof, and he shall
receive you and your Brethren into His Joy. Every day shall wait upon you with
glad Tidings; And Domitians Dream of a Golden-head, arising behind upon his
shoulders, shall be unridled in the Peaceful and Golden times which will
succeed this Bloody and Iron Age. Be we but content to wait Gods leisure,
without murmuring and distrust, here in his Own House; and we shall behold the
Buckler of the North, and Sword of the West meet, and concenter Triumphantly in
the East, and there make up a Wreath of Bays, and a Chaplet of Roses, for that
Head which has so long been Crowned with Thorns. Yea, and he will Crown us
All, with his Mercy and Compassion here, in his House Militant; and with Glory
and everlasting Peace in his House Triumphant. AMEN.

FINIS.

