A True and Exact RELATION OF The great Victories obtained. by the Earl of
Manchester, and the Lord Fairfax; AGAINST The Earl of Newcastles Army in the
North.

As it appears by a Letter of Sir William Widdrington, sent to the Earl of
Newcastle; which Letter was Intercepted by the Parliaments Army, and sent to
the House of Commons.

Together with two Letters concerning the said VICTORIES: The one from the
Right Honorable, the Lo: Fairfax; The other from Sir John Meldrum, to the
Honorable, Sir William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Relation and Letters forthwith
printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edward Husbands, October 19. 1643.

To his Excellency, The Lord Marquess of Newcastle, most humbly present these:
May it please your Excellency;
I Thought fit to give your Lordship an account of our business yesterday, how
bad soever, as speedily as I could; We had but three divisions charged, two
divisions being of Sir William Savills, the third of my Lords, Ethings, and sir
John Henderson joined, being Eight Troops; the third division being of the left
wing, put the Enemy to disorder, but Savills Regiment totally running
disordered, and so put to rout our whole Army, we have in a manner totally lost
our Foot and Dragoons that were there, being near 800 horse, extremely
disperced, but no great number cut off; sir John Henderson intends to assign
them quarters betwixt Gainsborough and Newark, some on Lincolnshire side, and
some on Nottingham side, for the better calling of the Troops together; but of
the strength of which, we cannot yet give your Lordship any certain account;
but you shall not fail to hear daily of our strength; All Officers having order
to return a daily account of their numbers; I have written to Hastings for his
and the Belvoier Troops, which he has now called to him, but with little
expectation of any assistance from him; sir John Hinderson has written to sir
Edward Nicolas, and General Reven, and I have written to my Lord Jermine, to
let them know, that without the King be pleased to send a considerable number
of Horse in Huntingtonshire, to divert their staying in those parts, or
otherwise to come in the Rear of them, in case they continue in these parts,
that your Lordship will be very much straightened for the preservation of the
county and Yorkshire, if your Lordship shall quit the siege at Hull upon this
unfortunate action; I presume your Lordship will think if fit to fortify the
Church, and some part of Beverley, that so a considerable Garrison may be left
as near them as may be; Their Horse are very good, and extraordinarily armed,
and may be reported to be betwixt fifty and sixty Troops, being very strong; I
do not know the number of their Foot, but we believe them to be about Fifteen
hundred, or betwixt that and Two thousand; Their Foot was not come up to their
Horse, and the ground they had chosen would not admit of above three divisions
of Horse to charge at once; they are for the present at liberty to dispose of
their Forces what way they please, either to Hull or Derby; I can but submit it
to your Lordships consideration, and remain

Pon Cotne, October. 12. 1643. Your Lordships most humble servant, W: WITHRINTON.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce I writ this, there are diverse Foot and Dragoons come in, so that I hope
the loss is not so great as I expected, and I hope not many of the Horse lost,
though not many of them come together as yet; if you be straightened for Arms, sir
John Fitzherbert has six or seven hundred Muskets at Bozover castle.

Sir Ingram Hopton certainly is slain, and Captain Abraham Marcham, and sir
George Bows, and Lieutenant Godfrey, Lieutenant Colonel Ares, Colonel Saint
George, Captain Vernat, and diverse other Captains and Officers either taken or
slain.

He that commanded that division that routed Savills first division (being
conceived to be Cromwell) is certainly slain, and one or two Officers more,
Master Portington is shot through the Arm, and Master Wheeler through the thigh.

For my Honorable friend William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Commons House of
Parliament.
SIR,
THough it were long ere we received any assistance at Hull, yet when any came,
I hope it shall appear we neglected little time in making use of it, an Account
whereof I now desire by your means to present unto the House. October 5, we
had a a supply, from the Earl of Manchester 400. and from Sir William Constable
(though himself be not yet here) about 250 men; the ninth of October the Enemy
assaulted one of our works, but was repulst with the loss of eleven or twelve
men, and six or seven Officers, some taken by my men, some carried off by their
own men, as some of theirs confess, and some few Prisoners taken. Yesterday
being the eleventh of this instant, I drew my Auxilliary Forces and my other
men with some seamen into two Bodies, commanded in chief by sir John Meldrum,
and made a sallie upon the Enemy in his Trenches on the west side of the Town,
two several ways at once, having placed three Troops of Horse, to keep off
the Enemies Horse (which were quickly drawn into a Body) from annoying my Foot:
The service begun about Nine in the morning, it was not long ere my men had
beaten them out of one of their works; and assaulted them in another; nor long
after that, ere my men falling into some disorder, were forced to a retreat,
and the Enemy got possession of their works again, which filled our men with
much discouragement, and all of us with fear of the success of the day. But it
pleased God, by the gallant courage and activity of sir John Meldrum, and the
spirit, and valors of my Commanders and Officers, my men were quickly rallied,
and in a short time recovered all their works on that side, and put the enemy
to flight; there we purchased one of their foreign brazen staves, one of
their great Demi Cannons, which now through Gods mercy has proved a staff of
Reed to them, that piece we speedily made a shift to draw away out of danger of
their recovery, till we had more leisure, toward night, what time we fetched
her within the walls: We took besides, one demi culvering, one sacre, three
drakes, and one case of small shortpeeces all brass, one carriage with great
buller, and about an hundred Arms: After some two hours intermission the
enemy had drawn together a considerable Body of fresh reserves, both horse and
foot, and with those assaulted our weary men, with great fury, but it pleased
God, infinitely to manifest strength in weakness, to supply us with new
spirits, and after a skirmish of some two hours hot service, to drive the
enemy clear of the field, the last night they gave some of my outguards a
strong alarm; but what we then imagined is come to pass, we find this
morning they then drew off the rest of their Ordnance, from their other works,
and have in some measure raised their seige, at least from so close a seige,
though I hear and believe they intend to keep some works at a further
distance, only some few are left as we conceive to face us a while in one
week* while they get their carriages clear, and in all this service, we do not
find that we lost above sixteen men: And thus through the goodness of God
this snare is thus far broken, and we are thus far escaped, and we may truly
say, it is the Lords doing, and marvalous in our eyes; and to him we desire the
glory should be ascribed: We are confident the enemy will yet keep a Garrison
at Beverly this winter, and so though we have obtained some elbow room for our
selves, and our Cattle; yet we expect affronts and what mischiefs they can do
us at that distance, howsoever now that this Port for the benefit of the County
and Kingdom is thus far secured, to the end we may not here sleep
unprofitable, but take all opportunities to advance the public Cause, my
desire is you would earnestly move the House, they would now if ever, contrive
some way to supply us with moneys whereof we are exceeding short, for the
payment of my willing Officers, and Soldiers, who would gladly, now they seem
to fe^le the mercy coming be putting on to help it forwards, then which
nothing is more desired, nor shall be more earnestly endeavored by

Your affectionate friend and servant. FER. FAIRFAX.
Kingston super Hull. Oct. 12. 1643.
For my Honorable friend, William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the Commons House of
Parliament.
SIR,
I Shall not weary you much with the Relation of some happy successes, God
has blesseed us withal since my arrival at Hull, knowing that many pens will
be set a work, whereby neither the truth, in the narration, nor the favor and
mercy of God, can be revealed Upon Monday being the ninth of this instant, the
Reginalists about break of day, did with a great deal of courage, being
commanded by Denton Stricland, and one Little a Countreyman of mine, who
commanded in chief, fell upon one of our outworks, called the Raged Jetty, a
place of great importance for the safe riding of our shipping before the town:
but by the resolution of two English Commanders, and a country man of mine,
cosen germain to sir William Cunningham, and the courage of the Cunners and
soldiers, they were (upon view of a hundred musqueteres which followed me from
the mount) beaten out of the work, driven to a most shameful retreit, leaving
the bodies of their Commanders dead upon the place: many of their soldiers
killed and wounded, Whereupon upon the 9. of October my Lord General did call
a counsel of war, where it was resolved for us to issue forth, and to beat
them forth of their next works approaching to ours: the order was to fall out
in two distinct bodies of 500. Musqueteres apiece commanded (under my charge)
by two Colonels Lambert and Rainsborow, who with Major Forbesse and Major Wren,
carried themselves very bravely, marching along the enemies line of approach,
on every side, the enemy abandoning one work after another, until we made our
selves Masters of their Ordinance. But as the sun (in the greatest brightness)
is subject to Eclips, so it fell out that the forwardness, and violence of our
soldiers, was abated by a hundred pikes of the enemy, who charging the Van of
our soot, scattered and in disorder did drive us backward again, regained their
Ordnance, and enforced us all to a shameful retreat, the Commanders and my
self not being able to stop any one man (if the kingdom had been at the stake)
In this retreat Colonel Rainseborough is either taken prisoner, or killed dead
and fallen into some ditch, but cannot be found, his man's dead body is found:
upon my Lord Generals order to shut the gates, and the sense of their own
carriage, a body of foot was again drawn up which falling again, with as much
animositie and heat as formerly they had retired; did drive them again out of
their works, recovered all the Ordnance lost, and gained a Half cannon and a
Demi culverin of brass, which we had not possessed in the first charge; upon
this change of the Scene of affairs, the Lord Marquis, Lieutenant General
King brought down the whole army from the head quarter, wherewith the 2 last
pieces turned upon the body of their army, they were all forced to a wretched
retreat, and to stand at a distance, until we slighted their whole line of
approach, we brought off nine pieces of Ordinance, one demi cannon called one
of the Queens Gods, a demi Culvering of brass, two Sacars, and four or five
drakes safely within our quarters. After they perceived that they had lost the
two brass pieces (which they did imagine we were not able to draw off) their
whole body of foot with forty Colors, draws themselves within Pistol shot
to the Raged Jetty (where there great was) being resolved to fall upon it that
night, but by the Order, the Order they perceived was taken to keep two hundred
Musqueteres without the Ietty, which could not have been done, if they had had
Ordinance, and putting so many resolved men within the Ietty, they took
themselves to their heels about midnight and retired to their Head quarter, my
Lord Newcastle and Lieutenant G^nerall King were beholders of the second part
of this act, and as is reported, King is wounded in two several places, our
Ordinance has done them a great deal of mischief: and if we had had a fresh
body of foot, they had been put to a great straight. In their retiring their
other God stuck in the dirt, until all the Country people were called to draw
her off. Amongst the captain (who deserved all well) Micklewhaite, Persons,
Bethel, and Hardstaffe: For the Horse, Captain Clayton, the bearer hereof,
having a general love of all the Soldiers, did very good service, Capt.
Salmond, Capt. Sibbalds, and Capt. Crooker for the foot, did carry themselves
very valiantly. I had a blow on the side by a slug of cutted Iron shot from the
great Piece, but thanks be to God, am not the worse, I believe her Sacred
Majesty if she had known where the shot should have lighted, would have
checked the Gunne^ for not charging f^ll home: Whilst we were in service in
Yorkshire we heard the noise of the encounter in Lincolnshire, whereunto God
has pleased to give a happy issue, whereby you may perceive that God is upon
the stage, and that Dagon (...) down. Since the beginning of my letter we
understand that Colonel Raineseborough is safe: I desire that you will
continue your accustomed favor toward

your affectionate friend and servant: IO. MEIDRUM.
From Hull Oct. 14. 1643.
FINIS.

