No Martial Law, BUT ADVICE For the Grand Inquests of London, and Middlesex,
and may serve generally for the whole Kingdom.

Written by a London Apprentice, on the behalf of his fellow Apprentices, 1648.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

No martial Law, etc.
Gentlemen,
LIfe and Liberty are the fevorites of Law, of these the King cannot (without
breach of his Oath) deprive the meanest Subject but by legal proceeding, which
only distinguish the lawfully executed Malefactor from the untimely murdered
innocent.

So tender is the Law over every man's life, so strict in preservation of her
own rules, that if the Sheriff beheads him whom the Law condemned to be
hanged, it is Stamf. plea, tit. felony, fo. 13.
murder in the Sheriff, for the Sheriff not persuing the judgment and
warrant of the Law, does contrary to the Law, and thereby murders him whom he
should have executed: And surely that Law that is so tender over those, her
own hand marked out for death, as not worthy to live is zealous over such as
never transgressed her statutes.

Offenses deserving death are many, and many the manners of death, differenced
only by the nature of the offense; yet for all offenses, for all deaths there
is but one trial. viz* By Peers, according to Mag. Chart. the Statutes of 5.
Edw 3. and 28. Edw. 3.

Mag. Chart. is that no man be imprisoned or diseised of his Freehold or
Libertys or Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or otherwise destroyed, nor
we will not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by lawful judgment of his
Peers or Law of the Land.

5. Edw. 3. Cap. 9. is that no man shall be attached, nor forejudged of life or
lym, contrary to the great Charter.

28. Edw. 3. cap. 3. is, no man shall be imprisoned, nor put to death, without
being brought to answer by due process of Law.

These statutes exclude all trials, but by Peers, as for Barons to be tried by
Barons, Commoners by Commoners, which is our jury of twelve men, and Commoners
cannot wave their Peers, to be tried by Barrons, nor Barrons theirs to be
tried by Commoners, as was resolved in the Case of my Lord Dances. Much less
may we wave 26. H. 8.
the Common Law trials to be tried by Martial law, for that were to consent
to self murder; for Sir Edw. Cook Cook 3 part of the Institutes fol. 52.
says, that if a Lieftenant, or any one that has Commission to execute
Martial law, put any man to death in time of peace, this is murder and against
Mag. Chart.

Times of peace with the ancient Romans were denoted by the shutting of Janus
Temple. And with us by opening Westminster hall, the Chancery, the Kings Bench,
and Courts of justice: and therefore in the Case of Thomas 4. E 3. 39. Ed. 3.
42. Ed. 3. numb. 13. Co. 2. part of the Institutes fol. 48. Co. 3. part of
Instit. fol. 52.
Earl of Lancaster, who was taken in open Rebellion and put to death; in the
Case of the Earl of Arrundell, John of Gaunt, and others, the proceedings were
adjudged unlawful because by Martial Law in time of peace, when the Chancery,
the Kings Bench, and other the Kings Courts were open.

If these though Military men and guilty of Crimes, the Common Law would punish
with death, might not be condemned and executed by Martial law when the
Chancery, Kings Bench, and Courts of justice were open; how could we then in
London condemn and execute by Martial law Mr. Tompkins a Gowneman, Mr.
Challoner a Citizen while the Courts of justice were open, a Parliament sitting
at Westminster, a Goal delivery in London? Nay while Mack Mahoon, and Mack
Quier (Soldiers) were tried at Westminster by the Common Law condemned,
executed by the Common Law: But the reason is apparent, for these men were
charged with Rebellion against the King, a crime that the Common law does
punish with death; Mr. Tompkins and Challoner charged with what the Common law
would justify, not call a crime; yet because policy (not justice) would that
they should dye, therefore the Martial law must hang whom the Common law would
not.

And upon the same reason Sir John Hotham and his Son, though Parliament men,
were (without breach of Privilege) executed by Martial law: Whereupon a
Cavaleer said wittily, that it was the best piece of bad justice has been
done since the two houses reigned; for when contrary to law the Houses had
justified them in treason for keeping Hull from the King, it was but fit to
hang them when they would not be so honest as to restore Hull to the King: And
here give me leave (though with digression) to observe to you what another
observed to me upon their deaths: That as their first act being treason was by
color of Law yet against law justified as legal and they rewarded, so their
second fact being lawful, was by color of law yet against law, adjudged
illegal, and they executed. And that their sufferings might in justice be
referred to their first fact, on the same day the month they severally entered
Hull, on the same day the month they severally dyed; for young Hotham
outriding his Father first entered Hull, on new years day, 1641. But Sir John
Hotham, whom age and six Wives had detarded, did not enter Hull until the
second of January, 1641. and therefore on new years day 1644. young Hotham was
beheaded, and Sir John Hotham not until the second of January, Justus es
domine and justa sunt judicia tua; but to return. When these men suffered,
there was some shadow, some color for Martial law: For then there was an
opposite army on foot in the land, but now for these two years there has been
no Army, no enemy in the Land but the two Houses, and their Army, all Courts of
justice at Westminster freely open, yet we have ou^ fellow Subjects, some
murdered, some imprisoned, others distreined, as Robert Arnoll of Collonell
Lilbornes R^giment executed, the fifteenth of November, 1647. William Tompson
taken from the Parliament door by Lieftenant General Cromwell, and by him
committed to White hall, and after by Martial law condemned to be shot to
death. Mr. Pledwell in Fleetstreete has his goods destrained by Martial power,
while the Chancery is open, the Kings Bench open; nay while the Parliament
sits: that Parliament that condemned the Earl of Strafford, for sentencing to
death (not executing) by Martial law, the Lord Mount Norris for billetting
Soldiers and taking distresses by Martial law, etc.

But beyond all these, is the Sabbath days work, the ninth of April, wherein
the Lord Mayor and Commissioners for the Militia of London, out-acts all the
illegallities of Strafford, all charged by Mr. Lilborne on Lieftenant General
Cromwell, for the Lord Strafford put none to death, and while Mr. Cromwell a
Martial Officer does but execute Martial law upon Military men for breach of
Military orders; the Lord Mayor a Civil Officer, draws out Military men, and
power to execute a Civil not Military order, these do not sentence nor
destraine, they kill their fellow Subjects; for while the Ordinance does direct
that such as profane the Lords day should pay five shillings, if above
fourteen years of age, if under, their friends twelve pence, these shoot and
kill without distinction, children of nine or ten years of age, and choose
rather to commit murder on the Sabbath then permit children to play at Cat on
the Lords day.

But to find whether these proceedings (by millitary power) A brief and
perfect relation of the ans. of the Earl of Straff. fol. 11. 12. Mr St. John's
Argument.
be actions of arbitrary, and tyrannical government; examine, and compare them
with the charges against the Lord Strafford, where the condemning the Lord
Mount Norris by Marshall Law, the billiting Soldiers upon Subjects against
their will, and executing papar Orders by Marshall Law in time of peace, is
adjudged by this present Parliament, a subvertion of our fundamental Laws,
and an introducing of an Arbitrary, and Tyrannical government; next if ye
examine, and compare them with the rule and dictate of our settled and known
Law (to which all military proceedings are opposite and distructive) and which
if ye countenance, nay, if ye withstand not, ye are guilty of their past Facts,
guilty of breaking the Protestation, the Solemn League and Covenant with God to
maintain, and protect the Kings person, his honor and estate, the rights,
privileges, and liberties of the Subject; for all these are in the custody of
the Law, and if the Law be not preserved all these are violated, the Law said
Mr. Pym puts the difference Mr. Pym speech against the Lord Straf.
between good and evil. just and unjust, our honors, lives, liberties, and
estates are all in the keeping of the Law, without Law all men have a like
property to every thing, and every man to nothing, for us therefore to execute,
or permit to be executed, this Arbitrary, this Tyrannical government of
Marshall Law, while the Chancery is open, the Kings Bench open, and others, the
Courts of justice open; we commit treason, murder, rapine, oppression, perjury,
for says Mr. Pym, Arbitrary government comprehends Mr. Pym speech against the
Lord Straf.
all offenses: Treason by subverting the Laws, suppressing the old, and by
force introducing a new government, nay, new Governors, Treason enforcing by
Millitary Mr. St John Argument of Law against Lord Straff.
powers, the Kings person from Holmby to New Market; Treason in detaining by
Military power the Kings Person in prison, and forcing papers or ought else
from his Person, much more in assaulting his Person, and surely where his
Person is thus endangered, his Crown is not safe, his Honor nor Estate
preserved, when by Martial Law we condemn and execute any man that may be
tried by Common Law we mur^her him: For although the offense deserves death,
yet dying by Martial Law which is illegal, we murder him whom the Law would
have hanged.

All free quarter is Martial oppession, all plunder, all distress by
Soldiers, rapine and theft; all these against Magna Charta, against our
Petition of Right, against our Protestation, against our selemne League and
Covenant; because against our Rights and Previledges.

You Gentlemen, are the eyes the ears, the tongues of the County to search
out, to hear and to inform the Courts of Justice of these Treasons, these
Murders, these Rapines, these Thefts and Oppressions; if ye (Gentlemen) be
silent in these Crimes, ye make your selves not only guilty of the past
facts, but of the like in the future, for the impunity of the first invites the
second offense, which has so multiplied these sins upon our Nation that
custom has almost made them lawful: Let therefore your inquiry be speedy and
strict, not pitying the poor, be he Common Soldier or Apprentise, nor sparing
the rich, be they the great Officers of the Army or Major or the Committee of
Militia of the City, (who deserve chiefly to be indicted and executed for the
late tumult) yours is only the cognizance and presentment of crimes, that done
ye saved your own souls; the resolution and judgment of Law is the duty of
the bench, which if the Judges neglect, sin is at their door, Mercy is the
Kings, and lodge only in his bosom, and if any Rebel sons follow Ahitophels
advice and defile their Fathers Concubine, may they want what they pretend to
give mercy, and in their flight meet with Absalons Oak, and Joabs gentle
dealing, while ye as faithful servants to your David return to your own
houses, and sit under your own Vines and your own Fig Trees.

Per me John Whittington, near Dowgate.
FINIS.

