THE Poor Distressed People OF HOLLAND,
Their humble Thanks and Acknowledgement for His MAJESTY'S Gracious Favors
profer'd them in His late Declaration.
GReat Sir, whilst You these Favors do create
For us, You do our Thanks Anticipate:
There are no merits on our part, can claim
The least from You, Ingratitude's our shame.
What Poets talk Achilles Spear could do,
Jove's threats and smiles are verified in You;
If You but say You Will kill or cure it is done,
'Twixt Charles and Jove there is no comparison:
You having Conquered by Your powerful Arms,
Straight by Your kindness salve Your Captives harms;
Making Your Conquests double, by these Arts,
You Have won the Field, and gained your Enemies hearts.
Had You dealt with us as the Israelites of old
With the deceitful Gibconites, have sold
Us and our Families for slaves, then we
Had known a precedent for Your Clemency.
Our Lives and Liberties to You we owe,
And You to us a Fathers pity show,
When we'd forgot those hands that did us feed,
And gave's relief in greatest time of need.
Yet whilst You such unheard of favors show,
From guilty breasts some jealous fears do flow,
And run in murmuring streams, these whine and cry,
No favour's offered but there is reason why;
But let such narrow souls repine in vain,
We think Your grace as boundless as Your Main:
Great Princes like to gods no merits know,
From pity or their will their Favors flow;
Since, Royal Sir, you are pleased to declare
Us Your Free Subjects, it shall be our care
To Render double Loyalty to you
By our obedience, and our actions too.
What our Industry has brought from foreign (...)
Is ready to attend Your Royal Commands,
Each active hand prepared is to bring
Their richest Treasure to Great Britain's King;
No Bank, or Public Faith, being so secure
As is the Faith-Defenders Promise, sure.
Your Actions are so just, it may be se'd
Astraea from this World to Yours is fled;
So will Your Land e're long be styled the Burse,
And only Treasury of the Universe.
Thus you will by Chymick Policy attain
What Lully and old Hermes never could gain,
Whilst the Elixer of Your favors can
Attract the India's to Your Ocean,
And make the Thames, influenced by Your beams,
As once Pactolus, run in golden streams.
Our Hoogen Moogen's too will think it meet
To prostrate themselves and Ships before your Fleet,
And lay their Treasures at Your Royal Feet.
Thus with these Favors You the World affright,
Conquering your Enemies, e're they come to fight;
Each Monarch trembles, and of You's afraid,
That with a word their Countries can invade:
They often have felt the force of Britains Sword,
But never the power Magnetic of Your Word;
The one at random strikes at any part,
But this never fails to force and win the heart:
So shines Your Virtues that the whole world must own
That You're both Charles le Grand, and Charles le Bone.
Nescit Fama Virtutis Mori.

