A DISSECTION OF THE BRAIN. A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ASSIZES IN LINCOLN ANNO
1640.

By Michael Wigmore Rector of THORESWAY in Lincolnshire, and sometimes Fellow
of Oriel-Colledge in Oxenford.

Ponit personam amici qui induit Iudicis. Tull. Off. l. 3. LONDON: Printed by
A. N. for WILLIAM LEAKE, and are to be sold at his Shop in Chancery Lane near
the Rowles. 1641.

To the right Reverend Father in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of LINCO^N, etc.
Right Reverend and thrice Honorable
AS tending to its proper place, this small piece begs your Lordships Patronage
being delivered in your jurisdiction. Your luster danteth in the attempt: The
sweetness of your disposition gives encouragement.

The matter does deserve your protection, being Justice inviolated, like Virgo,
placed in the Zodiac between those two signs of Leo and Libra, those two
supporters of courage and Equity: The publication has taken wing, being borne
up with other men's desires, The Author does lie prostrate before you, Let thy
Servant be a Servant 1 Samuel 25. 41.


To wash the feet of the Servants of my Lord, MICHAEL WIGMORE.

Ad Lectorem.
QUisquis haec legit, ubi pariter certus est, pergat mecum, ubi pariter
haesitat, quaerat mecum, ubi errorem suum cognoscit, redeat ad me, ubi meum,
revocetur. Aug.

A DISSECTION OF THE BRAIN.
A Sermon Preached at LINCOLN-Assises.
ESAIAS 9. 15. The Ancient and Honorable, He is the head.
RIght Honorable* etc. If I be not mistaken in mine* apprehension, I am here
to be your ghostly Father, That before you give the Charge to the Country from
our Sovereign Lord the King, I should give you your Charge from him that is King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords; And now we as Ambassadors for Christ, as 2 Cor. 5.
20.
though God did beseech you by us we pray you in Christ's stead, that ye be
reconciled unto God.

Yet so, that as the precious ointment, which being powered Psalm. 13* 2.
upon the head, it may run down unto the beard, and so along to the skirts
of the garment* we being all the members of that Body, whose Legs and Thighs
are of iron and Dan. 2. 31.
brass for patience and industry in labor and travail, whose Sides of silver
for sincerity and loyalty, whose Head of gold for perfection and purity; within
the circumference of whose pre-eminence are the Brains, the Councillors of
Justice, and Judgment, which only do reflect upon this present occasion, as
The Ancient and Honorable He is the Head. But before we ascend that stately
Pharus, or do discover Division.
those inward Cells, we must first take a general view of the Body, Then help
on with those Robes of gravity as they lie folded up in those two pleats, the
one of Age, and the other of Honor, and so lead you through those cooler
vaults and regions; And first of the first in the Body politic.

After that God had made the whole world, inso many First part. Of the Body
politic.
different and repugnant natures, Then like a curious and exquisite workman,
that is most admired in his least pieces, and shows his greatest Art in the
smallest bulk, he does contract them into one little model, and does unite
them all in man: In whose soul he has seated his own image in a Trinity of
Faculties, and an Unity of Essence, which beautisies the Head with two greater
lights, and a many other, to discern of more Objects, then is the number of
the stars in the firmament; His bones lie covered over with their flesh, as
rocks lie hidden in the bowels of their earth, about his liver is a sea of
blood, dispersed over all this little world, with a many flexible veins and
rivers: He has growth, and sense, and understanding, The lives of Plants, of
Beasts, of Angels; And if we do but look into his heart, there shall we
find, as sleeping in their dens, the roaring Lion, and the subtle Fox, the
ravening Wolf, the Goat, the Swine, with all the Town-heard of the beasts of
Ephesus, which being 1 Cor. 15. 32.
rowsed, do break forth in passion: As in the Creation the whole world was in
man, so in the Redemption the whole world was one man: Et omnis in Christo unus
homo, Knit together by joints and bands, and like that multitude Col. 2. 19.
Acts 4. 32.
in the fourth of the Acts, That had but one heart, and one soul.

Plato would have the Universe the World to be Dei statua, the portrature of
God, and Saint Gregory would have a Christian Commonwealth, to be Corpus
unitum compage membrorum; so to grow up into him in all things, which is the
Head, even Christ.

Then, as it is in the natural body, if one part suffered, the 1 Cor. 12. 26.
rest would grieve with it, And if the least finger were but out of joint, the
Eye would be ready to shed a tear, the Heart would ache, the Head be sorry,
the Tongue to complain, the Legs and Feet to run for help: Then would we
Gal. 6. 2.
bear one another burdens, as every stone in a material building, et
portat, et portatur ab altero; Then would each one keep Court at home where
every Sense should be an Agent, and every Faculty should be an officer;
Patience his Counselor, Truth his Attorney, Peace his Solicitor, Sensus
Communis his Common Pleas, a Tender-conscience his Court of Chauncerie, whose
Judge should be Charity, whose Seal of Office, the Holy Ghost in the likeness
of a Dove.

This were to bring a Vine out of Egypt, to make her Psalm. 8. 8 etc.
boughs like the goodly Cedars, and they that should devour it, should root
up that plant, who says unto us, you are the branches; This were to flourish
like the Tree in Daniel, Dan. 4.
the height whereof did reach unto the Heavens, And he that should but lop a
limb from off it, should hear a voice crying unto him as Aeneas once,
Polydorus ego, when He plucked a bough from the Myrtle tree, I am Jesus whom
Act. 9. 5.
thou persecutest, parce pias scelerare manus.

He that united the earth and the heavens, and all other creatures to make them
one world; He that contracted all contrarieties, and did compose them all in
one man; He that has squared us as living stones to grow up into one holy
Temple, The King of Salem, the King of Peace, would have us all as a City of
Unity, as the boughs of one stock, as the branches of one Vine, as the members
of one body, under one Head, which is Christ Jesus.

But as it was with Abraham and Lot affluxerunt divitiae Diseases of this body.
Ch^ysost.
and discinditur concordia, as Wealth increased, Amity decreased, and we are
here fallen all in pieces, as if we had been but cimented together, with some
fusile and melting matter, now dissolved by the fire of Contention.

S. Augustine tells us of a brutish custom in Caesaria of Mauritania, that on
certain days of the year, the people gathered themselves together, and (as
if they had been all enraged with madness) Fathers, and Children, and
neighbors with others, threw stones with such violence, one against another,
as that not a few were murdered with it: A fit resemblance of this Campus
Martius in these dog-dayes of strife and contention; When we shall find five
in one house, L^^ 12 52. 53.
three against two, and two against three, the Father divided against the
Son, and the Mother against the Daughter, their hearts reaking with passion
within them, as if they had sucked the Dragons in the Desert; and like that vast
and untamed Element foaming out their own shame. Some come hither (...) 13.
l^ke the Mermayd and the Dolphin, who take their pastime in troubled waters,
and with Abner call fighting sport, let 2 Samuel 2. 14.
the young men arise and play before us: Others, for as small provocations as
Jonas had to be angry with his God, only Jonah 4. 6. 8.
a blast of wind, a shadow, like those that run to Chirurgions and
Physicians, for every trifle, a Pimple or a Wart, whereas the Physician and the
Lawyer should be for necessity, and not for wantonness. Envy comes swelling
hither like a Toad, waiting a time to disgorge it self, and goes a way again
like the Wasp, which leaves his sting, and his strength behind him; The proud
man striving with a stronger then himself, as Milo rending an Oak in sunder,
is caught so fast in the clest by the fingers, that he becomes a prey to his
Enemy; But loudest of all is the cry of Oppression, who comes in like Nero in
the Tragedy, Fortuna nostra cuncta permittit mihi, And where the Foxes does
prove too scanty, he will inch it out with the Lions skin, to grind the faces
of the poor, to devour the widows houses, and that peradventure with as
much equity, as he that laid claim to Tullies learning, because he married his
Executrix.

Saint Paul would have such Harmony between us, as 1 Cor. 12.
is amongst the members of the body; and Saint Augustine would have every man
to be as a several letter in the same sentence, Quilibet (inquit) in Civitate
sit una litera in Sermon; Were this accord kept in humane Society, Then each
foul word would be a Barbarism, and he that should but wrong his neighbor,
should be as one that is sick of a frenzy, biting and wounding his own
flesh; But here we find such discord and dissension, such scratching and
tearing one of another, as if we would choose the Bramble for our King, to put
our trust under his shadow. Jud. 9. 15.


It was a custom amongst the Persians (to make them feel the smart of
Anarchie) that at the death of every Emperor their laws did sleep for five
days, and every man in that interstitium did what was good in his own eyes;
whether would the swinge of our passions fling us, were we not bounded with
Authority, which limiteth our turbulent perturbations? (as God once spoke unto
the Sea) hither unto shall thou go and no further: But the rapacity Job 38. 11.
of these Orbs are slacked by the course of the higher Sphaeres, Nature never
yet framed an heart, but where there was a brain to cool it; and the Ancient
and Honorable He is the Head, which beckens me unto my second Close, the
Torse, that wreath of Or and Argent, in those Appellatives of Age and Honor.

It was an inviolable custom with the Romans, never The second part: 1. Of the
Ancient. 1. Their Gravity.
to give sentence but sitting, in token that Judgment ought to proceed from a
stayed and well settled mind; And it is an observation in Philosophy, That
nimius calor agitationem efficit, cognitio quietem and stabilitatem requirit:
The Brain that must disperse those former sumes had need to be of a strong
constitution, Et tunc mentis oculi vident perspicatius, cum corporis oculi
deflorescunt: Greatest Atchivements are not managed so much by strength as they
are by wisdom; whence the Sanhedrim amongst the Numb. 11. 16.
Jews was of the Elders of the people, as the Senate with the Romans had it is
nomination a Senio from Old Age.

It Is often found, that the luster of the mind looking forth through the
countenance of Man, does dart such a terror upon the Beholder, that the
Heads-man let his sword drop from his hand, when He beheld the face of Marius;
And in the hottest eommotions of the People, Even then when sedition has been
staring mad, the grave aspect of some reverend Personage has so becalmed, and
allayed the fury, as that Madness ^ath been turned into shame

Tum pietate Gravem, ac meritis si forte virum quem
Conspexere, silent, arrectisque auribus adstant,
Ille regit dictis animos and pectora mulcet.
If so, then well may the wrinkled brow become the seat of Command and Power,
whose furrows have been sown with the seeds of Virtue -- Et Seges est ubi
Troia fuit; Whose despised Characters of Age do bear the Escuchions, and
fore-fronts of wis^dome, which only waxes young and fresh with years; And in
whose visage only does appear a Transfiguration o^ Fear and Exodus 34 30.
Reverence, as Moses after his Conference with God, the people were afraid to
look upon him.

As Authority dazeleth with its splendor, being a Medall 2 Their Maturity.
Dan. 7 9. Ecclus. 25. 6.
cast in his mold, who bears the name of the Ancient of Days, so is
Experience the Crown of Old men, which ripens the understanding of the Aged,
And makes them speak as the Oracles of God; No man when he has tasted Luke 5.
39.
Old wine desires new, for the Old is better, and Certiora sunt judicia senum,
qui d^^ res easdem cogitarunt, and sursum ac deorsum volutarunt. The
prerogative of Infancy, is Innocence; of childhood, wantonness; of manhood,
valor; of old age, discretion: Roses that are fresh are more pleasant in the
flower, yet being dry give a sweeter sent, And it was Antigonus his judgment
of Pyrrhus, Magnum futurum si senesceret; The Spring indeed is lovely for it is
hopes, B^t the Autumn only is for fruit, which brings that maturity with
it, as makes wisdom a skillful Pilot; The hoarie Head is a Crown of glory,
if it be found Prove. 16. 31.
in the way of truth.

And where should we seek for Righteousness and 3. Their sincerity.
Judgment, if not under these Winter colors? It Is true that the gift blinds
the wise, and perverteth the wo^ds of the Exodus 23. 8.
righteous; But when our forces begin to languish, when our senses wax dull and
dim, when the ruinous Cottage of our feeble flesh is decayed, and threatens
a final fall, then when like Aaron in the Camp o^ Israel, we stand between
the living and the dead; Then when the Eccles. 12. 3.
Keepers of the house do tremble, and the strong men do bow themselves; Then
to lade our selves with thick lay; Potest Hab. 2. 6.
quicquam esse absurdius, quam quo minus vitae restat, eo pl^^ viatici quaerere?

In the 13 of Genesis at the second verse, where it is said that Abraham was
rich, the Hebrew gives it that he was heavy, which shows that Riches are but
a Burth^n, and like those Mathematical showers, which in the twylight seem to
be gold, yet when the light comes prove lime and sand: But a wise man's eyes ar^
in his head; And Eccles. 2 14.
maledictus quitran^f^^t terminos, Cursed is the state of that man, that
removes the Bounders of Nature; that when time has filed from him the better
part of his vital powers, still feeds himself with the Hope of life, and puts
the Day of his death far from him. And thus much of my first Epethite; Thus
much in honor of the Aged.

Yet let not the rigid censure of any so esteem of wisdom Secondly, Of the
honorable.
and policy, as ^f those gifts might not be shrouded under the shadows of
fresher colors: The Romans did admit of a Senator, at the Age of twenty and
five, and of a Consul at forty three, Daniel but young, yet judged the people,
and Joseph a man of tender age, was made a Father to Pharaoh and his family,

-- Tempora quippe virtutem non prima negant, non ultima donant. When Frederick
the third refused to give Audience to two young men Ambassadors from Venice,
If (said they) the State had known, that Caesar had regarded of wisdom by
the gray head, and the long beard, they should have sent him a couple of Goats;
For Honorable Age is not that which stands in the length of time, nor that
is measured by number of years, but wisdom is the gray hair unto man, and
an unspotted life is Old age. Wisd. 489.

So that as the workman in the Buckler of Minerva wrought in his own Name,
with such dexterity as that it could not be taken out, without the dissolution
of the whole frame, such is Prudence to Age and Honor. What is a scarlet Robe
without it, but like rich Hangings in a dark blind room, where there is
neither light nor life to show them? The shadows of the fairest Ornaments do
cast as black as the mourning weed; And the disgrace that attends basenesso
is the selfsame in the Peer and the Pesant; but that (as the Ape) the higher
he climeth, by so much the more conspicuous is his shame. The scandalous
proceedings of men in Authority, which would have been covered in a common
crowd, are then made eminent and blazing, like the Comet that is gazed at by
every eye, yet knows not it self to be seen of any.

Honor is a sign to show where Virtue dwells, and their minds are too
narrow for a publick-weale, who think they are advanced for themselves, where
He that is Luke 22. 26.
greatest should be least, and He that is Chiefest as him that serves. And
then where Age, Maturity, Sincerity, and Honor, is attended by discretion,
where there is this Conjunction and Aspect, Jupiter is Lord in that Ascent;
that Body's governed by a lucky Planet, where the Ancient and Honorable He is
the Head; and so much for the second strain; so much of the Garland and
outward Ornament.

I must now lead you about Mount Cephalon, there to The third part, Of the Head
or Brain.
behold the seats of Judgment; within whose Arches you shall find the Brain
fostered by two mothers, like Salomons Harlots, Dura Matter, and Pia Matter, the
one 1 Kings 3.
severe to punish and correct, the other tender with the Bowels of Compassion;
As the scarlet Robe that is faced with white does signify ruborem in sontes and
scelestos, and candorem in innocents; And first of the first, the Dura Matter.

As Diseases are bred in the Body, so are Corruptions 1. Dura Matter.
in the state. Those which at first were not discerned, or might have been
helped with a gentle purg^, being neglected, do grow to that height, as not
to be cured but by loss of blood, and then (as Livie speaks of old Rome) Nec
vitia nostra, nec remedia far possumus: For the prevention of which Malady we
must deal with transgressions as men do with Serpents, He that finds a
young Snake which never did hurt, yet kills it for the very Kind, nor shall
thine eye take pity upon any to justify the Deuteronomy. 19. 21.
evil doer.

The least trespass in the law Leviticall, were it but a Levit. 4.
slip of Ignorance, yet was not purged without fire and blood, and in the
Gospel, where Mercy abounds, He that looks upon a woman, He that calls
thou Fool, not a word, not a look, that shall pass unpunished; Frustra
moritur Nero, si Otho vivit, In vain it were to cut off the great Thieves, and
to preserve the little ones for breed.

There Is not the least offense we can commit that can be less then the point
of a thorn; yet not the least thorn in the Crown of Christ, which did not
cost him a drop of blood, and as the smallest Coin, the Widows Mite, is not
without it is valuation, but may be multiplied into a Talent, so in the great
and general Assizes (the prototype of Justice and Judgment) we must not look
to come sorth Math. 5. 26.
of prison until we have paid the uttermost farthing: upon good grounds then
does that one word Noxa signify et culpam et paenam, since sin and
punishment must go together. Authority the Prop of Government, Majestas
Imperij, salutis tutela, the strength and fortress of a Commonwealth must be
maintained with fear and severity, whereas Facility breeds Impunity, the
Mother of Presumption and Contempt, and then, as a multitude of smaller drops
swells up a Flood to overflow the Banks; so does Indulgence and too much
lenity breed such a general Aposteme in men's minds, that, being nourished by
Licentiousness, It bounds to the height of all Impiety; Christ that was the
Prince of Peace, chose as well some to be Sons of thunder, Esa 9. 6. Mar. 3.
17. Act. 4. 36
as He had others for Consolation* and sometimes sharply to reprove and
correct, is as a favor done to many, which like a Thunder bolt that strikes
but one, yet fills with Horror the Hearts of All men.

The World is now in its decrepid age, and were it not supported by those
Crutches, the Staff of Beauty* and the Zach. 11. 10.
Staff of Bonds, It would even sink with its own Burden. All the gross
humors of former times are fallen down into the legs; And where the Bonds of
Love and Duty fail, there must the Staff of Government supply, yet so, that
as Valentinian the Emperor, first being married to Severa, and after that,
enamoured on Iustina, ma^cht with Her too, and kept them both at once; So must
it be with Severity and Justice; Dura must remember that she is Matter, and that
her sister Pia must dwell with her, as Rachel and Lea the wives of Jacob, as
Mary and Martha under one roof, as Mercy and Truth that met together, as
Righteousness Psalm 85. 10.
and Peace that kissed each other; like Abraham going to Sacrifice his Son with
the Sword of Justice in the one hand, and the fire of Charity in the other.

When God appeared to Elias in Mount Horeb, He was 2 P^a Matter. 1 King. 19. 12.
not in the wind that did rend the Mountains, nor in the Earthquake, nor in
the fire, but came unto him in a still soft voice; when He chastised Adam in
Paradise, it was in the Genesis 3. 8.
Evening, in the cool of the Day, and the Sun was but risen Genesis 19. 23. 24.
upon the Earth, when the Lord rained upon Sodom and Gomorrha Brimston and
Fire from the Lord out of Heaven: for who shall be able to stand before him
walking like a Grant in his full strength?

Amongst those thirteen divine Attributes, Exodus 34. 6. there was but one that
named his power, but only two that concerned his Justice, and All the rest
were of Mercy Exodus 25. 40.
and Goodness: As God spoke to Moses in the Mount, Fac ad similitudinem and
exemplar, So must it be the charge of those that bear his Image and
Superscription, look that thou do after thy pattern. He that made the whole
Ios. 6.
world in six-dayes, took seven days to destroy one City, and they that are
his stamp and character, must not seek to be like unto him, either in the Arm
of his power and strength, or in the Finger of his Miracles and Wonders, or in
the Brains of his infinite Wisdom, but in his Bowels of Pity and Compassion.

Exact and strict were the Rabbis of the Jews; in observing the properties of
their Judges, as that they should be free from all blemish of Body, that they
should be skild in the seventy languages, that they should not be too far
stricken in years, that they should be men of Wisdom and Knowledge, amongst
others, they would not admit of an Eu^uch, because that such men were commonly
cruel, nor of any but such as were Fathers of Children, which they thought to
be a motive to Mercy.

Men in Authority should be like the Planets quo altiores eo sedatiores, and
not like Aristides that was too just. Phaeton the son of the Sun, riding in
the Chariot of his Father, is a Mythologie of all such, as sit in the Throne of
him who says, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it, Rom 12. 19. Mal. 4. 2.
Psalm.
Christ, he is the Sun of Righteousness, The Chariots of the Lord are twenty
thousand, and they that rule them are Gods on earth, called the Children of the
most high, styled with the title of the sons of God; And good luck have Psalm.
45. 5.
they with their honor, according to their worship and renown, to ride on
because of the word of Truth: but not to be too busy with the spur, rather
to make use of the reins then of the Whip, not to turn to the right hand or
the left, not to stray from the path of the just, and in their Progress to
keep the Rode, not to mistake Plaeentia for Verona.

Sylla that was surnamed Foelix, thought himself to be the more happy for the
friendship that he held with Metellus named Pius., so let it be their Crown,
their Glory; to remember those that are in Bonds, with the Heb. 13 3. Col. 3 12
Bowels of Piety, Kindness, Meekness; To be as their Father in Heaven is,
Merciful; To look upon the wounded and afflicted, and to pity the
friendlesse and oppressed; Yet not to respect the person of the poor, nor yet
to honor the Levit. 19 15.
person of the Mighty; But in righteousness shall thou judge thy Neighbor.
And thus as Papyrius at the Gate of the Senate, I have set up the Image of
Mercy, with another of Justice standing by it.

Sensus Communis is the next that does present it self 3. Sensus communis.
unto your view, sitting as a Judge in the Gates of the City, and taking the
Appeals from all outward objects; yet (as being in the substance of the
Brain) it is deprived of all sense and feeling. Nec unquam apprehendit
objectum sub ratione jucundi vel molesti. Which bids Authority to be the like;
and as it was the manner of the Thebans to portrait their Princes blind, and
their Judges assisting without hands; So not to censure by an outward
appearance, nor yet to be corrupted in their ways.

Nerva was wont to say of himself, Se nihil fec isse quo minus possit imperio
deposito privatus tuto vivere. Princes Examples are speaking laws, bidding (as
Abime^ech sometimes) what ye see one do, do ye likewise.

Those heretofore that sat at Stern, and ruled the Rudder of the
Common-wealth^ had while they were in the seat of Judgment, their solemn
Habits to be furred with Ermins, which little Creature in the Hunting, finding
the Mouth of it is Cave to be bedirted, does rather yield it self to be a
prey, then to pollute it is skin with filth and mud; An Emblem calling unto
them in those words, Mallem mori quam (...), as Adams skinn^ he wore declared
his fall.

Rewards and gifts are like an Incubus, which overlayes the judgment of the
wise, whilst Avarice (an envious Philistim) comes with his earth to choke up
Isaaks Gen 26. 1^. 20. 21.
Well, and leaves us to the Springs of Eseck and Sitnah, none but the waters of
strife and contention. This done, you shall have them (like Aethiopians that
usually do paint their Angels black in favor of their own complexion) to
run point blank the Course of Equity, to damme up the passages of right and
reason, and so to betake them to new quirks and quaeries, with those
Astrologers that make good their motions by finding out strange Notions and
Intentions, Eccentricks, Epicicles, and the like.

The Lord our God is a God of Gods, a Great, Almighty, Deuteronomy 10. 7.
and a terrible, regarding neither Persons nor Rewards, and those that are
Minores Dij, when they pass sentence upon others, ought to be like
Mathematicians, only conversing in Abstractions: Not to wear on them the
Robes of Justice as dead-mens Coffins are bestrewed with flowers, not to be
speechless in the poor man's cause, as if necessity should have no law; not to
be like the Idols of the Heathen, with eyes and ears that neither hear nor
see; nor like the Griffin to floare their nests with gold, and then to censure
for the Mighty, as if in case pro forma pauperis, Bos in lingua (as it is in
the Proverb:) their tongues were hung up to the roof of their mouths, and
their souls possessed with a dumb devil: Surdaster erat Marcus Crassus, sed
illud pejus quod male audiebat: And it is the memorial of the just that shall be
blessed when the name of the wicked shall r^t. It is a Criticisme amongst the
Gramarians, that Falsus in the passive, and not Fallens, does signify a double
and deceitful man, for that the mischief of his own lips does at last fall
upon his own pate, and whilst be says with himself. None sees me; but God
He stands in the Congregation of the Prince, and He will be a Judge amongst
the Gods, who lays his ear unto their whisperings in their most secret
consultations; Besides, Suspicion like a well-drawn Picture seems to look
after them where ere they go. and not a servant, if a Favorite, but's thought
to be a Posterne for a Bribe. Lastly, they are deceived in their Hopes, with
him who in his vain opinion Corpus putat esse quod umbra est, and prostitutes
Desire to a Dream. When the Prophet in the sixth of Zacha* saw the Vision of
the four Emperies, He asked of the Angel, Qui sunt isti? who told him, Isti
sunt quatuor (...). 6. 5.
venti, To show that all the Worlds pomp and glory is but a puff, a blast, a
breath. Corruption for a time may be concealed, and folded up in the large
pleats of Honor; Great men may shine on high like glorious lights, as long as
greatness is observed with fear; Yet at the last, when Death shall blow them
out, their farewell shall be nastie, noisome, loathsome, like an ill savouring
and stinking snuff, that gives offense to all that are about it. Let Foelix
Act 24. 26.
hope that money should be given, Justus will be a Act. 18. 17.
man that worships God, whose house was joined to the Synagogue.

Having thus brought you through the first Region, in 4. Fantasy.
the next room does Fantasy sit to judge each Species, where Imagination
transformes them like unto Ixions cloud, and runs them through a thousand
several shapes, that so they might avoid the embracements of Error; which does
infer that saying in the Schools, Apprehensio objecti ab intellectu semper
est sub ratione very: And yet all wisdom comes from the Lord (as Pallas was
borne Ecclus. 1. 1.
of the Brain of Jupiter) and as she was clad in complete Armor, so He that
puts on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6. 11. Wisd 5. 18. Job 31. 20.
must put on Righteousness as a Breast Plate, and true Judgment in stead of an
Helmet: so shall the loins of the naked bless him, the Tongues of the Poor
be trumpets of his praise, and the Hearts of All men Honor him.

When the King of Mexico comes first to the Crown, He takes with it a solemn
Oath, Iudicium se administraturum, effecturum ut Sol cursum teneat, Nubes
pluant, rivi current, terra producat fructus, etc. Meaning that Justice Psalm
45. 14 15.
like the Kings daughter, attended by those Virgins that be her followers, is
never seen alone without her train, Deuteronomy. 27.
Blessings in the City, and Blessings in the field, Blessings in the fruits,
and Blessings in the flocks, Blessings within doors, and Blessings without; all
these Blessings shall overtake her, when like an exquisite and cunning Organist
she touches truly, and according unto Art, when the Spirit of God shall be the
blast that gives Breath unto the Instrument,

-- Iustitiae soror Incorrupta fides nudaque veritas, And every one should be
unto a Judge as Tacitus speaks of Tiberius and Claudius, Nec Beneficio, uec
injuria cognit^, Whence Cleon, being made a public Magistrate, and having
assembled his acquaintance, disclaimed in the presence of them all, all former
interest, all future friendship, and bid's adieu to all inward Amity as most
incompatible with his charge; For He puts off the person of a friend that
undergoes that other of a Judge. And if it be so in the Tents of Mesech, what
must be done in the Dwellings of Jacob. Lucian observes it in Stage Players,
that if a man misact a Servants part, it is a slip not worth the talking of;
But if in Jupiter or Hercules, the fault is foul and does disgrace the Scene.
How much more then is his reproach and shame, that does (...), not an earthly
Prince, but Him that is the King of Heaven and Earth, For the Judgment is
Gods, says Moses his servant, Deuteronomy. 1. 17.

And though he be near unto Malefactors, about their Psalm. 139. 2.
paths, and about their beds, and understands the thoughts of their hearts,
yet in the Cry of Sodom^ and Gomorrha (to leave us an Example of his Justice)
I will go down (says he) and see whether it be altogether so or no; Genesis 18
21. Ecclus. 11. 7.
Then blame not before thou have examined, understand first and then rebuke.

Qui stat^it aliquid part in audita altera,
Aequum licet stat^erit, haud aequus fuit.
In the Solemnities of former times, Linguas ultimam sacrificiorum partem in
sacros ignes conijciebant, the Tongue was the last that made up the Sacrifice;
Be ye likewise swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. Iam 1. 19.


It is a conceit that is grounded upon reason, That if God should assume a
visible shape, he would take Light to be his Body, and Truth should be in
stead of his Soul. Et dominus (as says Tertull.) Non se consuetudinem, sed
veritatem cognominavit; He then that bears the Image 1 Cor. 15. ^9.
of the Earthy, must also bear the Image of the Heavenly: And give thou
sentence with them O God, send out thy light, Psalm. 43. 3.
and thy Truth to lead them.

Now as Joachim the high Priest charged the Inhabitants 5. The five senses.
of Bethulia to guard the passages of the Mountains: so for the safeguard of
this Citadell, we must fortify the Cinque Ports of the senses, for there lies
the way to the seat of Judgment.

First, for the Sight, the Optics do require, ut medium 1. The Sight
sit recte dispositum and ut Organon sit been ordinatum. If the glass in the
spectacles be painted yellow, each object will appear in the same color; and
if the Eye be sick of the ^aundise, it infects all that look upon it; Counsel,
Jury, Witnesses, Officers, Corruption, like a Plague, will taint them all, and
search like oil into every joint, till poison cramp the powers of the Soul,
till Reason plead without Law or Equity, till Conscience be charmed into a
deadly sleep, and till Religion connive it self stark blind, like the people
Arimaspi in Sythia, that wink, and wink, so long with one eye, until at last
they have winkt it out, and then no mervaile, when their Eye is evil, if Math.
6. 23.
their whole Body be full of Darkness.

For the Hearing, it is observed by Saint Origin, that the 2. The Hearing.
Levit. 14. 14.
right ear, in the clensing of the Leper, was the first that was touched with
the blood of the Sacrifice, as a means to purify the rest of his actions,
Auris prima mortis Ianua, prima aperiatur and vitae, And Nature (after the
fashion of the head) has likewise planted two ears in the Heart, that
whatsoever enters at the one, might also be received by the other, Then he
that has ears to hear let him Math. 13. 9.
hear.

For the smelling, suavis odor lucri, Yet as Pliny of the 3. The Smelling
herb Ariana, though it be of an excellent sent, it has in every leaf a
little Serpent, whose sting brings present Death to all that touch it. He that
plucketh up the bounders of the Law, He that breaks an Hedge a Serpent
Eccle^. 10. 8.
shall bite him.

The Heart is seated in the Center of the Breast, with a 45. Of Touching and
Tasting.
curious net of Nerves and Veins, spread from thence over all the Body; And as
the Spider in the midst of her web, feeling the least touch that shakes her
work: So should the Soul shrink, and retire, at the least taste, and touch of
sin, Abstain from all appearance of evil. 1 These. 5. 22.


I have done with the senses external, and internal, there now remains no
more to be seen, but only the retentive strength of the Memory, which lies in
the hindermost Region of the Brain, and in the last part of my discourse.

Memoria est Aerarium anima, It is the Storehouse 6. Memoria.
and Chequer of the soul: And albeit Humility and Charity, with the Aspect of
such a light appearing at this time, in this Meridian, tells me that is but
needless labor, Yet let not my Lords be angry, If with the poor Widow in the
Genesis 18.
Gospel I cast my mites into the Treasury.

To remember you in the words of Solomon, that the eyes Prove. 15. 3.
of the Lord are in every place to behold the evil and the good; could we take
Darkness for a Mask, and the Night for a covering to our secrets; could we
clime up into the top of Carmel, or dive into the bottom of the Sea, could we
digg down into the neithermost Hell, and hide our actions in the ashes of
Tophet, yet all our thoughts, our words, our ways, our reins, our bones, our
mothers wombs, All things are naked in his sight; then think (with trembling)
what a madness it is, to shun the sight of a silly man, and not to fear the
presence of the Lord, Et quis fur auderet furari, si sciret a Judice s^ videri.

To remember you that you shall die like men, That the Psalm 82. 7. Dan. 2.
golden head has a foot of clay, That the fair colors of pomp and power,
shall in a short time starve and vanish.

To remember you of that unconsolable Night, in the which you shall lie
struggling with Death, not able to remove a little fleame t^at's ready to choke
up your vital spirits; when all your senses shall be aghast, your fantasy
aff^ighted, your thoughts amazed, and your selves slighted by your Dearest
Friends, in strongest consultation for the spoil, when you most need their
help and comfort.

To remember you that mighty men shall likewise be mightily Wisd. 6. 6.
tormented, gored with the ^ing of a wounded conscience, and called to account
for every Soul that has been murdered, perjured, poisoned with
misinterpretation of the Law.

To remember you of that great white Throne, from Rev. 20. 11. 12.
whose presence the Heavens and the Earth did seek and could not find a place
to hide them.

To remember you of that ghastly Dragon, and that huge gulf of Fire and
Brimstone, of that full flood of the wrath of the Lord, A fire which as nothing
does feed it: so it consumes nothing that it burns. A place affording
nothing but Horror, Tormenting Devils, burning Souls, Roaring and lamenting
with woe, and alas, weeping, and howling, an gnashing of teeth.

And now in the Name of him that is able to reach the strongest by the meanest,
and send wise Solomon to School the Raven, that I may conclude in the words of
Saint Paul, I charge you before God and our Lord Jesus Christ, and 1 Timothy 5. 21.
before all his Elected Angels, That ye observe and do these things without
preferring one before another, and doing nothing by partiality.

That so unto him who can keep you from falling, to Jude 24. 26.
present you faultlesse before his presence, All Glory, and Majesty, Dominion,
and Power, be given both now and for evermore, AMEN.

FINIS.
May 29. 1641.
Imprimatur

THO. WYKES.


