SIX SERMONS LATELY Preached in the Parish CHURCH of Gouahurst in KENT.

And afterward, most maliciously charged with the Titles Of Odious,
Blasphemous, Popish, and Superstitious,
Preaching.

Now published by the Author, I. Wi^coks

TACIT. Si accusari fas est, nulli licebit esse innocenti.

LONDON, Printed by I. Raworth. Anno Dom. 1641.

(...) blasphemy, false doctrine, and odious preaching, leading of souls to
hell: I could have borne innumerable other outrages, and lashes of their
tongues; but God only knows how much my soul has been over charged with these
imputations. It is not my case alone, others of my brethren, infinitely
deso^ving better; have been engaged as deeply: Our backs are daily plowed
upon, they say unto our souls, ly down that we may go over. (...). The Lord
will surely awake out of sleep; He seems to them, Non advertere quia non
a^imadvertere; and because punishment is not presently executed, they swell in
the prosperity of their proceedings: But he will shortly show; that these
things have been both visa and invisa, he has seen that their time is coming,
and therefore lets them rige. I shall with patience possess my soul; and
commend my cause to God, and my just excuse to thee, Christian Reader, whose I
am in Christ Jesus.

J. W.

THE FIRST SERMON.
JOHN 20. Verse 19, 20. He said unto them, Peace be unto you: and when be had
said, be showed them his hands and his side.
THe words are the salutation of an Apostle, of an Apostle to the Apostles; he
which was the Apostle of the Fathers sending verse. 21. to them which were
Apostles of his own; they are his own words a little after, as the father sent
me, so send I you: But the sicut there, is not aequalitatis, but proportion is,
says Maldonate; in regard of the manner of his mission, and the matter of his
commission there was indeed a non sicut; the work of mediation was only his, of
ministration theirs; he was to purchase, they to publish; He was pax nostra, so
says the Apostle; they but praecones pacis, says the Prophet, messengers of
peace; yet in regard of the authority of the mission, and the efficacy of the
ministration, there was a similitude; their hard fortune in the world, their
course entertainment amongst Wolves, (I might instance in other matters, but
that it is not proper to this Text) may very well be suffered to carry some
proportion; Amongst the rest there was a sicut in this, this salutation in the
Text: when he sent them the first word, he appointed them to say were, Peace he
to this house, Luke 10. 5. And now he whom the Father had sent comes un^o them
with the same salutation, to show that he and they were of the same mission,
Peace he unto you; and when he had said so, be showed them his hands and his
feet. I shall not need to tell you that these words were a usual complement
amongst the Jews; they practice it within themselves ^o this present; Peace he
unto you, is their salutation: even when war is in their heart, they would have
peace in their mouths, and make the symb^ll of love and friendship, a mask of
falsehood and treason: to that effect Joab greeted Amasa in the 2 Samuel 20. 9.
Art thou in health my brother? but he showed him neither his hand nor his side;
for there he covertly held his sword, with which treacherously he slew him.
Little better is much of the only complement of these times, whose words are
smoother then butter, and yet are they very sword^. But there was no matter of
any such mistrust from these words of our Savior, and to prevent all suspicion
which possibly might arise, as soon as he had said them, He showed them his
hands and his side.

Indeed the Disciples were afraid, so Saint Luke says, chap 24. 37. they had
but lately beheld the sad Tragedy of their Masters sufferings, and like a
trembling Herd when their choicest Heart was smitten down, fled amazedly
distracted at the fall; they looked every hour when themselves should be marked
out for the slaugh er by those hungry woodmen. They were at this time assembled
together for fear of the Jews, (the words before my Text) and the doors were
shut; and our Saviors sudden and invisible apparition had been enough to have
frighted them being in that terror, if he had not presently said unto them,
Peace be unto you, and showed them his hands and his side.

And yet whether they mistrusted some poison might lie in that courtship,
remembering what treason was of late interred in a kiss; or whether fear had so
much estranged them, that they werenot come to themselves when Christ spoke,
and so gave no attention to what was said; he is fain to repeat the same over
again; and that he might not lose in their acceptance that which he thought
they would so h^^hly prize, says Maldonate, he says unto them again, Peace be
unto you, verse 21. and ^aint Luke says, again he showed them his hands and
his feet. Christ had received this praise in the Gospel, that he did both do,
and teach, Acts 1. 1. and that he was mighty indeed, and in word, Luke 24. 19.
He practiced ever himself first, what he taught others, and though never man
spoke like him, yet his works made a far better report of him then his words,
Ioh. 5. 36. Indeed he was sent to bring the blessing, and those come to steal
it rather which come with the voice of Jacob, but the hands of Esau: Those
which will be right bringers of it, must when they come show their hands and
their feet; then will they say like those in Esaias 52. 7. How beautiful are the
feet of them, which declare and publish peace! Christ had purchased peace; the
wounds in his hands, and side, and feet were the chastisements of our peace, so
the Prophet Esaias calls them, Esaias 53. 5. and now he comes to publish it to his
Disciples; and that his last act might be made up of a perfect harmony, he
brings the Trophies of his victory, the wounds of his body, to show them how
and upon what terms he had purchased it for them: He said unto them, Peace be
unto you, and when he had so said, he showed them his hands and his side.

If we attend only the salutation of our Savior, there were not much to be
spoken, it was common to others as well; yet it is remarkable in this, His
Disciples had all of them either cowardly forsa^en, or shamefully denied him,
they abode not by him at the first skirmish, he was left alone unto the shock,
and there was none else; now he was returned a victorious champion, having
broken through the steely ribs and braz^n bars of death and the grave; and that
he should at the first word proclaim peace unto those traitors, that not sued,
not sought unto, he should embrace those fugitives, is contrary unto most of
the practice of the world, such a greeting does ill agree with such as they;
Curses upon such occasions are more in ure then blessings; the sword one would
have thought had been more due then peace; but it becomes not Christ to be the
messenger of war; He brought wounds but in his own hands and side; he would not
give any, though he was content to receive. Such is the mercy of our God still
unto us sinners, he is not Aestimator meriti, but largitor veniae, as our
Church calls him in her Liturgy.

But there is more in it then so, Aliter a Christo, quam a mundo silutamur,
says Maldonate: it is not for nothing, that contrary to the form of
salutation, he does presently upon the matter repeat the same words, verse. 21.
he goes over it, and over it again, to show that he would not have it singly
regarded; or as Pharaohs dreams were doubled to confirm the vision, so are his
words to make good his salutation; Pacem subinde dicit, ut p^ hello solamen
afferat, says Chris st.

And if we consider the quality of the peace, we shall find it to answer the
greatness of the war; before war Jehues reply to Jehoram sorted well to every
one of us, what had we to do with peace? after war, so chargeable a war as our
Savior had so lately undertaken, it is not likely an unworthy peace could be
accepted; as is the man, such is his m^ssage, you shall hear more of the worth
of both anon.

I had ere now taken the Text asunder, but that I thought I ought not rashly to
have entered it without some salutation: I must now a while disturb the peace
of the Text, that I may the better discover unto you the Text of peace. The
violation which shall be offered, will be redressed by the union: A division
which is but moral, not mortal, will be the better relished in the close: I
shall at last with more ease leave it as I find it, then find how or where to
leave it.

Two words take up the whole Text.

1 Peace, and 2 The price of it.
1. The publishing of peace. 2. The purchasing of it. In the first is verbum
pacis. In the second factum pacis: and when words and works concur, is like to
be truest peace. Or else thus, There is first the blessing of peace, that is
the matter of the Text. Secondly the author of peace, 1. Pax Dei. 2. Deus
pacis. And he is

Two ways the author of peace. 1. By Ministration. 2. By mediation. 1. By
publishing. 2. By purchasing; the messenger, the maker is one, he which brought
it in the first words of the Text, Peace be unto you, first bought it in the
latter, and for that end he showed them his hands and his side.

Again, the publishing of peace is two ways. First, optatively, by way of
wishing. Secondly, imparatively, by way of commanding. In the first, Pax vohis,
he wishes peace to us, he wishes us to it; and therefore some of the Fathers
have called this more then a salutation, votum Christi; In the second, Pax
vohis, is as much as, pacem habete in vohis; and therefore more yet, than votum
Christi, it is mandatum Christi.

And here will come in at last to be considered, the persons to whom it is
proclaimed, for whom it was purchased, vohis, Peace be unto you: and when he
had so said, he showed them his hands and his side.

We begin with the first, the blessing of peace, 1. Pax Dei. It will be too
hard a task to make you understand that which the Scripture says does pass
all understanding. The Kingdom of God says the Apostle consists in three
things, (whereof peace bears the greatest part) Righteousness, Peace, and Joy,
Romans 14. 17. Opus justitiae, Pax Letitia, offectum pacis: Joy could not have
been at all without righteousness, righteousness alone could not have brought
forth joy; upon those terms we stood till Peace was brought into the world
purchasd and proclaimed: Those two extremes, Gods justice and our joy had never
come together, till Peace came in the midst and concluded for us.

Now peace, is that which all things wish, it is votum, and summa vo^orum:
Aquinas calls it, the summum bonum of all things. Reasonable Creatures the
Angels in Heaven they desire to bring the news of peace, Pax terris, Luke 2.
The devils in hell would be glad of it to; The very enemy of peace to have
peace himself, he would not be tormented, nor troubled that troubles all things
else, unreasonable Creatures, fire and water, whiles they are together, nothing
bustles more, when asunder nothing joys more in their separation, they fight
that they may be at peace all: even senseless things are at an unrest till in
their place, to which naturally they tend in, which only they be at peace; even
God himself wishes so well to peace, that as if he preferred it before all his
other Titles, he loves to be styled Deus Pacis, the God of Peace.

Saint Austin places it in order, and calls it tranquillitas ordinis: as the
Symmetry among the members when none are out of place; the Harmony in music,
when no one note is harsh, or out of tune, such is peace and order among
estates. Maximus calls it, ejus quod gratissimum est plena possess^o, when the
desire has its full complement of what most delights it: therefore happiness
is by some said to be Pax desiderii, when our desire has what it would, then
it will be at rest, not before; then it will have peace; But that is not to be
had here in this life, not that peace which may estate us in a full and quiet
possession of all things we could wish for; it is but desiderium Pacis here; we
must therefore make two sorts of peace with the School. 1. Perfecta. 2.
Imperfecta, The one is Patriae of the blessed Saints and Angels there; the
other is Viae of the tossed souls and Pilgrims here: that consists in a Union
to one eternal good, this chiefly in Communion.

The first, Pax vohis, sitting enough for Christ to wish, but not as yet for
you to receive; you are yet but in the way to it; and yet that we may not
altogether exclude from the Text. Christ purchased that for you, the peace of
God, and therefore it belongs unto you. The glorified Saints in heaven enjoy it
by right of redemption from him, by virtue of the price which he paid for it:
you may joy in it here, but not enjoy it; the remembrance of it will make you
love peace the better whiles you live, and teach you to keep peace here, which
to the preservers of it, is a Symboll and token of that blessed peace there.

But the peace is to be stated according to this life, and that is but
imperfect; at the best but imperfectly perfect: it is threefold; and to note
that Tribus vicibus pace^ dicit.

1. Peace in heaven with God above us, that is Pax aeterna, it is but begun
here in this life, and they have it to whom Christ says, Pax vohis; there was
a war betwixt God and us; he was become our enemy, and in that great
inundation had swept us all away for ever, but that Christ, like the Dove with
the Olive Branch in his mouth, brought us peace, reconciled us to him; he is
our peace which has made of both one, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 14. he
which was factus u^us ex utraque one Person of two natures, was faciens
utramque unam, two natures into one peace.

2. Peace within us with our own hearts, Pax interna: that Caro semper militat
contra Spiritum, says St. Chrysostom. Tom. 1. p 1. 41. It is not so much, that
that war is to be still continued, there can be no peace there, till a^l the
lusts be subdued: God forbade Israel to make any peace with the Cinaanite,
victory only which will not be till death must put an end to the Battle. But
besides, there is a war not only against the soul, but in the soul, in sinu,
the soul it self is wounded and cast down, and overthrown; it lies upon a Bed
of thorns, between hope and fear, between faith and fainting; some have been
so deeply engaged in it, that they would have rid themselves of their souls to
be rid of it, but now a peace here is concluded, a peace made with God above;
and soon will there be peace in our hearts within: whiles the Lord of Hosts was
up in arms the very powers and forces of the soul mustered themselves against
her self, but now he is down, and is reconciled: Why art thou so vexed, O my
soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? and why say you then you
rebelling fears, unto my soul, that she should fly as a bird unto the hill.

3. Peace with others without us, Pax externa: the Angels proclaimed this from
heaven at the Birth of our Savior, pax terris: and all the world was then at
peace, in token whereof Janus was shut up. I shall not doubt to say that this
peace (peace amongst men) is part of our Saviors wish, and of his will too,
and therefore when he sent his disciples, he bade them ever say first, pax buic
Domui, and we know how much the Apostles preach it, as their Lord commanded
them. Civil peace is after spiritual, the greatest of Gods blessings, with it
an band full of herbs how sweet is it? without it an house full of Sacrifice,
what good is it? Therefore the Primitive Church, says Tertullian, ever used to
pray for it, orbem pacatum; and the Psalmist bids us remember to do it, Oh pray
for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love it, Psalm. 122. 6. They
shall have joy that counsel it, Prove. 12. 20. They shall be blessed that make
it, Matthew. 5. 9. How great a reward should he find in heaven? how glorious a
name shall he leave upon earth that could bring it to pass?

I pass unto the next, the Author and Giver of Peace, the God of peace. Christ
himself is the Author of it; omnis benedictio a majore, says the Apostle, and
no blessing greater than peace, none greater to give it than Christ; when he
was born, it was Zenium Christi, so St. Cyprian calls it, Encaenium Christi, so
Bonaventure. The chief part of the Angels song, Peace on earth; his first gift
when he went away, it was Donativum Christi, my peace I give unto you, my peace
I leave with you: his last Legacy; men use at the last, to give their best
things unto their friends. and Christ had no better then peace to give; he gave
it by way of Testament then, upon his Good Friday farewell, by way of Testimony
he renews it now as upon his Easter Salutation, that he might remember them
afresh now, of what so late he bequeathed them then, says Chrysostom. It was
the last thing he thought on before his death, it is the first thing he thinks
on now after his rising, the first and the last with Christ, and yet for the
most part the last and the least with us Christians; and to show how much
himself was the cause of peace, he is called Pax nostra, Ephesians. 2. 14. And
every where in the New Testament, Deus Pacis, and God as if he took better
liking to that Title, then any of his other, is no where since styled Deminus
Sabbath, but Sabbath, not of hoasts, but of rest, not of power but of peace.

1. Now he is the Author of peace; so the Church in one of her collects calls
him two ways. 1. By Ministration, he was not content the Angels only should be
Heralds of it, or that men alone should be Evangelizantes pacem: himself came
to Minister, to grace our Function the better, and if of any thing, it is most
fit that he should be the Minister of the best things; It was necessary that
peace should be published, there will be no laying down of Arms till then: but
why Christ himself should be the Minister of it, was sure to set the greater
price on his peace, to show its dignity, his dignation, he which bought it,
also brought it, the Make^ of our peace would be the Messenger of it.

1. And now he brings it. 1. Optatively, by way of wishing, Peace be unto you.
Those ever ought to do that at least which say it, there ought to be an
intendment at least of peace, if it cannot be had, yet it were to be wished, to
be sincerely desired; there should be votum pacis in cord, as well as vox
pacis in ore: or else twere fairer dealing to march on furiously with Jehu, to
say plainly, what have thou to do with peace? then falsely with Jo^b and Judos
to salute and kiss, and to betray and kill. It is pity that the Language of
Heaven should ever usher in any project of hell, that black purposes should
come clothed with the whitest Ornaments, that dark fiends should speak like
glorified Spirits, and under pretense of prayers devour up houses, under the
colors of peace, contrive mischief and destruction.

But our Savior intended it sure, and therefore wishes it to them, and in it
whatsoever else goods to be wished for; Peace is the Breviary of all votes,
Pacem te poscimus omnes: The Apostle calls Evangelizantes pacem, Evangelizantes
bona, Romans 10. 15. As if all good things were in peace, that is the best
comment upon this complement, they which wish us peace, wish us all good
things: besides, both Bonum jucundum and foecundum, they are the chief goods;
we look after pleasant and profitable goods. Peace is both the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 133. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, like A^rons ointment, it
is bonum amabile, and like the dew of Hermon, it is bonum utile. Peace and
plenty ever go together: Abundance of peace were not so fit a phrase, if it
were not to show that abundance, is ever the effect, the fruit of peace. But
Christ does not only wish this, but also will it, he commends it to them, and
commands it them both under one, his teaching was ever with au^hority.

2. Imperatively. Pax vobis, is as much as, Pacem babete in vohis: if it were
not good for us, he would never wish it, much less command it; and this here
is but a remembering of them, says Saint Chrysostom, of what he had before so
often told them, of having peace one with another. If his authority was doubted
then; sure it was sufficiently confirmed now: now he was risen from the dead,
and had conque^ed all those enemies of peace, even death it self the last enemy
of all. To speak of peace, to advise to it, to enjoin it was a very fit time:
Dives in hell desired no more, then that one should rise from the dead to teach
his brethren.

Now the peace which commands us is Oris. Operis. Cordis.

1. To speak peace for strise, like to flames gather life by breath; angry
words are ever heralds unto war; they that will pursue peace must keep their
tongue from evils, and their lips that they spoke no guile: Curses and
reproaches are like arms of straw to the fire of wrath, says Camerarius, they
add fuel to it; but a soft answer, says Solomon, allayeth it. The Apostles
though they had tongues given them like fire, yet they were such as had light,
as much as heat in them, and that heat which was, was cooled with a blast of
wind, Acts 2. And heat can do no harm where it is governed by light; there
must be habete potestatem in verbis, before there can be any hopes of habete
pacem in vobis, they know not the way of peace, which know not how to do that.

2. The next is Pax operis, To practice, peace: Christ did both, they heard him
speak, and he showed them his hands and his feet, to confirm his practice, he
was mighty in deed and in word: the Scripture places deed ever first where it
speaks of Christ, Acts 1. 1. Luke 24 19. to show there was most worth in that;
and Christ's action should be our imitation, when we speak peace, we should show
our hands that we practice it, that we labor for it, not Joa^ and Judas like,
have peace only in our mouth, but a sword or staff in our hand: But it is
possible our labor may be lost, as David's was in Psalm. 120. I labor for
peace, but when I speak unto them thereof, they make themselves ready for
battle. It is likely we shall speed no better then Christ told his Disciples,
when as he sent them forth with the like salutation, Pax buic domui: as it hits
and meets with the Son of peace, so it will be retained, else returned back to
us again; yet there must be still

3. Pax in cord, a well wishing unto peace, an hearty desire of it; not to let
enmity take up any room there, to express it by free motion of it, by glad
receiving it, by seeking and suing for it, by sending after it and purchasing
it; till this be seen, we show not our side, how it bleeds after peace: This is
Christ's wish, that we would do thus; and this is not only commended unto us,
but commanded us: Pax vobis (i. e.) habete pacem in vobis.

And let it now pass for an injunction, and not only for a salutation: Love is
of the same nature with peace: our Savior calls it a new Commandment, John
13. 34. Peace has somewhat the advantage of that our Savior speaks of, and
that only to Peter after his resurrection, but this he gives in charge to all
his Disciples: Pax vobis, is he to them.

We come to that now; the Persons to whom it is enjoined, his Disciples; they
were then gathered together, and their Congregation did fitly represent the
Church of God; only they were gathered through fear, these through love: Now
peace is never so fit as at a meeting, be it from what cause soever, whether of
love or fear, there to be published, then to be entertained.

When men are simul, there ought least of all to be simultas: Peace is the
Cartilage which keeps the members together, the bond of peace the Apostle calls
it, because the Church like a shea^e, has by it all her ears of corn kept from
shattering together; This was the peace of Christ's principal intendment, Pax
Ecclesiae, that they should always be, as their bodies were conjoined, so have
their hearts and minds united: as they are of one place, so have all one
peace: we cannot say with any success, Pax huic domui, if they be not of one
mind in the house.

Saint Basil reports with astonishment what he had by experience sound in his
travells, that when in all Arts and Sciences, and societies, he saw peace and
agreement: tantum in Ecclesia Christi pro qua ipse mortuus, maximum dissidium,
Ascet. p. 186. He reckons it among the judgments of God, and we can do no
less, if any time we think seriously of it: he imputes the cause of that to
men's contempt of their heavenly King, as Isreal's calamities in the time of
Judges, because every man did what they list, and there was no King in Israel;
they which are rebels to the King will not be ruled by his Law, sine Rege, and
sine Lege ever go together; and they do little better but deny his sovereignty
which reject his commands; they forgo their obedience, which cast of his
cognizance; nay with greater rage then the soldiers used him, they rent in
sunder his seamlesse coat and break even his bones in pieces, so Saint Austin
speaks of the Schismatic Donatus.

There will be ever in the Church of God haters of Peace. The enemy of peace
will be still sowing tares of dissension, ever since the opening of the second
seal, Revel. 6. 4. There was power given to take peace from the earth: then was
Pax terris, that part of the Angels song turned into vaeterris. Jehnes fury,
and Jereboams schism carry all away before them: The Gospel they pretend to
both, as if it had gotten new colors, war and the sword, and not peace, and
love.

Yet shall Christ's wish take no effect: Pax vobis, will sure be welcome to the
Disciples: Pax domui huic, to the sons of peace here: Those to whom Christ
wishes it, are the same to whom the Angels proclaimed it, Luke 2. Pax terris,
but quibus? says Saint Bernard: (...) hominibus magnae scientiae, and
dignitatis, sed bone voluntatis.

But what and if you will needs reject it? shall it be said in vain, Pax vobis?
if it find no sons of peace, it will return to us again; the blessing of peace
will be returned to them that plead for it: and that our Savior pronounces,
blessed are the Peace makers.

And blessed for ever, blessed be that Peacemaker who did not only plead for
peace all his life, but purchased it by his death, who paid the prise of it,
his own blood, who was not only the messenger of it, but the maker of it: and
to show that, he showed them his hands and his side.

2. I come to that now, the second way of Christ's being author of our peace, by
mediation, by purchase; he said; Peace be unto you and when he had so said, he
showed them his hands and his side.

O hers were Evangelizantes pacem, the Angels from Heaven, the Apostles on
earth; but procurantes pacem, none but he: they by ministration having received
commission from him, he only by mediation having his mission from the Father:
they may be messengers, he only the maker, and in that respect he, and not
they, is called Pax nostra.

If you require a sign of it, there is the Prophet Jonabs in such a storm which
would have soon swoopt up the ship and all her passengers; Take me says he,
and cast me into the sea, and then the sea ceased from her raging. Adam was the
Carrick, in him all mankind was imbarqued, and that was ready to be swallowed
up in the Abyss of Gods high displeasure: take me says Christ, and let me
pass through those angry wounds; only with this difference, Jonahs truly said
it, Propter me haec tempestas; but of him says Esaias, He was wounded for our
transgressions: and those wounds which he then received, here he shows unto
his Disciples: He showed them his hands and his side.

Christ would have the wounds of his passion to be seen after his resurrection,
for many good reasons. It is probable he has them still to show: In a vision
which Zachary saw, 13. 6. there is one whether Saint or Angel, is bold to ask
him, what are those wounds in thy hands? and his answer is, These are they
which I received in the house of my friends. Saint Austine says of the
Martyrs, Omnes suas cicatrices in caelo habituros, non tanquam vitia sed
veritatis testimonia. de Civit. lib. 22. chap. 20. Not as arguments of their
frailties, but as testimonies of their virtue. Among the rest there are three
not the least.

1. To consound his enemies when they shall look upon him whom they have
pierced. Herod was affrighted when he heard of Christ's works, and said it is
John Baptist whom I beheaded; even so shall they be daunted when they shall see
his wounds, and say, it is Jesus whom we crucified.

2. To confirm his friends: Ad sananda infidelium cordium vulnera, servata
clavorum and lanceae vestigia, says Leo. Except I see (says Thomas) the print
of his nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe, verse 25. and
vidit and credidit: the mouths of his wounds spoke most effectually to his
faith, he read best in the print of those nails, the resurrection of his
master. The report of Christ's rising, was as strange to him, as to Jacob of
Joseph's living, till he saw the wagons which Joseph sent for him, and Thomas
the wounds which Jesus suffered for him.

3. That he might carry in his body the Trophies of his victory and our peace,
says Maldonate; that the wound in his side might be like the bow in the Cloud,
the rainbow about the Throne, which John saw in his vision, Revel. 4. 3. or
like the blood on the lentell, Exodus 12. or the red thread in the window, Joshna
2. 18. that God when he sees it, might remember his Covenant, that the godly
might fly to his side as their sanctuary, to the holes of that rock, to the
secret place of the stairs of his Cross, and hide themselves in that great and
terrible day of the Lord. This was the purchase of his passion, a place to hide
us in: there is no finding of any peace for us murderers, out of these Cities
of refuge; no way for us to happiness, but through these gates of the
righteous, in at these everlasting doors: Of the wounds of his side, may very
truly be said those words of the Psalmist, This is the gate of the Lord; the
righteous shall enter in there at.

Now, he might well speak of peace, which was made our peace, and wish us to
peace which was wounded for it: Peace after war is ever welcome, nay it is
the honor of peace, that war is made for it. The emblem of a soldier is a
sword in one hand, and fire in the other, with this motto, Sic quaerimus pacem,
and it is Christ's our Captains word, Veni quaerere and sanare; and war
destroys all, Peace only saves.

And now me thinks I hear those wounds in his hands and side, like so many
mouths (for Quot vulnera, tot ora) saying unto you, Peace be unto you; Videte
quantum constitit mihi pax vestra, put your fingers here and see mine hands,
put forth your hands here, and put them into my side; make not my wounds
greater by your infidelity, then the Jews did with all their cruelty; will you
not believe except you see them bleed afresh in my members, in my spouse the
Church? can you slight that for which I paid so dear? prize you my blood at so
low a rate, that upon such slight occasions you contemn the purchase of it;
will you sell me again for thirty pence, and cry out so many crucifies, rather
then put up any little injury? Can you for a ceremony cashiere all your
charity, and so readily break the bond of peace; for which I was content to be
bound over to insupportable pains? will you use me more despightfully then
those ^urrish Soldiers did? they neither rent my garments, nor brake my bones,
and will you tear in pieces that seamlesse coat of charity, in which I have put
my Spouse; as if you were wild beasts? and like fierce Tigers, make wide
wounds in my body which is the Church? Had I never bought it for you, or being
bought, had I never brought it to you, you could not have been more strangely
careless of it. All I can say unto you, is Peace be unto you; these wounds in
my hands and side will say more, and he showed them his hands and his side.

And it will make you think the better of peace whiles you live, if you
consider one thing more, whose hands they are which deliver it unto you; if
there were any better thing in the world, those hands would not have kept it
from you; that side would have afforded blood sufficient enough to have
procured it for you; and you may be sure it is worth the receiving which Christ
gives you, you ought not to refuse that which he bought at so dear a price.

I would here wind up all, lest while I be a factor for your peace, by too
much tediousness I forfeit mine own; but that in Christ's showing his hands and
his side, after he said, Peace be unto you; is as me thinks imported something
of a moral intendment. Saint Luke says, they were his hands and his feet; it
is likely he showed them all. 1. His side, how it desired their peace. 2. His
hands and his feet, how they labored for it.

In this sense we are to imitate him, the words of our commission are the same
with his; Pax vobis, and Pax. buic Domni are much at one; and himself says,
sicut misit me Pater, etc. We cannot show you our side how it has bled for it;
our hands and feet how they were wounded for it, that only Christ can do, and
those wounds he has yet to show; yet in a moral meaning, we show you our
side, how earnestly we desire it, our hands and our feet, how we labor for it.
Else

The voice of peace, if the heart be not to wish it, the hands to work it, will
do little good; those which come with it on that fashion, art but like the
bramble in Jothams parable, Judges 9. 15. which promised peace to those that
trust on him; and is likely first to scratch them that lay hold on it: Though
one once carried away the blessing from old Isaac, I no where find any ever
brought it, which came with the voice of Jacob, and the hands of Esau. The
Scripture joins salt and peace together, habete salem and pacem, Mark 9. 50.
and that is sal scientiae and conscientiae, which are matters of the heart and
hands, and not merely of the tongue. Indeed they must be all three seasoned,
our words, our wishes, our works; before habete salme, there will be no habete
Pacem.

How ever, let those which are sal Terrae, not lose their season: let their
feet be shod with the preparations of the Gospel of peace, Ephesians. 6. 15. and that
preparation is especially in patient putting up of wrongs: There is no true way
of peace to be had there without it. And then will others say; Quare speciofi
sunt pedes Evangelizantium pacem? their feet must be seen in the ways of
Peace, as well as well as their voices heard, with the words of peace; it is no
right coming to come with the voice of a Turtle, and the talon of an Harpie.
To such as you are Christ especially commends peace, in Pax vobis, and commands
it too, in Pacem habete in vobis: do you pray for peace, and plead for it, and
practice it, be benefactours for peace, that you may one day receive the
blessing of peace.

And now Pax vobis, to you all; I promised you to end as I began, Piece be unto
you. Christ wishes it to you, and advises you to it: you can do no less then
return him praise for it, Glory unto Heaven, for peace on earth. The Angels
taught us that way in their heavenly Hymn; and there is no way like that to
keep peace here, than by giving glory there. Unto him therefore in the lighest
Heavens, who is the Author and giver of Peace, be given all Glory, and praise,
now and ever, Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON.
LAMENT. 5. 16. Woe now unto us, That we have sinn^d.
HEre is Flebile principium, a lamentable beginning: This Text comes like man
himself into the world, crying; you could not look that this day should bring
forth any other child, then a child of sorrow: Ben-onies are ever the fruits
of true fasts: If the day it self could speak. you should have no other voice
from it then that which Isaiab heard: A voice saying, Cry, Isai. 40. 6. Now if
you ask with him, what shall I cry, my Text will direct you in that; Woe now
unto us, that we have sinned.

Here is a cry to be taken up by all of us; and there is good reason for it.
There have been diverse cries already, only we our selves have not cried, God
himself has cried in the Proverbs, Chap. 1. Verse 20. Turn you at my
correction: His Ministers have cried, and never left crying, Isaiab, Jeremy,
and Jonab; our sins have also cried, Unto heaven has their cry ascended, it
has come unto the ears of the Almighty; Judgment also has begun to cry, and
her voice to be exalted above mercy; only we, as if we were senseless, have
stood still at this time, and not cried at all: But now we do begin, and it is
well thought on, before we come into the cry of Egypt, a cry of midnight, we
dye all, Exodus 12. 33. Or that dismal cry which shall be in the last night of
all, a crying to the rocks to hide us, and the mountains to fall upon us. The
way not to cry then, will be to cry now: to make our selves cry before we be
made to cry; the cries of repentance prevent the cries of vengeance, especially
when we join all of us in this cry. It has been reported, that the cry of an
huge Army has intercepted the flight of Birds, they have not been able to
pass over for it, but have fallen down in the midst: so are Gods flying
Judgments to be intercepted: if we cry all of us, as we are appointed. I will
only add that advice of a King concerning this crying, and at such a time as
this was: that it may be a strong cry, Let us cry mightily unto God, Jon. 3. 8.

But are we to cry indeed? me thinks that were fittest to be done in secret;
tears shed in private, are commonly the tru^st; Ille dolet vere qui sine test
dolet, they speak loudest which make least noise; this is to be done, and done
often by us: Yet we are to do it in public too; to weep with them that weep,
was ever held seasonable, especially when there is a just cause of weeping as
now there is; it will be an unanswerable fault, if the Church shall have just
cause to complain of us, We have mourned unto you, and you have not wept.

And here we are not as upon a stage, only to personate a crying; we must act
our own parts; like him which was to act a lament^ble part, that he might do it
the better, call to remembrance the death of his only son, whom he most
dearly loved, and fell indeed into true tears; none of us but have cause
enough, if we but call it unto mind, to make us to weep, if not for others
sins, yet for our own; hinc illae lachrimae. They, they alone are a sufficient
motive to make our hearts seek vent at our tongues, to make uss^y at least thus
much, Woe unto us, that we have sinned.

We should not need this ado, if we were but of David's, or Jeremies, or
Peter's, or Mary Magdalens temper, apt to cry: they could water their Beds, and
mingle their drink with their tears; The Poets fain that Prometheus, when he
made man, tempered his clay with tears; and yet how hardly come they from us,
as if our natures were of another mould? I must needs grant a Corporal
Calamity has f^tcht too many our of some, even to a prejudicating of their
faith, but when has a spiritual done the like? is nature such an enemy to the
soul, that the can be prodigal of her tears, when any temporal affliction
moves her, and so base and nigardly, when a spiritual afflicts her? Woe is me
that I have not Moses rod, to strike these Rocks; I have not the art to make
you weep, no not to weep my self. The Angel of God descend this day, and stir
our pools; he touch our hearts, that they may teach our eyes true tears, and
our t^ngu^s strong cries, that we may with unfeigned sorrow say, though it be
but the words of this Text: Woe now unto us, that me have sinned.

I might have fitted you with a Text of more words, but not of more matter:
long speeches are not always strong ones: Magnum in parvo, is natures best
work, so it is reasons, so it is religions: Those which are run out in length
have commonly least spirits in them. How short was Moses cry, yet how
forceable? Nay, when he had said least, he spoke loudest, Exodus 14. 45. our
Saviors cries are by the Apostle called strong, yet they were long none of
them: how short is that which he has taught us to utter, and yet not the less
effectual? how powerful was the Publican in that short petition, God he
merciful to me a sinner? The Pharisee said more, but went home with less.
There are but three syllables in peccavi, yet quantum valent, says Saint
Ambrose. David received pardon only for them: it is but little we are to say
now, we may say it in a moment, if we say it right; and that we may do that, we
must say somewhat of the manner of saying it.

If you please but to observe the Text where it is placed, you will find two
necessary attendants on it: The Book is a Lamentation, the Chapter a Petition;
it is as Augustus Caesar said of himself, when he sat between Horace and
Virgil, inter suspiria and lachrimas: The Author of it was a Petitioner with
tears in his eyes, he was like a Dove upon the Rivers of waters, Can. 5. 12.
His heart mourning, his head dropping: prayers and tears, are the true acconts
of his voice, he spoke with his eyes, as well as with his tongue: Lamentations,
mourning, and woe are not severed, they are joined by Ezekiel in Gods Book,
they are not parted by Jeremy in his: so it is the manner of repentance to
assume what is due by vengeance, she does freely undergo whatsoever justice
does award: they belong to her by her own judgment, whatsoever is due by Gods:
So she uses to judge her self before hand: This is her manner, and to be
practiced by us now, with Lamentation, and mourning, to pronounce our woe. Woe
now unto us, that we have sinned.

I may well term my Text, the lamentation of a sinner, or rather the
lamentation of sinners, for we are not in our private Closets now; the time
has made it public, we are to join all of us in doing of it, so the Text
takes us in all, it is not to be said by one alone, but by many, all of us that
are hear present: Woe now unto us, that we have sinned.

Now in saying this, we say two things, 1. Our misery, which is the cause of
our Lamentatio^, Woe now unto us. 2. Our sin, which is the cause of our misery,
That we have sinned.

We begin with the first, the sense of our misery, and that will bring us
afterward to a sight of our sin; and in that we have two things to be
considered.

First, The greatness of it. Secondly, The neernesse of it.
First the greatness of it, it is expressed in one word, but that the most
significant, and full that can be, if any expression may be infinite, and take
in all the intentions of misery, that is it, Woe now unto us, it is in that
word Woe.

S^condly, the neernesse of it for miseries a far of, do not so much affect
our senses, we are not so much touched with them, as to go about to prevent
them It was St John's wo^d^r, Quit vos prae^nonuit fugere ab ira ventura, that
any should take so much thought as to think of that: But this is near two
ways: First, in resp^ct of persons, it is our own and not others. Secondly, of
time, it is not to come, but is come already. Woe now unto us.

And by that time we have considered these we shall find cause enough for
lamentation, and finding th^se off^cts, look further to the true cause of our
misery, which is our sin, take a full sight of that, and that is properly opus
Diei; I humbly beg of God his assistance, while I dispatch it.

1. Our Misery. That takes up the first place: So it uses in all complaints,
especially where our pain is as it is here, Woe is the wor^, we have it
express^d by;

Woe, is a word of malediction and commination, there i^ a cursing and a
threatening ^ver employed in that: any mean Grammarian knows the meaning of that
interj^ction. Two ways only do we find it us^d in Scripture. 1. By God, when
he denouncethany judgment upon others: So it is often in the Prophets, Isai.
5. Ezekiel. 13. and by our Sa^iour in the Evangelists, Matthew. 23. by the Angel in
the Apocalips, Chap. 18. and Chap. 9. 2. By others when they lament any
judgment already fallen, or likely to fall upon themselves, in Jeremy we fin^e
it often, Iere. 4. 31. Woe is me now, for my soul faints, Iere. 10. 19. Woe
is me for my destruction, and my grievous plague, Iere. 15. 10. Woe is me my
Mother, that thou bast born me a contentions man, a man that striveth with the
whole earth: Of this sense is this Text: we do even curse our selves in saying
of it, at least we make application of that curse which does belong unto us.

And this is very proper to this time, we are now in hand with that which the
Apostle else where advises us unto, To judge our selves, that we may not be
judged of the Lord, by denouncing of a curse^, we take upon us to be Judges; in
the Court of Conscience, we are allowed to do it to our selves; it is the part
of the discipline of repentance, to award that unto our selves, which the
Justic^ of God has threatened unto sinners; such we are; nay the very cl^i^fest
of sinners: we do not do it potestative, but approbative, we consent that the
judgment of God is just: and we cannot ju^ge l^ss^ does belong unto us then
this; this is the least that we can ju^ge, Woe unto us. Now repentance is
rightly called by the School a pe^ce of ju^tice, it consists especially in
awarding due punishment: poenitentia a puniendo, says the Master, L. 4. d. 14.
We are apt in this matter to follow Peter's counsel, Master favor thy self:
either we see not fully what we have committed, that part of the wallet we
commonly cast behind, or we are but partial judges to determine what we have
deserved: but true repentance may not so spare her self; she is to assign all
that does belong unto her self, to appoint in her own judgment, whatsoever
divine judgment has threatened.

And then once Woe will be too little, we find it thrice threatened Revel. 8.
13. Woe, woe, woe, and when these are past with St Bernard, we shall find a
fourth, it will be but injustice with the King of Israel to smite but thrice,
when we should do it five or six times, it will be but to repeat the words so
much the oftener, and four woes we shall in justice award unto our selves, and
those four, from four places. First, From Heaven above us. Secondly, From the
world without us. Thirdly, From our own consciences within us. Fourthly, From
hell beneath us; in respect of every one of these, we have just cause to say,
Woe now unto us.

1. From heaven above us.] ^hen we do contemplate the greatness and power of
an incensed Judge, how the Lord of H^asts is up in arms against us, how
justice musters up her clouds, and winds, and storms; how thousand thousands,
and ten thousand thousands, Dan. 7. d^ily march in his Army; how he comes with
flames of fire, rendering of vengeance; how with him Judgment cannot be
prevaricated; no bribes will blind his eyes; no friends corrupt his
affections; mercy dares not plead; tears will not be heard to speak; who is
able to stand before consuming fire; who can dwell with everlasting burnings?
How the very Earth shall melt at his presence and the heavens be rolled up, as
in a scrowle before him; how he will ^ip up the bowels of the heart it self,
and search the secrets of the soul; how he found not steadfastness in his
Angels, and even the Stars are unclean in his sight: How much more is man a
worm, even the Son of man, which is but a worm? If Moses could not abide his
back parts, how shall we endure his presence? what can we conclude from this
contemplation, but with my Text, Woe is unto us?

2. One woe is past, but behold a second: If heaven do abandon us, how shall
the Earth comfort us? If the Lord be against us, how can I help? was said by a
King, one as likely to help, as any in the world. We may well look about us,
but we shall find with Jeremy, our plague is desperate, our wound is
incurable: When God is angry, he infatuates even counsels, quos perdere vult
dementat. He mak^s abortive all policies; you may learn it by Achitophels; he
suffers the Prophets themselves to provelyers, as they did in persuading Abab
to battle: he turns the swords of Armies against themselves, and their bows
into their own bowels; he makes them bring in a strong people, to scourge
themselves, as Israel the Egyptians, as children their own rod. He smites them
with blindness, and astonishment, as he threatened Israel, Deuteronomy. 28. 28. If we
look to the Church, we find giddynesse; to the Commonweal madness; if
without us to the North, vae malum, there is a mist; to the South there ever
and anon arises a cloud, threatening a storm; if within us, we may say with the
Apostle, we are in perils by false Brethren; there are Vipers which will eat
up the bowels of the Mother that bred them; treasons, and conspiracies fill us
with fears; divisions, and distractions add unto our woes: The world is by
Plato compared to a shop, almost whatsoever we look upon, we may say with the
buyer in Solomon, malum est, malum est, it is naught, it is naught. We have
cause enough, if we consider it, to say the second time, Woe is now unto us.

3. And yet behold a third, though there be never so many troubles, without us;
yet peace within us, would afford us comfort: but let us look within us, and
ask, is it peace? There is no peace unto the wicked, our own consciences will
tell us that; They are witnesses to accuse us of sin, and judges to condemn us
to woe. If they be quiet and trouble us not, our woe is the greater, because
our consciences are secure; but if troublesome, how great is our woe! They are
the Books by which we shall be judged hereafter: nay, by them we may become our
own judges now. Search and see if in our own judgment, we may not pronounce
against our selves another woe: how unsufferable are their checks; how evident
their accusations; how faithful their records: others cannot read them, and
may judge us better then we are; we which know them our selves, if we will deal
truly, must needs pronource a righteous judgment, and that is; Woe be unto us,
because we have sinned.

4. Three woes are past, but behold a fourth. It is St Bernards woe, of his
adding; if we look below us, we shall have cause to say it, and there we shall
find the complement of all woe: can you endure to hear that fearful sentence,
depart you cursed, without saying, Woe be unto us? how ready is the cruel
executioner of souls, the devil, to hale us thither? how wide has hell opened
her mouth to receive us there? could we but hear the dismal groans, and
yelling cries which they make, that are swallowed up into the river of
Brimstone; Let Dives speak for the rest of his fellows, (...), I am grievously
tormented; did we but believe the woeful extremity which they are in, that are
in utter darkness. Let our Saviors report work it into our faith, it is
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; night the duration of it not pass
for a fable; we have the everlasting Truth to confirm it, there the worm dies
not, and the fire is not quenched: have we not sufficient cause to cry out, Woe
be unto us?

How shall I make you say it, if this will not? hither we are judged, if our
judgment be right: we must not favor our selves and say, this shall not be
unto us: repentance cannot be true if partial: we must thus judge our selves,
that we may not be judged, non sumus bis judicandi, says St Bernard: God will
spare us, if we spare not our selves. Let us cast our selves down at the
footstool of his judgment Seat, and confess what we have deserved; Let us
come as Benbadads servants did to the King of Israel, with Sackcloth about our
loins, and ropes about our heads, 1 Kings 20. 32. such coming becomes us best
this day; Let us cast our selves out of heaven, as expecting only wrath from
thence; out of the world, as finding only miseries there; out of our selves, as
feeling nothing but terrors there; down even to hell it self, whether we
deserve to be for ever plunged; Let groans fill our souls, and tears our eyes,
vae vohis qui ridetis, in such a day as this is; and let our mouths be filled
with cries, saying it often; Woe now unto us, that we have sinned.

But, If the greatness of our misery have not sufficiently brought us to that;
yet the neernesse of it, will work some true effects. Things a far of, work
upon our apprehension somewhat, but not much upon our passion; but passion must
be set to work now; this day is the passion day of repentance. In two respects
we shall find it near enough. 1. Of Person. 2. Of Time. Those two will ad^e
sufficiently to the greatness of our misery, we shall not be put to in quire
further.

1. Of Person, it is our own misery; it belongs to our selves: Woe now to us.
Others miseries affect us not much, they work according to their distance, of
place, or person, Pacis cum proximus ardet, there begins our perplexity. When
our selves come to be touched, and repentance touches no where else, it swells
in her own bancks, it keeps sessions at home, and pasleth judgment only
against it self; We, we are the men, to whom woe does appertain; nostra res
agitur, we must not put it of from our selves, least God I^y it on: To us
belongs shame and confusion of face, says Daniel, Dan. 9. repentance
threatens none but it self, vae nobis, is the voice of it: Woe unto us.

2. Of Time Neither does it defer its judgment, nor put of the evil day
far from us, we deserve to have it brought upon us presently, and repentance
judges according to our des^rts. Woe now unto us: now indeed were it justice
with God, to bring upon us all this woe, he has forborne and given u^ many
times of trial, but we have despised the riches of his grace, and his
goodness has not lead us to repentance. He has come these many years,
looking for fruit, and found nothing but leaves; now might he in justice lay
his Axe to our root, and bid cut us down; now might he pronounce a curse
against us, and make us wither away; he might now speak unto us in his
displeasure, depart you cursed, and power upon us all his storms of indignation
and vengeance. If we were now to stand before Gods tribunal, and to be indged
according to our deserts, and there we are now placed by repentance; even now
presently, were all this misery to come upon us.

Now if any thing will work true appr^hension in us, it must be this:
Iraventura. Makes not any deep impression in many of us: the day of death,
though we see it a far of, may strike us into so ne dumps; but they are never
so true as -- (...) Cum sit inbeforae similis, jam jamque tenere.

When we see an hand writing with Baltazer, or hear a voice speaking our doom
with Nabuch adnezzar, then will our joints he loosed, and our knees tremble:
Saint Gregory reports it of himself, that when he expounded that sentence of
Abraham unto Dives, now thou art tormented, he was not able to on in his
Sermon. Pavore potius indigent quam expositione, says he, to his Auditors; the
apprehension of the present, wrought so much upon him, as if the jam vero, were
iam verum, now to be said to any of us, as it was to him; indeed we are to say
it our selves now, Woe now unto us: This certainly will make us sufficiently
apprehensive of our misery.

And now as men brought unto some dangerous disease, ever look unto the cause
that brought them to it, being in a storm as Jonahs Mariners were, they cast
about to find the fountain of it: it is the great consultation of this Kingdom
at this time, to find out the Authors of those great distempers that are in
it: So the sense of our misery will bring us to a sight of our sin, for indeed
hinc illae lachrimae; all our sorrows come from thence, we must lay all our
fault upon our sins, our sins are the troublers of ou^ Israel, and that leads
me to the second part of my Text. Woe now unto us, that we have sinned.

We came not till now to the cry of true repentance; it is not her misery she
is under, but the sin she has committed makes her cry: it is all the note that
they have in hell, Woe now unto us; but they never come to say that we have
sinned; for there is no place for repentance, the sense of their miseries makes
them only cry, not any sorrow or remorse for their sins: But it is these we
must now cry of; if we be true penitents, our sins must trouble us, and not any
other troubles whatsoever.

And now it is fittest to be troubled for them, for in times of other
afflictions, we cannot so well spend our tears upon our sins; torments of the
body, will drink up our spirits, the pains which we endure, take up our
complaints, our sins are not so well thought on, when our senses are otherwise
perplexed; sorrow often proves too late, which is let alone till then; but now
we do but make our selves miserable, we willingly assume woe unto our selves,
those woes we spoke of (we bless the goodness, and long suffering of our God)
are not as yet forced upon us, but freely assumed by us; other sorrows go not
so near unto our hearts at this time, that there may be the better room for the
sorrow, for our sins; sins are best lamented, when we are otherwise well, and
not afflicted: Pharaoh and Abab have done it in extremity, but it came not
freely from them, but by force; besides they lamented their plagues, not their
sins: But it is for these that we are troubled; not that we are punished, but
that we have sinned.

And that we may thoroughly be troubled for them, we must be sure to take a
good sight of them; not cover them as Cain, nor hide them as Adam; not cast
them behind our backs, but bring them before us, set them in our sight, that
God may cover them, while we discover them, that when we bring them before our
faces, he may cast them behind his back: Sin cannot be hid, but when God hides
it, we may rake it up, as we do fire in embers, but at the day of Revelation,
God will bring it to light.

But then to say that we have sinned, will not be enough to make us see our
sins; we have spent enough in the commission, Saint Peter tells us; shall we be
short in our confession? If we did go about it, we could not bring all our sins
to our remembrance: Holy men though they have studied the Art of Arithmetike,
have fain to set down at the foot of their account, an indefinite number; my
sins are more then the hairs of my bead, says David, then the sands on the Sea
shore, then the stars in the firmament. Our secret sins, St Bernard calls them,
maris magni reptilia, they are like the creeping creatures of the great Sea,
innumerable: yet as an huge army, though the common soldiers be not to be
mustered, the heads and chieftains are: in the firmament the stars are not to
be numbered, yet those of greatest influence, and magnitude are: among our sins
there are leaders, Captains over their hundreds, and thousands; there are some
of more transcendent magnitude, and malign influence; we may take sight of
them, and we shall not transgress the limits of the Text neither; it is to
say, but so much the ofner; that we have sinned.

We begin with Pride, that Primum pec^atorum, as Syrach calls it; a sin which
first began in heaven, and tumbled the first abetters of it down to hell; That
Epidemicall sin which has infected the race of all mankind; and like a most
malignant disease runs thorough all his veins, from that man of sin, the King
of all the children of Pride, as Job terms the Leviathan, who has the horns of
the Lamb, but the mouth of the Dragon, with which he speaks proud words. Unto
the lowest sinner amongst the sons of men, is this pestilence dispersed:
those which have seemed most to trample upon pride, and made pretenses of
voluntary humility, have done it with greater pride, as Plato said of Diogenes,
when he lord upon his chair with greater Pride, then ever he sat in it:
greater pride below often goes about to pull down lesser pride above; I must
not stand to tell you what the pride of our self conceit is, the magnifying of
our selves, the despising of our Brethren, our high looks, and proud stomachs,
the height of our apparel, the glory of our Pomp, how we perch up to the
highest twig of our estate, till the boughs will not bear us, how we look down
like the sons of Anack, upon our brethren as Grasshoppers; how full every vain
of us is of this vice, it is enough to see it, and to say, Woe now unto us,
that we have sinned.

The next sin is covetousness, Amor sceleratus habendi, the root of all evil,
as the Apostle calls, because it gives nourishment and grows to all other
sins; even pride it self has grown up by it, Idolatry, Profanation,
Sacrilege, Extortion, and infinite others, are troupers in this band: the love
of Mammon has begotten it, the wages of Balaam, and the booty of G^bazi, and
the Vineyard of N^both have maintained it. This also is our sin, and woe is
unto us, that we have sinned.

These two, Pride and Coveteousnesse, have their residence in the heart, have
usurped Gods mansion, and left him no room there; But

The third sin is Swearing, which is a cankar in the mouth, an open Sepulcher
in the throat, a s^ink that does ascend to heaven, which infects the sacred
name of God, the true General of Blasphemies; perjuries, lyings, etc. It is a
sin which crucifies Christ a new, and tears his very wounds and body in pieces,
and sheds his precious blood again, a sin which never goes without a curse a
long with it, which the jealous God will not let go unrevenged. This also is
our sin, and woe is unto us, that we have sinned.

I will but name another, a capital sin among the Armies of Lucifer, it is
Drunkenness the ring leader to adulteries, quarrels, wounds, distempers, to
profannesse, uncharitableness: swearing flies into the face of God, but
drunkenness defaces the image of God; he is the sepulcher of the creatures of
God, nay he is his own sepulcher, being entombed in his own bowels; It is a sin
which began with the new world, and has been cried down by the Prophets,
Apostles, Fathers, Pastors of the Church, and yet they have not prevailed; it
is a crying sin which makes a loud noise in Gods ears; and it is our sin also,
woe now unto us, that we have sinned.

I have named these four, because of the four woes we spoke of before; and
indeed if you peruse but the fifth chapter of Isaiah, you shall find a
several woe threatened to each of them. I must not go about to number the rest,
I cannot do it, I must say with the Psalmist, Oh how great is the sum of
them! and set that at the foot of the account; I can show you but a part of
this great Army, as Balack showed B^laam, but let that be enough to make you
curse them all, and say, ^^^^^ unto us, that we have sinned.

Let us not now put them off, and say, these are indeed the sins of the times;
with Saul, the people have sinned* Justus est accusator su^, true repentance
accuses none but it self; I have sinned, says David. we have sinned, we have
done wickedly, says Daniel. We our selves are the men, me, me, adsum qui fici,
in me convertite flaminat; they are our sine that have troubled Israel, say it,
though to the shame of our faces: ^ertul.
Let not us be ad delinquendum expandentes frontem, ad deprecandum subducenter;
Let us say it, and give God glory by our saying it, as Joshnah taught A^han,
but to our own shame, and the consusion of our faces; For woe now unto us, that
we have sinned.

I Will give you one observation more from the Text, woe now unto us; the pain,
that is present, so we are to judge, so it would be i^ that great Judge of all
do not forbear us: but the sin: that is past, the pleasure that was in it, that
i^ gone; that we have sinned, this is ever the sting of sin. The fruit that it
brings forth, is shame, the reward it leaves behind is death; all the worth of
it is woe. Woe now unto us, that we have sinnod.

What remains now, but that the sense of our misery, and the sight Exodus 31. 31.
of our sins like, A^ton and Hur make us, bold up our hands, with Moses unto
God in crying? That ceremony is not out of season now, it is all that remains,
and let us cry a great and a strong cry unto God, saying: O Lord we have sinned
a grievous sin, therefore if thou pardon our sin, thy mercy shall appear: and
let us withal believe assuredly, that for the strong crying of his son, he
will hear our faithful, and unfeigned, though but weak, and feeble cries; for
his satisfaction which be once made, he will forgive our sins, and accept of
our repentance. To whom with the Father, and the holy Ghost, three Persons, but
one God, blessed for ever, be all praise and glory, now, and ever. Amen.

THE THIRD SERMON.
1 COR 10. 16, 17. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of
the body of Christ?

17. For we that are many, are one bread and one body, because we are partakers
of one bread.


THese words are an argument of the Apostle, and such an argument which is
(...), taken ab axiomate concesso, against which there could be no disputing:
he appeals to themselves (...), which were able to judge of the truth of it;
and if to judge, then to contradict it if not true.

1. Two things are to be taken notice of about it.

My beloved, flee from Idolatry, for Idolaters have fellowship with Devils; and
I would not have you which drink of the Cup of the Lord, drink of the cup of
devils; which are partakers of the Lords table, be partakers of the table of
devils, verse 20, 21. Neither indeed can there be any communion between Christ
and Belial: now they might possibly except; Though they did eat of things
sacrificed to Idols, yet they did not believe they had any communion with
devils, or that they were in so doing made partakers of the table of devils The
Apostle answers that reply by a double argument; Israel after the flesh, which
did still observe the ceremonies of the Law, and the legal sacrifices; are not
they which eat of the sacrifices, partakers of the Altar? verse. 18. and if of
the Altar, then of the Idol which is over the Altar: and though the Idol be
nothing, yet of the Devil to whom the Gentiles sacrifice in the Idol, verse
19. The other argument taken from the Christians which are after the spirit,
which have an Altar too, Heb. 13. 10. though only mystical, and far superior
to theirs, because more spiritual, of which they which are partakers, all
worthy receivers have a communion with the things signified upon the Altar. The
Corinthians themselves were not ignorant of that; the Apostle speaks unto
them as men that understood it was so, verse 15. he carries it not out upon his
own authority, bu^ with their knowledge and assent: The cup of blessing which
we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? and if there be
communion in these, there is communion in those; if with God and Christ in his
Altars, then with the Idol and the Devil in his Altars. This is the
coherence, and the inference of the Text.

This being already affirmed by the Apostle, and acknowledged by the
Corinthians; for his interrogation, is it not? is Emphatica affirmatio: the
whole argument is grounded upon an Hypothesis which must not be denied; we ma^e
no more work to prove it, but wait upon the Holy Ghosts further illustration
of it, as he shall enable me, and your patience permit.

There is one word for the most part praedominant in every Text, in this the
word Communion is it; it is the chief vein in the body of it, and runs through
every line and part, and it is very fit for the season: Communion now
especially to be spoken of; when there is so much need of Communion, Communions.
them a several part.

The first is Sacramental, between the signs, and the things signed; Calicis.
The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ?

The second is the Spiritual, between the things signed, and the Capitis.
receivers; We are all partakers of one bread, which though last in the Text,
is the second to be inserted; because by the Apostle it is made the cause of

The third Communion which is mystical, between the receivers, Corporis,
and themselves one with another; for we that are many, are one bread, and one
body; or to read the words more agreeable to the original, and therein I have
the judgment of Beza; Because there is but one bread, we that are many are one
body.

The first of these is peculiar to the season, the Sacrament at the solemnity
of the Sacrament; and the ground of the other two. For first there is Communio
Calicis; and from thence springs the second, our Communion with Christ, which
is Capitis; and the third, our communion one with another, which is Co^poris:
Saint Austine affirms them all. Sacramentum Pietatis, vinculum charitatis,
signum unitatis, in Johan: Tract. 27.

I call them all Communions, because they are all cum unione; and where there
is union, there needs must be communion. Though (...) in the original be said
only of the first which is Sacramental; and (...) of the other, which is
mystical; yet they are made to differ but as the effect and the cause; the
ancient translations know no difference between them, these last ought to have
as full and as firm communion as the first: the end of that being to effect
these, the Sacramental Communion for our spiritual, which is with Christ our
head; and for our mystical which is with one another, our body; Ideo
institutum ut corpus in terris capiti quod est in Coelis coadunetur. Aug. Ser.
28. in Erem.

I begin with the first, Communio Calicis, the Sacramental Communion; and that
because it is the seal of all the rest, the cement of all our Calicis.
Communions, the Union of Communion. The Cup of blessing which we bless, is it
not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The Bread which we break, etc.

Now a Communioni^s rightly defined a relation between two, or Paci^.
union of two or more in one thing which is common. In the sacrament are two
things; 1 The signs, 2 The things figned: These two, by the Outward sign.
virtue of Divine operation, are made one, and thence is the Sacrament rightly
styled, A Communion: until this Union come, there is no Communion at all, res
terrena, and Coelestis, which Iraeneus makes the parts of the Sacrament, never
come together, they are at distance: look how high the heaven is from the
earth, nec verit as signo, nec virtus Sacramento, says Cyprian, till they meet
in one conjunction; no truth there I ward grace.
in the sign, no mercy here from the things signed, till mercy and truth both
meet: all the virtue in the Sacrament is in the Union of the parts, and when
that Union is, there is then a Communion.

Take we a view of the parts; we must know them first, before we can say any
thing of their Union, or of the Communion of them.

The first is res terrena, the outward and visible sign, which is in Ou^wa^d
fight.
effect but one, though in number two, even as the thing signed, one invisible
grace, or as St. Bern: says, rather unus Christus, in quo est omnis gratia:
formally the signs and the things figned, are but one, but materially two,
says the School.

They are two in number, so delivered by Christ at the first Institution, so
exhibited by the Apostle, at the reinstauration; and so received by our Church,
and all places where rightly received, at the Solemnization; and these two
severally considered, and not jointly, the Bread asunder from the Wine, the
better to illustrate the death and passion of our Savior, which was in the
separation of his Blood (which is the life) from the Body: but after they are
received, they come together again, as they did this day, the Resurrection,
Christ now dying no more. The Commemoration is of Christ's death, butthe
Communion of Christ alive.

The signs being two in number, are severally to be represented, so in the
Text, as they are at the time: we consider them in that Order the Apostle lays
them down, and content our selves with that reason which Hiereme and Anselme
give for his speaking of the Cup first, because he had more to speak of the
bread last; not to invert the Order by a figure, but to divert his speech
whither he first intended it, Bread being a more proper Symboll of Union than
Wine, not so soon falling into parts, not so easy a subject of separation as
that is; and of Union his intent was to speak.

The Cup] that is first mentioned in the Text: by a Synecdoche, it is The Cup.
put for the Wine in the Cup: That which is in the cup, St. Chrysostom. reads
it: The Papists which boast so much of their keeping the literal sense of the
Sacrament, allow of this figure, no man was ever so much est ranged from common
speech, as not to understand it: The Wine is the figne, the Cup by a figure put
for it; but yet it is not the Wine in any cup. The Psalmist speaks of one, In
the hand of the Lord there is a Cup, and the Wine is mixed, his enemies shall
drink the dr^gs of it. And in Jeremy there is a cup of Wine of indignation,
those that did drink of it did spue and fall, and rise no more. The Apostle
disting^^es from that, and calls it, The Cup of blessing.

The Scripture uses commonly to express the blessing of God by the Metaphor
of a cup: the abundance of blessing by the filling and overflowing of a cup,
Psalm. 23. 5. The Navell of the Spouse was as a round Cup, Can^. 7. ^. The
Heathen used to crown their cups in the time of plenty; and Calvin reports that
the Jews seats had their cup, an holy drinking, in which consisted the
solemnity of their action, and thence seems to come the Cup of Salvation the
Psalmist speaks of, which they used to drink at their solemn meetings, in a
gratulatory remembrance of their Deliverance; these are all far inferior
unto that our Apostle speaks of, which (...) he calls the Cup of blessing.

Two ways it may be called the Cup of blessing. First, from Gods blessing for
us. 2. From our blessing of God for it.

1. Gods blessing of it for us; the words of Institution are, He took the Cup
and blessed it: in which there is a double power. 1. A power of Cons^cration.
2. A power of Sanctification. By the first the Cup is made a Symboll, separated
from a civil or common use, to a religigious and holy intendment. By the
second, the Symboll is made effectual, to incorporate a right receiver into
Christ, whereof it is made a Symbol. (...) will extend to both, whichis the
word for both. Oecumeni us takes it for (...), which is consecrare. Beza for
the other, (...), which is sanctificare. Of the first there are infinite
examples in the old Testament, blessing of the Sacrifices, the consecrating of
them. Of the second we have a pregnant one in thenew: every Creature of God is
good, and is sanctified by the Word of God, (...). 1 Timothy 4. 5. Both these make
the Sacrament necessarily to beof Divine Institution; none but God may appoint
his figne, none blesseit but he, to make it effectual to the receiver; other
Creatures are of his blessing, in his first Institution they had that, Genesis 1.
and by his blessing of them, we receive all our benefit from them; but that was
but (...), his bare word; and man lives by that, Every word which coneth from
the mouth of God, Matthew. 4. 4. But in his second Institution, there is (...)
the good Word of God; much good must needs come from that; the Creature, the
Cup which is blessed with it, is indeed the Cup of blessing.

Besides the true effects of it in a worthy receiver, make it appear a Cup of
blessing: it is the only fap of our Spiritual life, the Autidote against the
deepest Consumption, the water of life, which whosoever drinks worthily, shall
never thirst any m^re. Haustus ej us neihi Nectar erit, it is the Wine of
Angels, the Cup of Salvation, the Waters of Comfort, the Springhead of
eternal happiness. In many things Christ has deserved well at our hands, but
in none so much as this. Super omnia it reddit amabilem, bone Jesu, Calix
redemptionis meae, says Bernard, it is a Cup of spiced Wine, Cant. 8. 2.
Christ kept the good Wine till the last, and then gives it to his friends to
drink: to his welbeloved to ^ake her merry, Cant. 5. 1. it is a cup for the sad
heart to cheer it, for the merry heart to confirm it; to quench our spiritual
thirst, to cure our spiritual grief: well may it receive from us these
Eulogies, which receive by it (...); so much blessing. There is Isaacs
blessing, The Dew of Heaven in it; and Calebs blessing, the springs above in
it; and that which is above all, and worth all, there is Gods blessing, it is
the Cup of blessing: from his blessing of it for us, that first, and that is
poculum benedictum, as well as benedictionis.

2. From our blessing of God for it; The Cup of blessing which we bless: there
is the same word for it. (...), but yet not altogether of the same sense:
Aliter nos Deum, aliter Dens nos: God blesses with power, and makes that to
be of force, which he says, we bless God withpraise; Gods blessing is real,
ours but verbal: His cum effectu, ours at the best, but cum affectu: his is
operative, his word is ever a work with all, ours only optative: it is the
greater only that can bless the lesser, according to that of the Apostle,
effectually: and he is the greatest, we the least; but ei benedicimus, cum de
co been dicimus; we bless him, when we speak well of him, when we confess his
praise, when we speak well of him: though so well as he has deserved of us, we
cannot speak. And hence is the Sacrament called Eucharistia, which is a giving
of praise and thanks, which is the word of institution, Matthew. 26. 27. and
(...) and (...) in the Original are Synonima, says Beza, to give praise and
thinks, and to bless.

And yet this is not all the blessing is intended, Cui benedicimus: has
reference to the Cup, we bless the Cup as well as God for the cup: (...),
says Oecumenius. The consecration of it is the blessing of it, the setting it
a part to an holy use, the praising of God for it, the praying unto God for a
blessing upon it; all these does the word of blessing extend unto: and one
thing more then these which is not to be forgot. (...) is a word for
benevolence, and charity, The Sacrament it self was wont by the Ancients to be
called (...) a Collection, a Gathering; because there used ever at such
gathering of the people to receive, to be a gathering for the poor withal. Let
not this slip, call it a Cup of blessing from thence, let the poor receive a
blessing from you, that you may from God. Calix (...), of Gods benevolence and
charity to you, of yours to his poor members for him; The first of these
belongs only unto us, which have the ministerial power of consecration: We
bless, the Apostle speaks it in our persons: but the other belongs to you, as
well as us, to bless God for it, to pray for his blessing upon it, but then
you must remember that your blessing is not operative, but only optative, a
wish; not a work; that belongs to God, as I said before, but this to us: so the
words cui benedicimus, may be said of all: and that is all needs be said of it:
The first sign, the Cup of blessing.

I pass to the second: the Bread which we break; Th^se signs are The b^ead.
one, as Joseph said of Pharoabs dreams; one in nature, yet two in number, they
make both but one part of the Sacrament: one thing is in effect signified by
both; yet one was not thought sufficient for usby our Savior, either to show
his death, which is the end of the Sacrament: or to seal to our faith, which is
the use of it, and by two signs, as by twowitnesses will be an end of strife.

We may yield three reasons for it, why these, and why both these are exhibited
by our Savior.

Man li^eth not by bread only; nor yet wine alone, there is no living alone by
the Cup, though some make a shift to stay by it long enough, yet they cannot
live by it; man is made of flesh and blood, and needs both to feed him, Bread
and Wine; and in our spiritual food, Christ would have no want: he takes them
both, they are the best, the cleanest food of our life, and so fittest to
represent the food of the soul.

pressum antequam expressum, before it is made fit to drink: So was Christ's
body, The Plowers plowed upon his back, the soldiers thrashed him, the Jews
fifted him, the teeth of the Lions to Ignatius, the teeth of death to him,
ground him small enough, the grave was the Oven to bake him; So was his blood;
the Cross was the press: The Prophet might well ask him, why are his Garments
red? So many thorns, and nails, such a wound in his side, were windows enough
to let out all his blood: The Bread and the Wine, very aptly intimate all this;
and this is even all, the end of the Sacrament.

of Union as these are. So are the faithful kneaded, and knit together, so
incorporated into one: and therefore says Saint Austine, Christ commends unto
us his body and blood in those things, quae ex multis redigunt in unum, that so
the Sacrament might be signum unitatis, a very Communion, as it shall appear
after: and to be this is another end of the Sacrament.

The signs then are both fit, other reasons might be given, but these are the
chief: but yet a reason would be given, why the Apostle calls not this sign,
the Bread of blessing, as well as he did the other, the Cup of blessing; it is
to be observed besides, that in the 11 to the Corinthians, Verse 24. where the
Apostle falls upon this matter again, there he mentions blessing only of the
Bread, and not of the Cup at all; belike he thought once naming it in both, was
enough for both, and that his saying of it once was enough to send us to his,
quod accepi a D^mina, to the first institution of it, and there we find them
both blessed a like, Matthew. 26. 26, 27. and it is worth the marking: that the
word which the Apostle uses for the blessing of the Cup, is the same that the
Evangelist uses there for the blessing of the Bread; (...) in both; and the
word which the Apostle uses in the other for the blessing of the Bread, is the
same that the Evangelist uses for the blessing of the Cup: it is Eucharistia
in both, to show that the words are both of one sense, and that the signs were
both alike blessed.

But besides, he speaks not here of the blessing of the Bread, because he was
to mention a necessary Ceremony, belonging to the sign, being indeed a part of
it, which may not be left out; and that is, the breaking of the Bread, and that
alone made the words of the Text full: The Bread which we break; and of this
mind is Pareus.

Breaking of the Bread is a most significant Ceremony annexed to the sign, it
does best show the Lords death of any: not that any such thing was done to
Christ's body, a bone of him could not be broken: I will not say with Saint
Chrysostom, he suffers that to be done in the Sacrament, which he could not
suffer to be done him upon the Cross, we may not think that he does suffer any
thing there, neither does that Father think so: but it is broken to show his
many sufferings, of what nature, of what number soever they were, breaking is a
Metaphor to express them, and the Prophet Isaiah has it of his passion; He
was broken for our iniquities, Isai 53. and the Apostle speaks it fully, Hoc
est Corpus meum quod pro vobis frangitur.

This Ceremony our Savior himself used at the institution, He brake the Bread:
to show indeed that he was not only broken in his passion, but he was willingly
broken, that he did break himself; for indeed, the nails, and the thorns, and
the spear could not have broken him, not so much as his skin, no more then the
soldiers could break his legs, had not he been willing to have it done, to be
broken; had not he been principal agent in it, as well as sole Patient of it,
and broke himself.

As he used it then, from his institution, we use it still. The Bread which we
break: and indeed, the rather to show that we our selves were chief act ours in
his breaking, it was for us, for our sakes he was content to be broken, we did
sit, our sins, all of us had an hand in breaking him: and in sign of that it is
sti^l, The Bread which we break.

But the chief cause of our breaking of it, is that which Saint Chrysostom
gives patitur frangi ut omnes impleat; every one could not take a little; if
Christ did not suffer himself to be made so little; and to show he gave his
body to be crucified for all, he appoints his sign to be broken for all. This
Ceremony and no other, he appointed for this sign, we may not so well away
with that of the Papists, which use round Wafers, and give to every one, one,
no breaking at all; nor yet, so properly allow of that of ours in some places,
cutting and mangling of the Bread, and not any sign of breaking; Christ was
known at first in the miracle of five Loaves, and there was breaking of Bread,
after the Resurrection he was made known unto the Disciples by breaking of
bread: The Apostles practice in the Primitive Church was, breaking of Bread,
and in the Sacrament he makes it his Ceremony, He brake the bread: all
Authority, all Antiquity makes especially for this Ceremony, and being it self
of such use, it behooves us to make much of it too: and so much to be spoken of
it, and of the first part of the Sacrament, The outward sign.

We be come now to the second part of the Sacrament, Res caelestis, part. The
inward Grace.
The inward and spiritual grace: which answers to the signs in number; yet is
in nature but one; Vnus Christus in quo omnis gratia, says Bernard, yet Christ
gave both: His body to be crucified, and his blood to be shed: his body to be
meat indeed, his blood to be drink indeed: and in the Sacrament he instituted
signs of both: The Cup which we bless, the Bread which we break: they are
both as yet to be considered severally, till we come to the Communion; to their
coming into one, the joining of them both together. As yet we take the Text in
parts; the second part is now to be taken notice of, and in that, according to
the order of the Apostle.

1 The Blood of Christ] Some take it Metaphorically for the soul The blood.
of Christ, so in the Law: Sanguis est anima. Christ indeed gave himself, and
he did consist of soul and body both, he had not took upon hi^ our nature else,
if he had not had a perfect humane soul, neither had he redeemed any soul at
all, if he had not had a soul himself: Toll animam Christi and Praesta quid
Deus redemit, says Tertullian to Marcion. And in his soul he suffered more
then in his body; the fears, the sorrows, the wounds of it, are past any man's
expression; witness his heavy complaining, Anima mea tristis est: his strong
crying: Pater si possibile est: his bloody sweating, his fear, his whole Agony,
none but he could ever feel such wounds, the guilt of a world of sin, the sense
of the wrath of God, none but his soul could carry such sorrows: Something it
is meet should be to remember them, as well as those of his body: the soul
cannot be resembled by any thing: the blood carries the nearest resemblance.
Sanguis est anima, or at least, in loco animae, we may allow of that.

If not that, then take it literally: his natural blood, the very substance of
it, that which he gave so liberally to be shed upon the Cross: the Blood of
the Paschall Lamb, the blood of all the Jewish sacrifices, were but
Commonstratives of that: that is not now to be had, not to be shown again.
Christ suffered once for all: his offering of himself was but once
substantially to be made, and made by himself; his flesh, and blood are now
glorified with his Godhead, and become impatible, Care and sanguis usurparunt
regnum Dei in Christo, says Tertullian, only we remember that: and the Wine in
the Cup is the nearest resemblance of it; not Commonstrative as the Type, but
Commemorative, of the Truth; of his Blood. That

We may add to it: the Blood of Christ Metonimically, the merit of his Blood;
that which he effected by shedding of his Blood, the remission of sins, our
reconcilement, and peace with God, our Righteousness. Sanctification,
Redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. All these through his Blood, through Faith in his
Blood. His Blood which speaks better things then the Blood of Abel: this
cried for vengeance, his was Sanguis clamans too, but it spoke, Father forgive
them: it cried for mercy and reconcilement. The benefit is specially intended
by the Blood, the purging of sin, and purchasing of peace: this is chiefly to
be remembered, and we do this when we say the Blood of Christ. For it is not the
substance of his Blood, that cleanses, it comes not to all, it comes not at
all: but the merit of it by the efficacy and virtue of it; this was the end of
our showing it, and this is the sum of what may be said of the first: The
Blood of Christ.

The next is the Body of Christ, we consider that also two ways, The Body.
and both of them are intensive in my Text: First, Substantiam Corporis:
Secondly, Efficaciam and meritum, both are to be remembered in this part.

First, The Body the substance of it, The same Body which was crucified: Corpus
quod pro vobis traditum est, are the words of the institution. The Syrian
interpreter renders it, Pagra, which says Beza is properly, Corpus mortuum, it
is to show his death, and it cannot be showed plainer then by such a word,
which signifies his dead Body; That we must show: the Bread which is broken is
his sign, Corporis quod frangitur, which is broken for you, 1 Cor. 11. 24. And
when we show that, we show his w^unds, and stripes, his beating, and brusing,
and bearing, all that he did suffer on his body; the Commemoration is to be of
his passion.

Secondly, we remember the merit of his passion; that, for which he gave his
Body to be crucified; the purchase for which he paid such a price: the
remission of sins: they were all laid upon his Body: David's sin upon David's
son; Dominus transtulit peccata tua, are the words of Nathan to him; not
abstulit, but transtulit, from thee upon him; and not only his, but ours, he
bare our sins, faith Isaiah 53. He bare them on his Body on the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.
24. we were sold to sin, to death; our body to the grave, our soul to hell. To
corruption to torment he gave himself for us, both body and soul, ut redimeret,
says Saint Paul, Tit. 2. 14. Remission, Redemption, are the main effects of
his passion; we cannot remember his death, but we must remember the desert, and
merit of it. So I have done with the parts severally, the outward sign, the
inward grace: Rem terrenam and C^lestem: we come now to the Communion, or their
coming into one, to make up the Sacrament: though the one part be on earth, the
other in heaven; and look how high the heaven is from the earth, yet they may
meet, they must meet, else there will be no Sacrament at all: Nulla virtus
Sacramento, says Cyprian; they must be in Common, or there will be no
Communion: and then the Text will not be true, which says; The Cup of
blessing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communi^n of the Body of Christ?

Communion is ever, cum unione; when two or more meet in one, The Co^^^en.
there is a Communion. It is diverse ways: either by nature, which is
Physical; as when soul and body are united into one person, there is Communion
between them, by reason of tha^ union. Secondly, by miracle, which is
Metaphysicall; as when two Natures, God and man were united into one Christ.
There is also Communion between them by virtue of that Union: neither of these
is this here; for it is no substantial, no Hypostaticall V^ion, and yet the
Fathers have used both these to illustrate this Commun^on. Thirdly, by local
coberence; as when many stones are in one heap. Fourthly, by actual
inexistence; as where accidences, as colors, etc. are in one ubject, none of
these yet: for the body and blood of Christ may not be thought to be, Locally,
Actually, any where but in Heaven: The Heavens must contain him till his
second, and last coming. There is yet another way. Fifthly, Intellectually,
Sacramentally, which consists in mere relation, which is the nature of
Communion.

Sacramental Union is that Communion we speak off: and it consists in a
Mystical, and Mutual relation, between the signs, and the things signed:
Sacramentum est rei Sacrae signum, is Saint Austins definition, and allowed,
and approved by all, when the sign comes to signify the sacred thing, it
comes to be a Sacrament; and this coming is the Communion. We look to two
things: 1. The cause of it. 2. The effects.

First, Divine institution is the cause. The Rainbow (it is generally The
cause.
agreed upon, was before the flood, yet) was not any sign of the promise of
God, of not destroying the world with a deluge, till after the flood; it was in
nube to be seen there, but not signum in nube, till God first appointed it his
sign to No^h. The Wine in the Cup, the Bread on the Table were in use before,
blessed in their creation for temporal food; but not in any use to a
spiritual life, till blessed again at their institution; they were not signs
of any sacred things, till God appointed them his signs to his Apostles; and
as words which come to the ears, are signa rerum, of those things which the
mind means to express: if aptly appointed, and do conveigh the very things to
the understanding of the Auditor: if he be quick, you would wonder at it, to
see how soon, at a word speaking, a thing of never so great distance can come
to his knowledge: so these earthly things, which are signa rei sacrae, which
come unto the eyes, and the other senses, being aptly appointed by the first
institutor, do conveigh unto the faith of the worthy receiver, the very things
themselves; and though they were before at never so much distance, they come to
be present to our faith, as other things expressed by words, are to our reason
and sense. To make signs of such, belongs only unto him which can give the
things: and his body and blood none can give but himself; none can make a sign
to be a means to conveigh it, to be apledge to confirm it, but he: the Elements
are empty and non significant; Accedat verbum ad Elementum, says Austin: his
word* his work that comes, and it becomes a Sacrament; the sign is made
effectually, to signify the sacred thing: and that making a sign, is the
cause of the Relation of the Communion first.

Secondly, being so made by the virtue of the Divine Institution, The effects.
the effects of Sacramental Communion follow. The signs themselves, have a
Communication of the Proprieties of the things signs: Communicatio Idiomatum
is the chief effect: As by the Hypostaticall Union of the two natures in
Christ, the humane nature is invested into the Divine, the manhood being
assumed, is allowed to carry away the properties of the Godhead, in the person
of Christ. And thence comes it, that the Son of God is called, the Son of man:
and the Lord of life was crucified and slain. The Mother of God, the Blood of
God, are usual speeches with the Fathers: so in this Sacramental Union by
virtue of that Communion, in the words of institution, the Bread is called the
Body of Christ, the Wine his Blood. When we give the Bread we say: The Body of
our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. the Cup, we say, The Blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ: The Bread, though it be res terrena, is called Panis vitae, the food of
Angles, the Bread which came down from Heaven, The food of the soul: Panem
Dominum, S Cyprian calls it, and not only Panem Domini: and all this per
Metonymiam signi, because of the Communion it has with the things signed, with
the Body of Christ.

Neither is this Communion only nominall, but also real: the very substance of
Christ's Body and Blood is by it communicated to worthy receivers: they are
verily, and indeed, taken and received of the faithful, says our Church. Not
in the signs essentially, but by the signs effectually; for we must hold us
to this, that the Union is not Physical, nor Metaphysicall, not Essential,
nor Local, but Intellectual, and Sacramental, and yet real, and not only
nominall. Ask what the Bread, and Wine is, I answer the Body and Blood of
Christ. Ask me how or which way: I answer Sacramentally; because they are the
Communion of the Body and Blood of Christ, and not that properly neither; for a
substance cannot be a Relation, but by a Metonymy of the effect; because they
make us partakers of the Body and Blood of Christ, they are called the
Communion of his Body and Blood.

And being Communis substantiae, they are also Communio efficaciae, they make
us partakers of the merit of Christ's Body and Blood; those things ever bring
their worth and dignity with them, remission of sins, redemption,
sanctification, salvation; all graces come along with Christ, in quo est omnis
gratia. Habent omnia qui habent deum habentem omnia. St August.

And as there is Communion with them, so there is communition from them: we may
not amiss take the word Communio, a Communiendo: that is to be reckoned among
the benefits we receive; so our Church reckons it, the strengthening of our
souls: Vis semper fortior in Union; nothing can prevail; against earth, when
heaven is joined to it: if God be with us who can be against us? and he is with
us here by Sacramental Union he comes into the Communion.

Thus have we made the signs, and the things signed to meet, and but to mere,
for we may go no further; my Text calls it but a Communion, and I take it to be
a full exposition of our Saviors words at the Institution; This (speaking of
the Bread) is my Body, says he, A Communion of his Body, says the Text: This
(the Wine) is my Blood: A Communion of his Blood, says the Apostle. If a
Communion of it, then not it, as the Papists will have it; Sacramentally we
allow it to be it, signum rei; not it substantially, but only a Communion of
it. Had it been it, grossly, carnally, The Apostle should have said, not the
Cup, but the Blood, not the Bread, but the Body; For the Bread, and the Wine
both according to their Doctrines are gone, only accidences remains, then he
had committed no small Tautology. The Bread which is my Body, is the Communion
of the Body of Christ: The Wine in the Cup, which is the Blood it self, is a
Communion, of the Blood of Christ; Indeed they do not well away with the
Communion, it crosses them too much, therefore they almost cross it out. It
may appear by other particula^s. Their private Mass shuts it out quite: Their
public Mass justles it out not a little: They have no Communion of the Cup
at all; The Laity are not allowed it: and if there be no Cup, there is no
Communion there: neither is there any Eucharist, if not it; (I do only observe
that by the way) for the word (...), from whence comes the name of Eucharist,
is no where used at the Institution, but at the Cup, and if no Cup, no giving
of thanks for it, of the Peoples part none, which have part of none: So
Communion and Eucharist they shuffle out; and worse then this, Christum denuo
crucifigunt, while they separate his Blood from his Body, without any
Communion, without any coming together again. But this is no place for
controversies: be we sure to keep it right, as we do call it right: and from
this very Text we call it a Communion.

And that we may keep it right, there must be on our parts a coming on to the
Communion: where the dead body is, there the Eagles will be gathered together:
and no where is the dead Body of our Savior more plainly represented: G^t we
up upon the Wing of pure Devotion, of holy Meditation, sore we aloft like
Eagles: Sursum Corda: if we come not, there may be Communion for others, none
for us: for only those that receive, are of the Communion, those that cate of
the things of the Altar, are partakers of the Altar; if ye cat not, you are
not of the Communion of the Body of Christ; If you drink not you are not of the
Communion of the Blood.

But yet, look how you come, for if you come unworthily, you will not be of
that Communion neither: we may not so tie the things signed to the signs, the
Body and Blood, to the Bread and Wine, as if whosoever receives the one must
also receive the other. Saint Cyprian resolves it well: Tantum utilitatis
quisque reportat quantum Vasculo fidei Colligit; others which come without
faith, Lambunt Petram, sed nec inde mel sugunt, nec oleum: They go away without
joy; because they came without faith: Like Mary Magdalen, they see the Lord
Corporal, the clean Linen lie, wherein our Savior was wrapped, but find him
not, and say without any comfort; They have taken away the Lord. Panem Domini
they find, but not Panem Dominum; neither do I know how they should; he is
present only to the eye of faith, not of sense: Non ventris sed mentis cibus
est; The hand, the mouth, the teeth, the stomach of Faith: Credere est edere.
Come with this then, and we come right, we shall no doubt be of the Communion.

And as you come with Faith, so you must come with Love: giving and forgiving,
are the tenor of it: both are done to you here by Christ, he gives you his
Body and Blood, and they are given for the remission of sins: both must be done
by you, unto your brethren. Then there will be a full Communion on all sides:
of Christ with us by mercy and truth, of us with Christ by Faith and Love? of
the outward signs, and the inward graces, of both with the worthy receivers:
of the receivers with themselves; for so from this Sacramental Communion, will
spring our spiritual with Christ our head; and from thence our Mystical, with
h^s Body the Members, till at last we come to a perfect Union with the
Communion of the Saints, which are complete in Heaven, which with our Savior
still drink of the fruit of this Vine, new in the Kingdom: Whither he bring us
all for his Infinite merits, and mercies, Amen.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
1 COR. 10. 17. For we that are many, are one Bread and one Body: because we
are all partakers of one Bread.
WE be come now to the second part of the Text; the second Communion, that
which is spiritual, between the things, and the receivers; Vnus Christus in
quo est omnis gratia, he is the thing signed between him and us, and it is
properly called Communio Communio. Capitis.
Capitis.

Communio Calicis was well premised, because it is the ground and foundation of
the other Communions; for thence issues this our Communion with Christ, They
that eat of the Sacrifices are partakers of the Altar, Verse 18. By eating we
enter into it, and upon that we pitch it, in the last words of the Text, We
that are many, are one Bread, because we are all partakers of one Bread.

Alimentum fit Alitum, says the Philosopher; so it is in our spiritual food:
Except we eat the Body of Christ, he dwells not in us; but if we eat him, if
we digest him, both which are to be done by faith, as has been showed before,
Participatione ea Respectu Communicationis Idlomatum dictum.
corporaliter nobis inerit Christus, says Cyrill; his very flesh is made ours,
as we are in him by a certain Physical Identity in the Hypostaticall Union,
our humane nature and his Divine made one: so he shall be in us though neither
by transubstantiation, nor by consubstantiation, not by natural, nor corporal
contract; but by spiritual and real Union, his person, and ours made one.
Sacramentally he is in his sign; Spiritually in the receiver.

The receivers are all those, which do worthily partake of one Bread; their
Union with Christ, was the end of that I^stitution of Christ: that Sacramental
Communion was to be a mean to ^ffect, and a seal to confirm our spiritual:
ideo institutum ut Corpus in terris capiti quod est in Coelis coadunetur, says
Saint Austen: Panis Daminus to the right receiver comes along, cum pane Domini.
They that eat of the Sacrifices, are partakers of the Altar, is a Proposition
unquestionably true; and then by consequence, if they partake of one Bread,
they also partake of one Body, and of this (...) says my Text. We are all
partakers of one Bread.

And it needs not trouble us, that the word in the Original is (...), when
before it was (...); there Communion, but partaking h^re; as if the Communion
between the signs, and the things signed, were fuller, then it is between the
receivers and them. Take one as the effect, and the other as the cause, so Beza
will have it, because by the partaking of the Bread, we come into the society,
and Communion of Christ: So the Apostle seems to intend it, we are one body,
one with him, because we are all partakers of one Bread; (...) symbolorum,
(...) is rerum, we place not our Union with Christ in participation, but in the
effect of that which is Communion, we fetch it thence, not seat it there; and
as from Christ's participation with our nature, where the Apostle uses the same
word, because the Children were partakers of flesh and blood, he also likewise,
(...) took part, Heb. 2. 14. did result the Hypostaticall Union of our nature
with him: So from our participation of one Bread, the Symboll of the Sacrament,
of which (...) does result the spiritual (...), the Union of his person with
us. Saint Ambrose upon my Text says it; non participatione taniun and
acceptatione, sed Vnitate Communicamus: Quemadmodum enim corpus unicum est
Christo; ita and nos per hunc panem unione conjungimur. So that, though not in
that, the act of partaking of that one Bread; yet by that, we come to the
Communion of Christ, though the Bread be but the Symboll of this Society, yet
upon the partaking of that, we come into the Communion of the thing it self,
which is signed by it, so that there is full out as firm Communion hence, as
was before;

And being a Communion between Christ and us, we call it rightly Communio
Capitis, in the Allegory of a Body, (which the Apostle he^r alludes unto)
Christ will not away with any other place then the head in the Body Mystical,
the supreme Head: In all other Allegories as of the Vine, and the branches, he
will be the R^ot which bears all, Romans 11. 18, and Radix arboris Caput est; of
the family, he the Master; and Dominus is ever Capu^ domus: In the Building
caput Anguli; in the Book, in Capite libri; and our tenor if it be right, must
hold in Capite too. All the Communion we have with him, depends upon this
Relation, and it is enough, we need desire no more. Communio Capitis, is near
enough.

This Communion of the Head with the Body, is neither Physical nor Corporal,
but Spiritual: the natural man cannot perceive it: how the Head in Heaven may
be united to a Body in Earth, is, (...), a riddle to humane reason. Who shall
fetch down Christ from above, or if he must be above still, Quomodo teneb^
absentem, says Saint Austen, in the person of a natural man? This is chiefly
to be explained, and about it two things.

1. What this Union is. Parts.
2. Wherein it does appear.
1. Esse, 2. Cognosci, are the material points about it.
1. It is Spiritual: the eye of Faith, and not of Sense can discern Esse.
it, Mitte manum fidei, and tractasti, says Austen in answer to Quomodo tenebo
absentem. That there is a Union, a being one with Christ, is plain from that
prayer of our Savior for his Disciples, and not for them only, but for all
believers: Father I pray thee that they may be one in us, as thou art one in
me, and I in thee, John 17. 21. but that being one is tanti^m spiritu and fide,
says Maldonate; and that sicut, there is not aequalitis, but cujusdam
similitudinis, says Chrysostom; for ^ssentiall Union, which is eternal,
between the Father and the Son; or Hypostaticall Union, which is substantial
between the Son and our nature, it cannot be; our personal Union is
spiritual, and no more.

Spiritual, because it is wrought by the Spirit; Faith is the fruit of Spirit,
and it is that which is the very essence of this Union, the nearest
symbolically quality that can be, between Christ and us. In every Union of
natural things, vis unitiva, some quality or other there must be, by which
they agree in one, something Medie Naturae. Fire and water can never be
reconciled alone, because they have none: in that greatest union of all, of God
and Man, Christ himself was factus Mediae Naturae. a Mediator: Earth and Heaven
had never met, but by his being exalted in Medium locum, the Cross was between
both, and Heaven there was content to stoop lowest, Earth being able to rise no
higher. In this Union of our persons with Christ, cum Capite, Faith is that,
vis unitiva, the Cement by which Caput Anguli is joined to the building, and
yet that is but a conjunction; no thing is conveyed into the other parts from
it: it is therefore more, the Ligament and sinew by which the Head is united to
the Body, and through which is conveyed all the benefit of being, and motion to
the members. Similitudo imaginis, that likeness, after which man was created,
had united him to God; but that was so defaced by the fall, God knew him not
for his Creature; nothing like in the world was left, all similitude between
God and him lost, till Christ repaired that Image again, washed it with his
Blood, and set Faith in the face of it; by that they may meet, there is
something like to bring them into liking, to make an union.

Neither is this Imaginary, a device for speculation; but real spiritual
things have the best and truest reality in them: The Fathers Illustrate it
diverse ways: as fire is united to red hot Iron, actually and virtually both,
it is no where more visible, more powerful for the time; as the Beams of the
Son are united to the air; as Wine and water contemperated and mixed together;
as wax to wax, and made into one lump: The Apostle gives a plain instance, he
that is coupled with an Harlot is one body; Erunt duo in carne una, is the
cousummation of marriage: in that sense it is called a Mystery, between Christ
and his Church: So he that is joined unto Christ, is one Spirit.

One Spirit, is but Metalepsis: one spiritual body is the meaning: Faith on
our parts, the Spirit on his part concur, and make a union.

You may see more, the ground of this will confirm the truth of it, and it is
in the words of the Text. We are all partakers of one Bread. There are four
sorts of unions, both Scriptures and Fathers use to Illustrate. First,
Eternal, between the Father and the Son. Secondly, Hypostaticall, between
the divine nature and humane. Thirdly, Conjugall and Matrimo^iall, between
husband and wife. Fourthly, Allegorical, as between the Vine and branch,
between Head and Members, between Bread and the receivers: each would afford
matter for a Sermon, I must insist only on that last.

That which we eat turns in carnem and sanguinem; alimentum fit alitum, if so
be, it be digested first, else it does not: Cibus Iadigestus famem satiat
animalem, non naturalem. It comes not into union with the body, by which it
might grow stronger, but is forceably cast out, though it stay the stomach for
a time: So it is in our spiritual food; they which know not how to digest it
by faith, have their appetite staid, not their grows, and strength augmented;
but if it be digested, it comes into one, it becomes one with us.

Thus are Christ and we made one: We have the Symboll, the Sacrament, the Seal
of it, of which we all eat, and wherefore do we eat, but ut uniamur? What is
more ours then that we have eaten? A nearer Symboll could not possibly be
thought on, of our incorporation, and making one with him; and yet St Bernard
says more; Et manducat nos and m^mducatur a nobis quo arctius illi
astringamur. In one and the same action he feeds on us, we feed on him: his joy
fills us; our faith feeds him: his body, his blood, his suff^rings, his
righteousness are meat and drink to us; our faith, our repentance, our
obedience, our salvation, are meat and drink to him: and those are one, (though
the comparison be without compa^is^n, yet) our Savior himself prays it may be
so; John 17. St Bernard proves it is so, between Christ and us: we one with him
abiding by faith and love; he one with us, a^iding by peace and truth: yet not
in that manner one, as they are; the d^ffer^nce of our nature and substance
still remains, which are one in the Father and the Son: only the diversity of
our Non c^hrrent a^essennarum, sed co^tinentia voluntar^m Lern.
wills reconciled, makes us one, one with the Father and the Son, and so one,
ut Deus and homo unus spiritus certa and absoluta veritate dicantur, si sibi
glutino amori^ inb^reant. So sure are we one, so real is our spiritual Union
with Christ our Head; if we eat the Bread, if we digest it, we are sure of it:
in reason, that we eat is the same with us: in Religion it is so too, and eat
it we do, we all are partakers of one Bread.

That this union is we are sure of, the Scripture every where bears witness
of it, we could not be branches, he the Vine; not members, he the head; not
precious stones built upon him, he the foundation, the chief corner stone; we
need not eat his flesh, nor drink his blood, the Cup which we bless, need not
be the Communion of his Blood, the Bread which we break the Communion of his
Body, no Communion at all indeed, but for this union: (...) might well be
spared, but for this, ut uniamur: it is the sign of it, the seal of it, the
ground of it, the cause of it: ut corpus in terris capiti in caelis: to make
them one, to make this union between Christ and us, Christus erat faciens
utrumque in unum. Christ's whole work was to do this, to make us one: our nature
one in the Hypostaticall union; our persons one in the spiritual: nec
pr^judicat rerum pluralitas huic unitati: for we that are many are one bread,
and one body, one bread partaking all of one bread; one body united all to one
head: one sign, one thing; we all though never so many partake of it: All the
believers bad one heart, and one mind, Acts 4. All of them are joined into one
head.

That this is, that was the first: I have been the longer, because it is a
matter of so much importance, and not so easily conceived: all our hope of that
union, Quae glorificat, which the blessed Angels and Saints enjoy, consists in
this our spiritual union, quae justificat, which is with Christ by faith: illa
praemium, haec meritum est, says Bernard, all cur^m rit is to be joined with
Christ. There is yet another work to be done to make this appear: else non
apparentis and non existentis, eadem est ratio, as good not be at all.

And yet, appear we cannot make it, to the eye of sense, Caput in Cognosci.
coelis, corpus in terris est: it is much too weak to be able to ken so far;
neither indeed is it necessary, that the hand or foot should see the heal; if
they feel it, if they find the use and benefit of it, that will be appearance
enough to them: and that is to be had of him.

Two ways it will appear.

1. By that which the head is to the body. Ways
2. By that the body is to the head.
Ways
of him. That it be, 1. Verum. 2. Perfectum. 3. Vnicum. 4. Pe^petuum. Christ is
all these unto the body.

1. Verum of the same nature with the body, not like Nabuchadnezzars Ver^^.
Image, whose head was of Gold, the breasts of Silver, the thighs of Brass^,
the feet of Iron, and Clay. And that he might be of the same nature, you know
he took upon him our nature: and therefore God, says the Apostle, has made
him head of the Church, Ephesians. 1. and that he is of the same nature appears.
First, by his suffering for us; he had not what to offer, till he had Corpus
aptatum, Heb. 10. he had not been the Savior of the body, if he had not had
that: Toll caruem Christi and praesta quid Deus redemit, says Tertullian to
Marcion. He redeemed not the Angels, quia non assumpsit, he took not upon him
their nature. Secondly, By his suff^ri^g with us, therefore says the Apostle,
it behoved him to be in all things like his brethren, that he might be a
merciful high Pri^st. And again, that by the things which he suffered, when he
was t^mpted, he might succor them that are tempted: for he is not an high
Priest which may not be touched with our infirmities: when he cried out upon
the way, Saul, Saul, why pe^secutest thou me? he was nearly touched: he could
not be an head, if he had not this, a sense of the bodies gri^vances. Secondly,
Again, to make him a true head, he must be united to the body. An head s^vered
from the body, is not the head; as good no head at all: a wrong head set on, a
right head cut off are much a like: the Joints, and Ligaments, and Nerves, are
all for that end derived from the head, that it may be set on. And of what
nature they are, you have heard before: Spiritus sanctus est nexus, and thence
is this union called spiritull. Thirdly, Again, ut sit verum debet esse vivum:
a true head, must be endued with the same soul the rest of the members are; and
such is Christ our head: the Spirit is the life of both, in the lead that is
fully, we have all received from his fuln^sse: that member which has not his
Spirit is not of his body, his children are led by his spirit: We may know by
this, whether we be in him or no, by the Spirit which he has given us. A true
head we may know him by this.

The second is a perfect head: such an one which has, First, Perfectum.
Reason. Secondly, Sense. Thirdly, Motion, Fourthly, Soundness. Fifthly,
Beauty in it. A^l are in him. First, The faculties of the soul, understanding,
will, prudence, providence, he knows all things, sustaineth, quickneth,
governs all things. Secondly, he seeleth our miseries, sees our wants,
hears our prayers, smells our sacrifices, tastes our charities, he
speaks and pleads for us, mak^th intercession for us. Thirdly, he moves
us, all spiritual motion in the body comes from him, holy d^sires, good works,
pure thoughts; in nature, in religion, life and motion, is a Capite: We see it
in those Creatures which are insectilia; cut them in pieces, that part lives
longest which cleaves to the head, the other soon dies: so it is in others: so
in our spiritual body: whatsoever is from the head is dead presently.
Fourthly, He is a sound and perfect head; ill humors which do infect the body,
flow not from him. All is like Aarons oil, which runs down from the head to the
skirts of the clothing: or like Hermons Dew which waters the Valleys: His
Influence ha^h no malignity in it, but rather healing to the members. Fifthly,
he is a fair and beautiful head, admits of no deformity, The fairest of ten
thousand, fairer then the children of men. All these show him to be a perfect
head.

The third, he is an only head, to have no head, acephali, to have Vnicum
more heads policephali, are both a like monstrous: privations of one,
divisions into many, ever tend to desolation: God and nature ever affect one,
and but one. God himself being Principalis Unit as, loves unity best,
especially in the best. And de ratione capitis est, unum esse: and therefore,
God after all things had been scattered both in Heaven and Earth by division,
by hearkening unto more heads then one, to the Serpents h^ad, in the
dispensation of the fullness of time, would gather them altogether again into
one, the word is (...). And that is properly a gathering together unto one
head; all gathering together is into one, as of sheep into one flock, of
materials for building into one pile, of many numbers into one sum, of many
grains into one loaf; but none so emphaticall, so fit in expression, as of many
members unto one head; and that one head is Christ. Him God has given to be
head of his body, which is the Church: and he is caput unicum, only one head:
all the heads of divinity, as great Maps in a little compass, as many plots in
a small Module, bring them together, contract them to one, they make but one
(...) one head, and that is Christ.

The fourth is, he is an head that never dies, death has no dominion
Perpetuam.
over him: even in Heaven when his body shall be removed thither, he will do
the part of an head. And while there is life in him, he will preserve it in his
body, the Church cannot dye, while her head lives, nor want while it has sense
and motion, and speech, and understanding to provide for it: Sum up all that
need be said of an head: all is in him, Verum, Vaum, Perfectum, Perpetuum, all
to be said, to be seen of him.

We have made this to appear sufficiently: the Communionis not ye^ full, if all
come from the head to the body, and nothing back again, from the body to the
head; two things it owes to the head at least.

1. Obedience.

2. Maintenance.

First Obedience to be ruled and governed, and moved by the head: Obedience.
it has the eyes to see, the brain to counsel, the will to put on, and all to
be sit to govern: if it go without the head, Mole ruit sua: shall the soot or
the hand say unto the eye, we have no need of thee? the Apostle makes this his
chief argument for obedience, Ephesians 5. 22, 23. Let Wives be subject to
their Husbands, for the Husband is the head of the Wife; as Christ is of the
Church. The head wheresoever it be, in the body Natural, Political,
Spiritual is to be obeyed.

The second is Maintenance, if the head be hurt or gone, as good all
Main^^nance.
the members be away; be the body never so entire, the members right in their
places, if the head hap to be away, as good they all asunder; Therefore all
Creatures strive most to defend their head; they had rather receive blows any
where else then there: The Serpent her self exposes her whole body to keep,
her head from bruising; you may mark how she gardeth it with her whole train,
the rather because she knows, that is laid at most: her head was to be broken
ever since the prevarication; so it is in others: In the body Politic the
enemy gives that charge that the Kings of Aram did, not to fight against great
or small, but only against the King, 1 Kings 22. 31. Therefore David's men had a
care of him, ten thousand of them were not so good as he; the light of Israel
was out if he were gone. So it is in other heads. All fencers play is most
against it; it concerns the body to defend it most, ibi fortiter opponere ubi
fortiter oppugnatur. So do Pagans, Infidels, Heretics, strike at our head; our
chief care if it be right, must be to defend it against them.

These are due from the body to it: and then there will be Communis cum Union,
which is best on both sides: of spirit and life from the head; Of Duty and
Defense from the body; it to guide, this to guard; it to lead, this to be lead;
this agreement if it be in all things, will make the union to appear
sufficiently, which is corporis cum capite, with Christ our head. Let us look
back once to the ground of this union which is in the Sacrament: by which we
that are many are one, one with Christ, because we have all partaken of one
bread.

The Communion was for this union: he comes to the outward signs, that by them
he may come nearer unto us; if we eat, we have him in us: nisi manducaveritis,
Ye shall not have him in you: and manducantibus vere ac realiter unitur corpus
Christi sicut panis, though the manner differ: This corporally the bread is,
that spiritually Christ is.

It concerns us much then, (...) that we may be of the other, (...): esse
participes ut simus consortes: to be of the Communion that which is
Sacramental, to be of it, to be at it, to eat, to eat often, that we may be of
this union with Christ here, quae justificat, which will bring us to that, quae
glorificat, our blessed union with God hereafter. Whither he bring us all. Amen.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
1 COR. 10. 17. We that are many, are one Bread, and one Body.
WE are still upon this theme: Bonum est nobis esse hic: therefore what the
Apostles would, we have done: Aedificavimus tria Tabernacula. We have staid a
time in two of them, we must not dwell there, Tents are not for mansions, we
must remove to the third: Communio corporis, which is mystical, will now take
up our Communio Corpor^s.
employment.

Yet we pitch this upon the same ground, we did the other. (...) is still causa
(...), our spiritual Communion which is capitis, our mystical Communion which
is corporis, spring from thence, from the Sacramental, which is calicis: we
are one bread and one body: because we are all partakers of one bread.

One body; there it is; we need not seek it by induction from the Text, which
is there literally, as we did the other, our Communion with Christ, cum capite:
that was as much intended as truly effected as this, though not so fully
expressed. And that must have been first: if not for honor which is ever due
to the head, yet for necessity, we must have premised that; there could be no
talk of the members growing into one body, if they be not first united into one
head: and in this sense Christ is caput Ecclesiae, because all begin there, as
the branches at the root, if they be not held to it by Ligaments and Nerves,
the skin, the flesh, and the veins never grow to them, never feed and nourish
them: But we have done with that, and now the body in its right place comes
next to be thought on.

One body is but one term of the Communion; duas oportet esse essentias ad
minus, ut sit Communio, seu unitio: two at least are required to all relation,
the Relatum is one, but the correlata are many, as many, as we are many; there
are many members, but one body: though we retain unity there, for the body can
be but one; yet we must admit of Multiplicity here, the members must be many.
Si omnia essent unum membrum, ubi corpus? says the Apostle; and so they are in
the Text. We that are many, are one Body.

The ground of this Relation is necessarily to be thought on, to make it up,
and it comes into the Text; one Bread, that is it: the Sacramental Communion
is the cause of the Mystical: that has ever been considered in all the parts
of the Text, and the Apostle will not have it left out here; two ways it comes
to be considered.

1. As it is the sign of it; bread, of the body, one bread of one body: signum
unitatis, Saint Austin calls it; for many grains go to make up that; many
members to make up this; Bread and Wine both of them, ex multis rediguntur in
unum; so we that are many are one body: this is Sacramental; and if we read
the Text right, as both the Original has it, and all the Ancient, both
Translators, and Expositors render it, it is thus; for there is one bread, we
also that are many, are one body, one as that is one, say Chrysostom, and
Ambrose, etc. Yet I doubt not but a good Spirit moved our modern Translators to
render it as my Text reads it: We that are many, are one bread, and one body,
one bread first; because we all eat of one bread, and vi fidei are in a manner
become one with that, as alimentum and Alitum are one, and one body by virtue
of that, one bread spiritually, one body mystically; yet the other is easier,
less strained, and therefore we will keep to that.

2. It is not only as a sign, but also as a cause of it, (...) is a causall;
because that is but one, the bread, as the Paschall Lamb was but one, to all
the house of Israel, one in a Mystical, and Spiritual sense, though
Numerically many; and we all partake of this one, all the Church of God, all
over the world, partakes of one and the same bread: in civil commerce to eat
of one bread, at one board, has ever been a pledge of unity and concord; so it
is in our mystical society, we are all of one Corporation, one body (...)
because we all partake of one bread. All these will come to be considered in
their places.

We begin with the Text: The Correlatives, We that are many. To the Church at
Corinth are the words directed, but may be assumed by us, by all that are in
the Church of God, wheresoever they be; place and time matter not in this
matter, nos illi multi, so Beza reads it: we are those many.

We: the Jews, and Turks cannot read this Text; illi multi, it is true, too many
they are, but such which come together into one, they are not materials of
this building, not sheep of this flock, not grains of this bread not members of
this body, at the best they are but of those other sheep our Savior speaks of,
Qui non sunt hujus Ovilis, or nondum sunt; in Gods good time they may be
brought, but as yet are not.

Besides them the Schismatiques cannot read it, illi multi, many they are, so
many as that the world wonders at it. The Arians and Donatis^s never overspread
the East and West part of the Church more in their times, then these in ours:
Like Egypts frogs, the whole Land is full of their croakings: But yet they are
many still, there is some good in that they come not into one, Quot homines,
tot sententiae, their perpetual differences among themselves, show they are
(...) and (...) not animated with one Spirit; they would be fearful to the
whole Church if they could be that, and like the Cake of Barley in the seventh
of Judges, they might tumble down into the Hosts and Armies of Israel, and
overturn them, but that they cannot be: their Cake which a flash of zeal has
heated, will prove dough, or rather like grains, not ground, they will not be
kneaded or knit into one Loaf: if at any time they come together, it is with
the sour leaven of malice, and uncharitableness, or of heretical and
Pharisaicall doctrines, the Leaven of the Law, which was to be cast out; not
with the Leaven of the Gospel, the Leaven of Faith and Charity. They soon fall
of having not the right Leaven, into many pieces, being not united by the
cement of the Spirit into one Body: sowing is all they are fit for, and to that
employment the enemy of the Church puts them, the whole field is every where
over-sown with them: These are many, but not (...) those many the Apostle
speaks of; for those being many are one bread, and one body.

But besides all these, there are many, of whom this Text may be said, which
are Materials of one building, sheep of one sold, branches of one Vine, grains
of one bread, members of one body: Which though they be dispersed on the
Mountains, are of one flock, belong to one shepherd, and know and understand
his call, though they be as divided members, here one, and that a little one on
this Page, and over leaf another, yet being cast up make but one sum, are
reckoned to one head; though they ly scattered like the dried bones in Ezekiels
vision, yet they shall come bone to bone, and the sinews, and the flesh, and
the skin shall come unto them, and their breath that they may live, and shall
be made up into one body; though they be but as an handful, in comparison of
others in the world, yet like the gleanning of Ephraim, they are better then
the whole Vintage of A^iezer: A little flock, a remnant, and other such terms
the holy Ghost calls them by, when he opposes them against the numerous
multitudes of others; yet they are many, enough stones for the building, enough
members for the body; God will not let any part be lacking, and there must be
many members to one body, and here they are many in the Text.

And that which is above all, nos illi multi, we for our parts, and whosoever
else which is of the Sacramental Communion, which is Calicis, and of the
spiritual which is Capitis; it needs not be disputed in what places we are,
while we are parts, whether the ear, or the eye, or the hand, or the foot,
whether of the honorable or less honorable, while we be members: the
administrations and functions are diverse, but they all serve the necessities of
the body. The whole Church is the Body of Christ; and we for our parts members
of it. 1 Corinthians. 12. 27. We may sure say the Text, We that are many, are one
Body.

But then that we may say it right (and it concerns us much) we must know what
it is to be one body, what ties and bonds belong to this union, how necessary
it is to be of it, what danger there is in being out of it: And this discourse
will take up the second part of my Text, The Relatum, in which all the
Correlates meet into one, We being many are one Body.

There are diverse ways for many to come into one. First, Natural; so the
soul, and the body are made one. Secondly, Conjugall; so man and wise. Thirdly,
Political; so all the Inhabitants within one City, or house are made one.
Fourthly, Moral; so friends are made one. Fifthly, Hypostaticall; so Christ
and our nature were made one. Sixthly, Sacramental; so the sign, and the
thing signed, are made one. Lastly, Mystical; so all the faithful, like so
many members are made one, being many, are one Body. I am not to say any thing,
of any one of them, but the last, our Mystical making one, one Body in Christ.
And this the Scriptures and Fathers have sought diverse ways to illustrate by
other Allegories; one building the Materials many; one flock, the sheep many;
one tree, the branches many: and many such, yet it is but one. The last of
these, I must insist upon, We being many, are one Body.

Yet there are three sorts of Bodies, especially considerable. First, the Body
Natural. Secondly, the Body Political. Thirdly, the Body Mystical. The two
first of these we cannot be, no man will imagine it, in a literal sense, one
Body, or in a civil sense, one Body: the Church of Christ cannot be one so,
which consists of many natural bodies it self, and is in many remote places,
never likely to come into one civil Polity, The Body Mystical is only to be
considered.

And that is but Metaphorical; so called by a similitude, taken from the
natural body, otherwise it is not properly a body, which is made up of many
bodies. But so the holy Ghost is sain to speak improperly to condescend to our
capacity, to show us what the Body of Christ is, his Church, by that we know
already, what the body of man is, Visibilibus rapere ad invisibilia, says
Gregory, That is his way. That way we take and consider four things, belonging
to a body natural, and under that similitude, observeable in the Mystical.

1. A sufficiency of parts.

2. The Union of them into one.

3. Their Symmetry and Agreement.

4. Their Offices and Administrations.

I begin with the first: A sufficiency of parts. No body can be without them,
trina dimensio, belongs to every body at least: but a perfect body, such as the
natural body of man is, or the Mystical Body of Christ is, cousists of many
parts. All the body is not one member, Multa membra, unum corpus. It belongs to
the Philosopher, and when he has done to the Physician, to take an exact
survey, of all the parts which do belong to a body, it is enough for us, that
there are parts enough. God in framing of the natural body, would not suffer
any redundancy or d^fi^iency, we may not but think the same of the Mystical.
In thy Book, says David, unto him are all my members written; he keeps a Book
of all the members of his body; the Church as well; by him they are numbered,
and to him only known; we may not deny the Body of Christ to be perfect, which
has a full enumeration of parts.

But yet the parts are not come together to make it perfect, God has a day
Book, Liber vitae bujus, wherein lie some scattered m^mbers not yet
recollected, they are not yet summed up, till God comes to his verbum
abbreviatum; yet they are to be reokoned in the accounts. In nature the
generation of the form is in an instant, but the parts stay their time of
production, and when they are all come, the body is not perfect, till it have
the degrees: the state of this life is, but the womb of the body of Christ,
there is a still repairing of the Saints, and an edification of the Body, till
we all meet together unto a perfect man. Here as in the Mount, the Materials
are all cut out, and squared for that great building; no noise of any
instrument shall be heard hereafter, but such stones as will serve shall be
laid upon the pile, the rest put away with the rubbish; God only knows how
many, and which they be will serve; we take all that are any way prepared to
belong to it, wheresoever the Axe of the Gospel, and the Hammer of the Law have
come; till the great builder shall have reprobated them. There shall no stone
be lacking to this building, no member to this Body, though they lie
sca^terred, yet there will be a Collection: Bo^^ to his bone; though they be
wounded, yet there is a repairing, not one of them shall be lost: the hair and
nail, and such excrements may well be let fall, and perish, but no part shall
be missing: A sufficiency of parts there will be: Tha^ is the first.

But yet they make not a body, unless they come together, the dried bones till
they were new set, and the Nerves, and flesh, and skin came upon them could not
be said a body: ti^l the Union of the parts in one come, there is no Communion;
many members there be, but by that; and that is the next, they come to be one
body.

In the natural body there are Nerves, and strings, and ligaments, and
irteries, by which all the parts are firmly united; Such there are in the
Mystical by which the body is knit and coupled together in every joint; Ephesians.
4. 16.

Spirit us sa^ictus est nexus: he is the prime principal bond. The Tendon by
which all the parts are knit and coupled; The Body to the head by him, and the
members to the body: he is the sap, which runs from the root into all the
branches, that a^me dies, and withers, and soon falls off, which has not him;
He is the Leaven, by which the whole lump is compacted, and grows into one
loaf; nothing keeps soul and body together, but he; all would soon fall off,
like ears of Corn, if not by him bound up into one sheaf: he is the cement of
the whole building, there is nothing else to hind too the Materials, if they
b^ laid loose they cannot last long: no Union can be firm without the spirit.

And to this quasi ad Tendonem, all the Nerves and other joyntures tend, here
they meet: they are many, as in the natural body.

religando; like Gordions knot, it will not be untyed, it may well be forced.
There is a story, how true I know not, yet of no mean Author, how four strong
horses in an whole hours space, were not able to strain the joints of one man
in his several quarters; and not then, till the executioner with his sword
hackt them in pieces: it is in nothing so true as in this tie of Religion. Non
dissolvi possunt quos vera religio conjunxit; it only makes true Yoak-followes,
which like the two Kine, as Saint Bernard sweetly compares them, bare the Ark of God to Bethshemesh, 1 Samuel 6. though their Calves were left behind them,
and kept one path, and went up lowing together. Neither Policy, nor Villainy,
can make so firm brethren as Religion: Fratrum gratia is no where kept so sure,
as between these; Quos Deus Conjunxit, is said of marriage knot, Let no man put
asunder, let them not, but if they will do it, and it has been done, who shall
let them from it? And it is likeliest done, where both the parties are not of
one Religion, or if they profess one, yet they are not, what they profess,
both: but of these which by it are made one, quis separabit? Like Saul and
Jonathan, they are lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death not
divided: neither indeed can they be divided: see but what strings they are tied
together with.

and quisquis fidem se tenere credit, unitatem teneat, says St Cyprian. He
falls from that, which falls out of this: Faith is imitatis Monimentum and
Munimentum. Therefore the Ancients hold that the Apostles Creed, Summa fidei,
was made for that purpose: ut esset unanimitatis indicium: that all professors
might there meet in one; though dispersed never so much in place. The Doctrine
of Christian Religion is but one, one Faith materially. The gi^t of Faith, by
which we have Faith in the Faith, to speak with Athanasius Creed; though it be
numerically Diverse, yet is in all but one, one Faith formally: one Faith,
there is union by that.

one mark the prize of our high calling, we all contend to; in the world men
take diverse ways, because they pitch upon diverse ends: he says unto gold thou
art my hope; another to his honor: but they that hope all for one thing, like
a ship under sail, where there be many passengers, steer their course unto one
and the same Port Can they think to meet there, and go every one their own
ways here? As if we had many heads, as one said of the Christian Armies. Quid
absurdius quam nos in terris dissidere qui fruituri sumus omnes eadem
felicitate in coelis? By one hope there comes more strength to this Union.

Bond of perfection is love, Coloss. 3. 14. and that is also one: it is called
Christ's garment; Faith and Hope never go apparreld in any other, and that was,
non de part consutilis, sed per totum textilis, says Cyprian, without any
seam, not to be ripped, nor rent, but delivered whole: If we have that on, and we
being Christians would not be thought without it, it will not be too little for
us to put on; sufficit and mihi and tihi tuni^^ Christi, says Bernard, it will
cover us, and withal a multitude of sins, of offenses, of breaches, which must
else make us fall off on all sides. And indeed the cause of all our rents is,
the want of having that on; and it is not such charity, which we commonly
reckon of such which has but a thread between it, and emnity, or so little
difference, as that they might not be distinguished asunder. Christ's Garment is
not like Jeroboams, wherein were made twelve rents at once: Integra vestis
accipitur: the soldier to whose lot it fell took it whole: men of that calling
seldomest of any have it, yet then it was had to show, that it may be had by
men of any condition ^^ of that: and being had whole, it will serve to cover
the whole body; the ear from hearing, the eyes from spying, the lips from
speaking, the hands from practicing any thing, that may tend to the breach of
Union, to differences, and discention: now a threefold cord is not easily
broken: one Faith, one Hope, one Love, make the bond of perfection, make the
Union firm.

But besides these three are other which are as Nerves and Sinews to unite all
the parts, The Apostle reckons them up in Ephesians. 4.

sumus fratres, As Abraham said to Lot: It was strange to Rebecca to have
striving in her womb, but there was some reason for that, two nations and two
manner of people, were in her bowels: But they are all of one people, whom the
womb of the Church bears, if they be right bred. Indeed it is not the Baptism
of Water which makes them one; many Lepers might have washed in Jordan, and yet
not come out as Naaman the Syrian did: The Baptism of the Spirit does only
that, and those that are so born, not of flesh nor of water only, but of the
spirit, will keep this union, will be one, as that is one.

5. One House, where we are all brought up together the Church Domus Dei, is
but one; I speak not of the material house, but of the mystical, one
Catholic Church, in which we su^k of the same breasts, we are fed with the
same milk, are tutored under the same Government, partake of the same
Sacrament: Habitare fratres in unum, to be of one mind which be of one house:
this is no small strengthening of the Union. These all of them and many more,
are Ecclesiastica vincula, and belong to the chief Tendon, by which this union
is made, the spirit.

Humano capiti cervicem jungere equinam: if not of a just proportion, both will
be a like monstrous. Their nature we have touched already, being in one womb,
we doubt not of that: of the other there may be some question made, in the
natural Body, it is the wonder of the Creation, to see in what perfect meeter
all the parts are made; yet there may be some aberrations there; the same
should be in the mystical Body: The Body of Christ can be no less perfect,
and yet the jarring of the parts, as if they had not that Symmetry we speak of,
their falling into pieces, as if they were not in their places, makes us make a
question of it. Look a little into the cause of it.

God says the Apostle, has so tempered the parts of the body, that there
might be no schism, no division in it. but that the members should have the
same care one for another: he has done the like sor the Church. Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, workers of miracles, gifts of healing, helpers, governors,
diversity of tongues, etc. are all of them members of this body; all of them
set by him in their right places to their right offices. There are diverse
causes of the schism that is among them.

Dislike of their own places: The foot would be the hand; or else not of the
body: it aspires higher yet, to be the eye or the ear, in the seat of
Magistracy, as it did of late among the Anabaptists in Germany: and in the seat
of Ministry as in the experience of our times. So it was in that great rent of
the Body of Israel, in Jeroboams days, the meanest of the people, Mechanics
among them, were made their Priests; and if they may not be that, they will not
be of the Body, and indeed, Gratulandum est cum tales de Ecclesia separentur,
says Cyprian: Vtinam abscindantur, was Saint Paul's hearty prayer. Such were
Corah and his company: Moses answer might serve their turns, Seems it a small
thing, that the Lord has separated you, to take you near to himself? Is it not
enough that you are of the Body? Were all the body an eye, where were the
smelling? Has not he placed lesser lights in the Firmament as well as great
ones? All are not there primae Magnitudinis: has not he ordered meaner
servants in his family, as well as greater ones? All are not there primae
distributionis: There will be degrees of glory in Heaven, as there are of
places in earth. Besides to avoid this dangerous schism, has not God so
tempered the body, that he has given the more honor to that part which
lacked? the onus is ours, the hones yours: The head cannot say, unto the feet,
I have no need of you; nor the eye to the hand, I have no need of thee: This
scisme, whether it be in Church or state, one Menenius Agrippa in Livy very
fitly confuted, by telling to the factious Romans, the tale of the falling out
of the Belly, and the members: because it seemed to devour all, the hands would
not work, the feet would not stir, the mouth refused to receive any food,
till they sound themselves to languish thorough the emptiness of the stomach,
and by bad experience proved the belly no less profitable to the body, then
the other members; and that the safety of the whole depended upon the society
and concord of the parts. This Emulation has been the cause of the
dissentions, which have ever been in the Church.

Yet there are some others causes, The neglect of their own offices, and
impertinent surview of others, which belongs to the head to censure, and not to
the parts: The want of Sympathy with the infirmities of the fellow members, if
one suffer, not careing to suffer with him, not considering if a Joint be
loosed or strained, all the parts ought to be painted with it: neither of these
but are causes of this scisme, and these lead me to the fourth particular: the
offices and administrations of the body.

A sufficiency of parts, a uniting of them into one body, a placing them in a
true Symmetry and Proportion, are all of them for this, for their
administrations and functions, and for them they have received diversities of
gifts, and by them are to be exercised in several operations: all three are
specified by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6. All the Body is not one member
but many; all the members have not the same gifts but diverse; all their gifts
are not for the same operations, but several: altogether are most wisely
disposed, both in the natural and mystical Body, for the furniture thereof,
edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 16. We have not leisure now to take a
short view of them in particular.

All that has been said tends to this conclusion, we are the Body of Christ,
and Members in particular: We that are many, are one Body, a Body in the parts,
in the union of the parts, in the Symmetry and Agreement of the parts, in the
offices and Administrations of the parts; and if we be of his body in earth, we
shall be sure to be joined to our head in Heaven; Vsurpavimus regnum Dei in
Christo, we hold Heaven in C^pite already. But then if we be all one body,
there must be no scisme between us, no falling off from the parts, no falling
out without them. Ad regnum pervenire non potest, qui eam quae regnatura est,
pacem derelinquit, says Cyprian: Has God tempered them all, that there be no
division, and shall we distemper them by scisme, and dissension? Will it be
enough to hang by one Artery, and have the rest disjoynted? By faith, and hope,
and not by love, which is the bond of perfe^tion? If we be wounded, there is a
repairing; if loosed or strained, there is a re-establishing; if we be of the
Body, we must have love to all the members, care of them all, we must suffer
with them, suffer for them; we must cover the blemishes, hide the deformities
of the parts, upon those parts which we think most unhonest, we must put more
honesty, and give the more honor to that part which lacks. Nature and
religion both, can by no means away with a scisme in the body. If there be, you
be not of the body; you cannot say the Text. We that are many, are one Body.

And if we be not of this Communion which is Corporis, we cannot be of the
other which is Calicis: that is Fundamentum Relationis: and one bread, of one
body, and of it sumus participes, we all partake. That of this simus consortes,
we may be all members; To eat of that, which is one all over the world; as
there was but one Lamb to an house, so but one bread to the whole Church; is
the Symboll and Sacrament of one Union with the Body. Non ex alio tu, nec ex
alio ille, sed ex eodem omnes nutrimur, says Chrysostom; It is but one
mystically though numerically many. And if but one bread, shall we make the
Table of the Lord, the table of devils? And partake of that, with bitterness
and wrath? If but one body, shall we take the member of Christ, and make it the
member of an harlot? of scisme and contention? God Almighty grant that we may
be all of one mind, in one house, being all members of one body; that being
united by one Spirit, in one Religion, in one Faith, in one Hope, we may serve
one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus Christ our Savior, in one Love, being
entered by one Baptism, confirmed and strengthened by one Bread, coupled and
knit into one Body; there be no scisme, no division among us, but that all the
members have a care one of another, and endeavor to keep the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of peace, Till we all meet together into a perfect man, and
the Measure of the Age of the fullness of Christ. To whom with the Father, and
the holy Ghost, be all praise, and glory, now, and ever. Amen.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
1 JOHN 4. 1. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits,
whether they are of God; for many salse Prophets are gone out into this world.
I Must begin where the Text ends: the last words of it are the reason of the
first: Quoniam is a causall: Many false Prophets are gone out into this world;
Why what then? Only this, believe not therefore every spirit, but try the
spirits, whether they are of God.

I could not think of any subject more proper to this season, or more
profitable for our selves; the old complaint is now, if ever proved true, the
days are evil. The world was never more rightly compared to a Sea, then now;
men upon dry Land, as if they were tossed in a rough Sea, thorough staggering
and giddiness of their brains, are driven to their wits end: they look
thorough the waves of their unconstant humors, and prejuducate conceits, which
make the straightest things, which have been so well settled with mature
consideration, and unquestioned authority, seem to them crooked: they complain
that the shoars and trees are moved, not perceiving how themselves are silently
transported, and that they move, and not these: they do not look that way which
they row; and yet as if they rushed not fast enough to their own destruction,
they hoise up their sails of fury and madness, to precipitate them forward.
They think to make away in the Sea, in which they cannot so much as spy out
any prints of their steps, which have gone before them, nor must hope to leave
any impression to be found by those which shall follow after. God only knows
what Port they are bound for, I fear me the distraction, if not destruction
both of Church and state: what else do so many fiery discursions abode, the
perverting of Scriptures, pretending of Prophesies, wracking of consciences,
the bold determinations of ignorant Mechanics, flying into the face of
dignities and authority; wounding thorough the sides of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, the head of Monarchy, and Government? Do they not all huddle in at
one gap, to let in confusion and ruin? Are they not fruitful seeds, which
bring forth such a Monster, which has so frighted Germany these hundred years,
and will eat out the very bowels of the Mother which conceived them? Is it
because there is no Prophet in our Israel, at whose lips may be inquired the
knowledge of the Law? Or is it not rather because there are too many? Such
which will take upon them tp be Prophets, and are not called as was Aaron:
Which Prophecy in my name, says the Lord, and I have not sent them, neither
did I command them, neither spoke I unto them, and yet they ran, Jere. 14. 14,
15. Is not Saul among the Prophets, madness and cruelty? And the devil gotten
again into Samuels mantle, malice and hypocrisy? Is there not a lying spirit
got into the mouth of these Prophets? As was in Ababs days, 1 Kings 22. 22. Do
they not prophecy lies unto us, in the name of the Lord? This, this the true
cause, the Apostle tells in the last words of the Text; For many false Prophets
are gone out into this world.

This being the cause what Counsel is to be followed? There are two rocks
which we must necessarily avoid: to believe all, to believe none: by believing
all, we rush presently into heresies and scisime; by believing none, we fall
upon irreligion and Atheism: against the first, the Apostle gives us a
Caution; Believe not every spirit: Against the second, this Counsel; But try
the spirits whether they be of God. This is his to them, to whom he writ; this
is mine to you, to whom I speak. Dearly beloved, Believe not every spirit, etc.

So the Text you see plainly supplies us with two parts. First, A premonition.
Secondly, A premunition. First, For praemoniti, Secondly, Praemuniti. First, A
warning of us, Secondly, An arming of us. They are but two, but we may say of
them as our Savior did of the Disciples two swords, it is enough; we need no
more, if we be well accoutred with them, if thoroughly instructed about them; if
we know how to prove them, we shall by the grace of God, quit our selves like
men; not to be put to turn to the right hand, or the left, but be able to stand
fast in our faith, till we be removed from our station, from faith to fruition;
from these earthly Tabernacles, unto heavenly Mansions; from waging of war,
and wrestling in combat against sin and error, to wearing of Crowns, in
immortality and glory. We begin with the first part, though the last in my
Text, the Premonition.

Many false Prophets are gone out into this world. It is that which all the
Prophets, all the Apostles ever complained of, I need not quote you places of
Scripture to prove it. Look but into, Jere. 14. 14. and Chap. 23. Verse. 21. Our
Savior himself foretells us of them, Matthew. 24. 24. Saint Peter, 2 C. 2. v. 1.
is evidence enough, There were false Prophets among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, Which privily shall bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift damnation. To be told of them aforehand, is the way to take heed of them;
to be warned of them, to be armed against them.

And indeed we had need to be warned, there are five reasons to be yielded from
the very Text, I need not seek further for more.

1. From their name, They are Prophets.

2. From their fame, They are false Prophets.

3. From their number, There are many false Prophets.

4. From their time, being now present, are gone out.

5. From the place whither they are gone, (...). I know not what spirit moved
our Translators, to render the Article so significantly, sure it was a good
one: Into this world.

Prophets. Who would fear to be seduced by such a name? The very name of a
Prophet has been in all ages venerable. Whither should she go for truth but to
a Prophet, for instruction not destruction? But this has ever been the Devils
policy, to bring in damnable heresies under Heavenly Titles: he which skils to
transform himself into an Angel of Light, knows how to make his Agents seem
like Saints. It is the old Proverb, in nomine Domini incipit omne malum. God
himself complains of it: In my name have they prophesied lies, Jere. 23. The
enemy dares not appear himself, nor send in his own name: Sub praetextu
Divinitatis delit^scentes omnia polluitis, as Constantine told Novatus Centu.
4. This has been his way, he has his Prophets, as well as God, he has been
ever styled Gods ape: and therefore though they be Prophets which come unto us,
yet you are to be warned concerning them. that is the first reason.

false Prophets; such are all of his sending, be their shows never so glorious:
the very Mahometanes would be called Maslulinen: the damnedst Incendiaries
style themselves Jesuits: the horridst Treason has been hatched in a Disciple:
the lying spirit comes in the mouth of a Prophet, so do wolves in sheep skins:
gilded pills are ever bitterest; painted poasts rotrennest.

Hic dolus est magnus, Lupus est qui creditur agnus. Such as these do soonest
seduce, for they have Sirens voices, Crocodiles tears, and most dangerous they
are, because the least suspected. This is another reason, and enough alone, if
they be proved false, to take heed of them: and such as these then, false
Prophets.

many; Legion may be their name, as well as his, who is the Master of them,
Mark 5. 9. Ye are many, says Eliah, 1 Kings 18. 25. So they were indeed, 450.
to one; ods enough. And a little after 400. to one Michaiah, 1 King. 22. 6. Our
Savior himself notes out their number, Matthew. 24. 5. Many shall say, Lord have
we not prophesied in thy name? False Prophets all, not of his sending, such as
he will profess unto, that he never knew them, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. It was the
complaint of the Church still. Many dogs are come about me, Psalm. 22. 16. And
they are false Prophets; look to Isai. 56. 10, 11. Greedy dogs which cannot
understand, which look to their own way, for their own advantage, for their own
purpose. By the many heresies they have scattered, you may well guess at their
number: Epiphanius in his days reckons up two hundred. Ecclesiastical
Histories muster them up by thousands. In Luthers time in Germany, they grew to
100000. Now if a small number were to be despised, yet so many may not; we well
say of the true ones in comparison of the false, as the Disciples did of the
Loaves, what are those among so many? All our hope is that which the Lord told
Gideon, he saves not by many; This is another reason, why we should take heed
of them. Quia multa sunt.

gone out] like the Locusts out of the dark smoke, Revel. 9. 3. In the Apostles
time, the mystery of iniquity began to work. Alages since have been pestered
with them. Semper aut exortae sunt novae Haereses, aut renovatae veteres, has
been the complaint of the whole Church; Satan never sleeps, he has like the
Philistimes, his spoiling bands still abroad. God has no sooner his Prophets
out, but he has his: Moses presently met with the Magitians: they were then,
so they are still; no times have ever had so just cause to complain as ours: we
may take up Saint Jeromes cry, changing but the name; ingemuit tot us Orbis,
and Miratus est se Arianum factum.

And yet is it worth the noting that the Apostle says, they are gone; true
Prophets are always said to be sent, they go not till they be commanded; but
these run, and yet I spoke not to them, says the Lord; of their own heads,
they are gone out: this is another reason, why you must beware, quia multi
exierunt, many false Prophets are gone out.

Lastly, they are gone out into this world, all the Emphasis lies in the
Article: this present world, now as well as then: this place of the world, here
as well as there: nullibi satis tutum, nullibi satis cautum, says Bernard:
this world as much as that has been troubled with them. Europe as well as
Asia: toto divisos Orb Britannos: we which are a world by our selves, have a
world of them; like the Frogs of Egypt, they crawl in all places of the Land;
the Kings houses, the Ovens, and the kneading troughes are not free from them.
Here is cause enough why we should take warning; Quia multi, for many false
Prophets are gone out into this world. Besides these all from the Text, we
might render some reason out of the Text: They are gone out, for what purpose
think you?

First, To seduce: non Doctores sunt, sed Seductores, says Tertullian, and
that they may better do it, they begin as the Serpent did, with the woman; and
they creep into their houses, as he did, for Serpentis est serpere: the Apostle
speaks it plain, They Creep into houses, and lead captive simple women, which
are laden with sins; which women are ever learning, and yet never able to come
to the knowledge of the Truth. 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. And that they do under a show of
godliness, making long prayers, Luke 20. 44. And then,

Secondly, When they are got in, wherefore come they there? Our Savior
resolves you; the Wolf comes not, but to devour and destroy; and for that they
come, to devour widows houses, their substance and estates: there can be no
good looked for, from their coming, They are of their Masters Profession, and
his name is Apollyon, a destroyer, and do but mark, how they do ply his work;
they destroy even foundations themselves, Faith, Hope, Love, Obedience; and if
foundations be destroyed, what shall the righteous do? Other Reasons we might
yield, but these are enough to make us follow the Apostles counsel, to mark
those which make divisions and contentions, which with fair speech, and
flattering, deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18. Indeed to warn
us of them, it is enough alone, but to remember the Text it self: Many falls
Prophets are gone out into this world.

I pass to the second part.

The Premunition.

To be warned of them, and not Armed against them, is to little purpose; we may
be armed two ways, by the Text. First, Negatively, non credendo. Secondly,
Affirmitively, probando.

First, Non Credendo: Believe not every spirit. Spirit and Prophet are here
Synonima, so Beza and the best expound it, Metonimically it is put for him.
Every Prophet pretends, he has the Spirit: Mabomet himself, that grand
Impostor, stuck not to affirm that the spirit was his teacher; By the name of
the spirit they gain authority unto their Doctrines, So as you have heard
already; The devil sendsforth his agents under the pretense of divinity: But
there is a lying spirit, as well as a true one, and here we have a caution, de
non Credendo: Believe not every spirit.

It is not safe for any soul to be too credulous in matters of salvation; to
believe every report, is in civil affairs, an argument of greatest Levity,
much more in religious: Credulity was the sin of our first parents: Eve
believed the Serpent, Adam believed her. I know when God speaks, to believe him
presently; ea Credulitas semper magni fuit and ingentis animi, says Saint
Chrysostom; it was Abraham's praise, and the Virgins Mary's; But since lying
spirits are gone out in the name of God, credulity must needs be dangerous: The
foolish will believe every thing, says Solomon, Prove. 14. 15. And the son of
Syrach, Eccle. 19. 4. He that is hasty to give credit, is light minded. This de
non credendo then, cannot but be a good watch word. Believe not every spirit.

And the reason of it is.

It is always best policy to watch that place, where the enemy strives to
enter, ibi fortiter opponere, ubi fortiter oppugnatur. Satan's chief battery is
against our Faith; we need not fear him much, if he get not in at that: poison
has no hurt in it, if it be not received; nor false doctrines, if not
believed: therefore his Agents work most upon credulous natures, they commonly
begin with weak and silly women, which are easy to believe and creep into
them, and then by them, wind themselves into the opinions and bosoms of weak
and eff^minate men. The Devil never could do any thing, if you would not
believe him: He requires Faith in his Auditors, as well as God does in his.

Belief is the only passage of all good or evil to the soul; if that be easy
to God, he enters, and with him all graces: if open to the devil, he enters,
and with him all vices. Therefore, Solomon bids us keep our heart with all
diligence, and especially that passage, at which Satan so much seeks to enter,
which is believing.

And that we may the better keep our heart, we should keep our ears too: stop
those outward passages, hearken not to them, Deuteronomy. 13. 3. Thou shall not
hearken to the words of the Prophets, or dreamer of dreams, etc. We let him in
too near, if he get into the ear; that passage he seeks to get first: if he
can, have free access to the ear, he will command the heart too, ere he have
done.

And that we may keep both our heart and ear, we should keep our houses too,
not let them lie open to them; it is not safe letting them come so near us,
their desire is to creep in there first, 2 Timothy 3. 6. But no deceitful person
shall dwell in my house, He that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight,
says the Psalmist: and these are Deceivers, Matthew. 24. 5. and Liars, 2 These.
2. 9. 2 Pet. 2. 1. Beloved let me not be mistaken, I mean those false Prophets
which are spoken in my Text, which are gone out into the world, which come unto
you with damnable doctrines, novelties, s^ismes, which sow divisions,
contentions, debates among you; which call themselves Prophets, but are not
sent, and come in the name of the spirit, but are not to be received; for it is
the Apostles caution. Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit. But I mean not
to insist longer upon this. The second take up more time, which is affirmative.
Probando.

But prove the spirits whether they be of God,] There is good reason for this
rule: to believe all tends to heresy and scisme; for there are lying spirits.
1 King. 22. 22. Evil spirits, Judges 9. 23. Unclean spirits. Luke 4. 23.
Spirits of error, 1 Timothy 4. 1. And therefore you have heard of the Apostles
caution, de non credendo. Believe not every spirit. But yet to believe none
tends as much another way, to irreligion, and Atheism; for there is a spirit,
which is of God; nay, there are the seven spirits of God, which are sent abroad
into the world; and these are to be believed, Revel. 5. 6. What is to be done,
that we may not be deceived? We are now to hearken to the Apostles counsel:
Prove the spirits, whether they be of God.

Now proving them is all the way we have to be safe from error; the false and
lying spirit comes in the name of God to us, as well as the righteous and true
spirit: dicit Dominus is the prologue ever to their lie. 1 Kings 22. 11, 12. In
my name do they prophecy lies, says the Lord himself, Jere. 14. We cannot but
mistake, if we take all, if we take none: to take the right, is to be take us
to the rule; to prove the spirits whether they be of God.

And now if ever we have need of proving, we live in the last and perilous
days, where many spirits of errors are gone abroad, and many are deceived by
them; those that are yet free, or not so far gone, have reason to be both
more thankful unto God, and more vigilant over themselves: the name of the
spirit is able to deceive the best and wisest. If a bad one but come, and as
once the good spirit did, Genesis 1. 2. incumhehat aquis; be but incumbent there,
or rest and stay there, God knows what he may produce; it concerns such
especially to take heed to this rule: to prove the spirits, whether they he of
God, or no.

And it is but the same which Saint Paul else where bids us, Prove your selves,
2 Cor. 13. 5. Prove what things are well pleasing unto God, Ephesians. 5. 10. That
ye may allow these things which are best, Phil. 1. 10. Try all things, and keep
that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. Try the spirits whether they be of God.

And now we go about the Trial; there are but two ways that I know of, but
both are Demonstrative; we may not in this case content our selves with
probabilities or possibilities: shows, and apparances are no good grounds for
our souls to take any thing upon trust; our proof must be armor of proof, or
else we shall not be well appointed against them.

The first is a Priori; the second a Posteriori: from their calling, from their
conversation; those two are the grounds we can only go upon.

First, From their calling, for they must have that, or else they cannot be
right. No man takes upon him the honor, unless he be called as was Aaron,
Heb. 5. 4. God himself renounceth them from being his, if they come, and be not
sent, if they run and be not commanded, Jere. 14. If they be not sent by him,
you may soon conclude that they be not of God.

That you may understand this point more fully, being a matter these times so
much stand upon. You must observe that there is a twofold calling by God:

1. Extraordinary.

2. Ordinary.

First, Extraordinary, which was in old times: either spiritus Oris, as
Abraham, Moses, Samuel, so the all the Apostles: They were called by the voice
of Christ; and sent into the world. Or else, ore spiritus, by special
instinct, whereby they were inwardly furnished with all the gifts of the
spirit, necessary to that service, whereto they were designed, so were many of
the Prophets; Elias in the deplored estate of the Jews.

These ways of calling are now ceased, and not to be looked for. The
Anabaptists, and their brood the Brownists, which pretend Revelations and
Dreams are not to be regarded: By the instinct of the spirit of arrogance and
error do they take upon them to prophecy, and of no other spirit at all: though
they come unto you in a mighty wind, yet God is not in that wind; you may not
take those spirits to be of God.



Internal, External.
1. Internal; and that is when a man finds himself furnished with gists fit
sor that calling, so says Musculus and Zanchie: They are the Talents with
which Christ has endued him for his service. The search of this is left to
every man's Conscience which desires the Ministry, he shall be reckoned an
Intrudor, if he find not these in some measure in himself: and therefore in
our Form of Consecration, the Bishop asks every one which comes to be
Ordained, whether he do think himself to be inwardly called. I confess outward
abilities others may judge of, humane learning, skill in Divinity, sound
Intellectuals, by discourse, by examination, they come to be discovered; but
inward preparations, they are from the Lord: It is the height of arrogance for
any to take upon them to judge of them in others than themselves, for what man
knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which (...) 1 Cor. 2. 11.
God only is the tryer of the heart and reins. He proudly enters into Gods
Judgment Seat, which takes upon him to determine that. If it be internal and
secret, how comes it known to thee or me? Let other judge of my abilities for
the Function, but the preparations of my heart are known only to God and my
self.

2. External, and that is Mediante Ecclesia: Christ has left the power unto
his Church, he called his Apostles, they called others after them; Titus had
precept from Paul to ordain Ministers in every City, Tit. 1. 5. So had Timotby
by Imposition of hands, 1 Timothy 5. 2. Christ cannot be visibly present, the
Heavens must contain him till his last Coming: but by his Spirit he is present
with his Church, he calls by it: those whom it balls lawfully, we are to
acknowledge to be called by God.

But whether it calls lawfully or no, that is now called in question; whether
this Calling only belong to the chief of the Church, which are so called (...)
or to all the mul^itude of believers: Those that question it, do withal
question the Doctrine of our Church, and if that, which they dare not deny but
was well settled by uncontrollable Authority, cannot satisfy them, how shall I?
Yet I shall adventure to lay my Axe unto the root of this Tree of pride and
arrogance, which does oppose it, if so be it prove not as the young Prophets
did, which was but borrowed.

They that are for a populary election, pretend two Arguments for the
Confirmation, The Scriptures, and the Primitive times. I shall satisfy both
with their own principles.

1. For the Scriptures, their own rule is this; That nothing binds to a
necessity of observation, which has not there an affirmative precept enjoining
it: Let them stand but to this, and be tried by themselves, whether there be
any such or no, and whether they do well in imposing a necessity of things
which are besides the rule: Is there any? let them demonstrate it, and carry
the cause; Is there none? let them see the invalidity and weakness of their
Argument, and relinquish it. But

They object the practice of the Apostles in their times; there are many things
which must go to make that an everlasting rule, and not temporary: those times
and ours are not like, and therefore not the like discipline: I will name but
one reason, an essential one, the true cause of that alteration that has been
in this point: All the believers were then of one mind, there was no danger of
any schis^ (...) any rent to be made in the Church then, of which innumerable
have been since. But yet that they cannot prove: the multitude of the (...)
were present, we will grant that, and not only with silence, as some think,
but with suffrages, as others, without which there was no laying on of hands.
(...) is suffragiis creare, as Erasmus argues in the Election of Matthias to
the Apostleship, and the seven to the Deaconship: let it be granted they were
there, that they s^^e not only still, but said some what, but gave their
consent, yet that was only to their Ordination, not to their Institution, at
the giving them power to preach, not assigning them any place: and I report me
to any indifferent Judge, whether that be not so done in our Churches Form of
Ordination.

2. For the Primitive times which succeeded the Apostles, we may most admite of
their inference from thence, which have been ever most enemies to true
an^iquity: you I now how Episcopacy and Ceremony is opposed, which themselves
cannot deny, but be grounded in Antiquity: we may say most truly what Saint
Augustine says, to some of the same sort: Qui in Evangelio, nihil nisi quod
vultis creditis; vobis potius quam Evangelio creditis: so vobis potius quam
antiquitati creditis. I confess ingeniously there is something favors their
saying, especially from the African Churches, but proves it not to be of a
binding nature at all times and places: Potest esse diversa consuetudo in
diversis Ecclesis, s^ith Calvin: I condemn not those Churches that have it not,
says Zanche: our Church may truly say with the Apostle, we have no such
custom. In things which are indifferent (as all things that are not commanded,
or forbidden in Scripture are) no man in his right wits will deny, but the
power of the Magistrate may determine. The Judgment of so many counsels,
which have passed upon this point; The Laws established in this state wherein we
live, are enough to satisfy any spirit that is not contentious, which defires
not rather to steal into the calling under the pretense of Antiquity, then to
come in by the door of Legal and established Authority. Of whom we may well
say, as Saint Cyprian does of Novatus, Adulter and extraneus Episcopus ille est
qui fieri a desertoribus per ambitum nititur, Epist. 52. Sec. 16. The sum of
all is, but the Doctrine of the Church of England, that those which come into
their Ecclesiastical charges, by those which are in Authority, do come in
lawsully, and their calling is of God.

I must not stay upon this point which would take up a book, and is not to be
contained in a Sermon. I return to my Text: the other way to know false
Prophets by.

2. A Posteriori, and this is the surer, because best seen by us: it is the
same which our Savior gives his Disciples; You shall know them by their
fruits: give me leave at once, to present you with a bundle of them.

The fruits of the spirit are Love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5. 22. These you may be su^e,
they are of God: and so are those spirits, that do come with these: But
contrarily, the fruits of the flesh, are Adultery, fornication, uncleanaeesse,
wantonness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulations, wrath,
contentions, seditions, heresies, etc. Verse. 19. 20. These ye may be sure they
are not of God, neither are those spirits which come with them: Look in another
place that true Character of false Prophets, and of such which our times are
especially forewarned of 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. In the last days shall come perilous
times, men lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, disobedient to parents,
cursed speakers, unthankful, imholy, without natural affection, truce
breakers, false accusers, intemperate, fierce. And Verse 5. Having a show of
godliness, but deny the power of it. And Verse 6, 7. Creeping into houses, and
leading captive silly women. And if you please to make up their Character out
of, 2 Peter 2. 1. Such which privily bring in damnable herefies, Verse 3. Which
thorough coveteousnesse, and fained w^rks make merebandize of you. Verse. 10.
Which despise government, and stand in their own conceit. Verse 12. which speak
evil of those things which they know not, and make their liberty a cloak for
their maliciousness. None of these are of God, neither are those spirits which
do come with them. By these you may be able to discern them; and this is a
trial you may trust unto.

But as in a disease there may some Symptoms be missing, especially before it
come to be Epidomicall, until it come to the height of it: so it may fall out
in the discovery of this great sickness of these times, all will not appear;
especially where there is so much art and cunning used in the concealing them.
I will pitch upon some few, which will not fail you, as soon as you perceive
them, you may be able certainly to prove them.

1. If they come not in Love: the Spirit of God is a loving Spirit: This is the
touchstone of the spirit: By this shall all men know that ^ou are my
Disciples, says Christ, if you love one another. It is an experiment upon
which our Apostle himself concludes a Probatum est: Hereby know we the spirit
of truth, and the spirit of error, Verse 6. Saint Cyprian is down right,
Quisquis ille est, qualiscunque ille est, Christianus non est, qui in Christi
ecclesia non est: And in the next words he tells us, whom he means, even
No^atus the Scismatick, Qui nec fraternam charitatem, nec Ecclesiasticam
unitatem tenuit. Epist 52. sec. 16. The unity of the Spirit cannot be kept, but
in the bond of Peace and Love: those then which come with malice, and
contention, and hatred; which come with wrath, and envy, and debate; which are
such as the Apostle speaks of, some which can never be appeased (pray mark
that) Romans 1. 30. are justly to be suspected, and you may be sure that they are
not of God; and by this rule you may try not only false Prophets, but false
professors.

2. If they come in Mecknesse and Humility: the Spirit of God is an humble
Spirit: and it is our Savior Lesson to his Disciples, discite ame quia mitis
sum. I am near unto him, says the Lord, which is of an humble spirit. This is
another argument to try them by, a Symptom of the Spirit of God: if they come
with pride, and arrogance, if contemning of their brethren, conceiting of
themselves, above themselves: you may know by this, that they are not of God.

Yet there is a voluntary humility, they may possibly creep, till they be got
in; but this vizard will drop off in a short time, you shall soon discover them
by this, whether they be of God.

3. If they come in Gentleness. The Spirit of the Lord is a gentle Spirit.
Wis. 1. 5, 6. God himself came not in the fire, nor in the Earthquake, nor in
the strong wind, but in a soft and still voice, 1 King. 19. 12. Gentleness
and love are the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. They know not of what spirit
they are which come otherwise. The feet of the Messengers of the Gospel are to
be shod with the preparations of peace: Isaiah delivers them their Message,
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, will your God say.

This is another rule to try the Spirit, it marches not suriously like Jebu;
it is not madness, but mildness which comes with it. They prosecute their own
cause, as he did, and not Gods, which come otherwise.

Again fourthly, Truth, is the trial of them; the Spirit of God is a Spirit of
truth; by their doctrines you must try the Spirits. He that denies that Christ
came in the flesh, is the spirit of Antichrist, Verse 3. There are other
Doctrines which proceed from the lying spirits. Saint Cyprian notes it for a
notable one in Novatus, for taking upon him to make a separation of the good
from the bad, as if he were the searcher of the hearts and reins; a lying
Doctrine and contrary to the precept of our Savior himself, who commands the
tares, and wheat, to be let grow together: And to the Apostle who says, that
in agreat house there are vessels of wood and earth, as well as of gold, and
silver. Such is the shutting up of the Gate of mercy unto a sinner, after he
has missed their set time of his call; The denying of hope of repentance to
such as have gone on long in their wickedness, and have fallen from their
professions: The cutting off, of most part of the visible Church, from a
possibility of being saved, by Gods secret and eternal decree of reprobation:
desperate and damnable, and lying doctrines, contrary to Gods own
protestations; As I live says the Lord, etc. At what time soever, etc. And the
whole tenor of the Gospel, and indeed a denying of Christ's coming in the
flesh; These and such as these are but lying spirits, and you may be sure they
are not of God.

5. I will but add one more, If they hate the light; The privily bringing in
their Doctrines, is an argument of salfity, 1 Pet 2. 1. Our Saviors main
reason to confirm the truth of his Doctrines was this, In private have Is^ad
nothing, John 18. 20. Veritas non quaerit angul^r. The dangerous^st treasons
have been nourished, and conceived that ways: All estates have justly
disallowed of private and frequent convenings.

The Disciples were commanded what they had heard in secret, to preach it upon
the house top: These dare not do it, for they dare not come to light, least
they be reproved. This is another rule if they come privately, if they seek
privacy they are not of God. Christ himself forbids you to look after him in
the desert or Chamber. I must not add any more lest I trespass too much on
your patience; I will shut up all in that exhortation of the Apostle, Romans 16.
17, 18.. I beseech you brethren mark them diligently, which cause division, and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoyde them: for
they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and
with fair speech, and flattering, deceive the hearts of the simple: and I
conclude, as I began: Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits, etc. Now to the eternal God, who is able to make you stand, be all
praise, etc.

FINIS.

