A learned and necessary ARGUMENT To prove that each Subject has a Propriety
in his Goods.

Showing also The extent of the Kings Prerogative in Impositions upon the Goods
of Merchants exported and imported, out of and into this Kingdom.

Together with a Remonstrance presented to the Kings most excellent Majesty, by
the honorable House of Commons, in the Parliament holden Anno Dom. 1610.
Annoque Regis Jacobi, 7.

By a late learned Judge of this Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Bishop for John Burroughes, and are to be sold by
Richard Hassell Bookseller in Bristoll, 1641.

To the Courteous Reader.
THis excellent Treatise of the no less worthy Author, happily falling into my
hands, I instantly thought it my duty to make that public, which had given so
much useful satisfaction to many learned, and judicious, in private;
remembering that ancient Adage, Bonum quo communius, eo praestantius.

I hope it is needless to commend either the Reverend Author deceased, the
Treatise, its use, or style; since the Authority by which it is published, is a
sufficient argument of their known worth.

If thou kindly accept his good meaning, whose only aim in the publishing
hereof was the Common good, it will be an encouragement to him (and others) to
present to thy view, what may hereafter fall into his hands worthy thy further
perusal.

Thine; I. B.

20. Maii, 1641.
AT a Committee appointed by the Honorable House of Commons, for examination
of Books, and of the licencing, and suppressing of them, etc.

It is ordered, that this Treatise be published in Print.

Sir EDWARD DERING, Knight and Baronet.
A Remonstrance delivered to his Majesty in writing, after the inhibition
given by him to the Commons house of Parliament, as well by word of mouth, as by
letters, not to proceed in the examining his right to impose without assent of
PARLIAMENT.
To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
Most gracious Sovereign,
WHereas we your Majesty's most humble Subjects, the Commons assembled in
Parliament, have received first by message, and since by speech from your
Majesty a command of restraint, from debating in Parliament your Majesty's
right of imposing upon your subjects goods exported, or imported out of, or
into this Realm: yet allowing us to examine the greivance of these impositions
in regard of quantity, time, and other Circumstances of disproportion thereto
incident: We your said humble Subjects nothing doubting but that your Majesty
had no intent by that Command to infringe, the ancient and fundamental right
of the Liberty of Parliament in point of exact discussing of all matters
concerning them, and their possessions, goods and rights whatsoever, which yet
we cannot but conceive to be done in effect by this command, do with all
humble duty make this Remonstrance unto your Majesty.

Frist, we hold it an ancient, general, and undoubted right of Parliament, to
debate freely all matters which do properly concern the subject, and his
right or estate; which freedom of debate being once fore-closed, the essence
of the liberty of Parliament is withal dissolved.

And whereas in this case the subjects right on the one fide, and your
Majesty's prerogative on the other, cannot possibly be severed in debate of
either; We allege that your Majesty's Prerogatives of that kind concerning
directly the subjects right and interest, are daily handled and discussed in
all Courts at Westminster, and have been ever freely debated upon all fit
occasions, both in this and all other former Parlialiaments, without restraint;
which being forbidden, it is impossible for the subject, either to know, or to
maintain his right and propriety to his own lands and goods, though never so
just and manifest.

It may further please your most excellent Majesty to understand, that we have
no mind to impugn, but a desire to inform our selves of your Highness
Prorogative in that point, which (if ever) is now most necessary to be known;
and though it were to no other purpose, yet to satisfy the generality of your
Majesty's Subjects, who finding themselves much grieved by these new
impositions, do languish in much sorrow and discomfort.

These reasons (Dread Sovereign) being the proper reasons of Parliament, do
plead for the upholding of this our ancient Right and Liberty. Howbeit seeing
it has pleased your Majesty to insist upon that judgment in the Exchequer,
as being direction sufficient for us without further examination: Upon great
desire of leaving your Majesty unsatisfied in no one point of our intents and
proceedings, We profess touching that judgment, that we neither do nor will
take upon us to reverse it; but our desire is to know the reasons whereupon the
same was grounded; and the rather for that a general conceit is had, That the
reasons of that judgment may be extended much further, even to the utter
ruin of the ancient liberty of this Kingdom, and of your subjects right of
propriety to their goods and lands

Then for the judgment it self, being the first and last that ever was given
in that kind (for ought appearing unto us,) and being only in one Case, and
against one man, it can bind in law no other, but that person; and is also
reversible by Writ of error granted heretofore by act of Parliament. And
neither be nor any other subject is debarred by it, from trying his right in
the same or like case, in any of your Majesty's Courts of Record at Westminster.

Lastly, we nothing doubt, but our intended proceeding in a full examination of
the right, nature, and measure of these new impositions (if this restraint had
not come between) should have been so orderly and so moderately carried and
employed to the manifold necessities of these times, and given your Majesty so
true a view of the state and right of your subjects, that it would have been
much to your Majesty's content and satisfaction, (which we most desire,) and
removed all causes of fears and jealousies from the loyal hearts of your
Subjects, which is (as it ought to be) our careful endeavor: whereas
contrariwise in that other way directed by your Majesty, we cannot safely
proceed without concluding for ever the right of the subject, which without
due examination thereof we may not do.

We therefore your loyal and dutiful Commons, not swarving from the approved
steps of our Ancestors, most humbly and instantly beseech your gracious
Majesty, that without offense to the same, we may, according to the undoubted
right and liberty of Parliament, proceed in our intended course of a full
examination of these new impositions: That so we may cheerfully pass on to
your Majesty's business, from which this stop has by diversion so long
withheld us. And we your Majesty's most humble, faithful, and loyal Subjects,
shall ever (according to our bounden duty) pray for your Majesty's long and
happy reign over us.

The question is, whether the King, without assent of Parliament, may set
impositions upon the wares, and goods of merchants exported, and imported, out,
of, and into, this Realm.
THree things have been debated in this Parliament, that have much concerned
the right of our whole Nation, of which every one of them has exceeded the
other by a gradation in weight and moment.

The first, was the change of our name, which was a point of honor, The name
of Britain not admitted in legal proceedings.
wherein we showed our selves not willing to leave that name, by which our
ancestors made our Nation famous: yet have we lost it, saving only in those
cases where our ancient and faithful protector, the Common Law does retain it.

The second was the union; a question of greater moment, for that concerned the
freehold of our whole Nation, not in so high a point as having, or not having;
but in point of Division and participation, that is, whether we should enjoy
the benefits, and liberties of the kingdom our selves only as we and our
ancestors have done, or admit our neighbor Nation to have equal right in
them, and so make our own part the less, by how much the greater number
should be among whom the Division was to be made. Coke li 7. C^l^^s case.
This was adjudged against us both Legally and solemnly, and therefore in that
we rest, hoping of that effect of this judgment which we read of in the Poet:
Virgil Aeneid. l. 1, Dido's speech to Aeneas.
Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine habetur.

The third is the question now in hand, which exceeds the other two in
importance and consequence, concerning the whole kingdom, for it is a question
of our very essence, not what we shall be called, nor how we shall divide that
we have, but whether we shall have any thing or nothing: for if there be a
right in the King to alter the property of that which is ours without our
consents, we are but tenants at his will of that which we have. If it be in the
King and Parliament: Then have we property, and are tenants at our own will:
for that which is done in Parliament is done by all our wills and consents. And
this is the very state of the question which is proposed, that is, whether the
King may impose without consent of Parliament.

Impositions are of two natures, Foreign and Intestine.

Intestine be those, which are raised within our land in the commerce and
dealing that is at home within our selves, and may as well for that reason be so
called, as for that vescuntur intestinis Reipublicae, They are fed, and
nourished with the consuming and wasting of the entralls of the Common wealth.
Against these I need not to speak; for the Kings learned Counsel have with
great honor and conscience in full Council acknowledged them to be against
the law.

Therefore I will apply my self to speak of impositions foreign, being the
single question now in hand, and maintained on the Kings behalf with great art
and eloquence.

The inconvenience of these impositions to the Commonwealth, that is, how
hurtful they are to the Merchants, in impoverishing them in their estates; to
the King in the increasing of his revenues by decay of traffic, and to the
whole people in making all commodities excessive dear, is confessed by all;
and therefore need no debate. The point of right is now only in question, and
of that I will speak with conscience and integrity, rather desirous that the
truth may be known, and right be done, than that the opinion of my self, or
any other may prevail.

The occasion of this question was given by the book of rates lately set out,
affronted with the copy of Letters Patents, dated July 28.6. Jac. In which
book, besides the rates, is set down upon every kind of merchandise, exported
and imported, for the true answering of subsidy to the King, according to the
Statute of tonnage and poundage. In the first year of his reign there is an
addition of impositions upon all those kind of wares, which within the book
are expressed, and the rate of the imposition as high and in some cases higher,
than the rate of the subsidy: And this declared to be by authority of those
Letters Patents. Heareupon considering with my self, that heretofore the
setting on of one only imposition without assent of Parliament, upon some one
kind of merchandise, and that for a small time, and upon urgent necessity of
actual war, did so affect our whole Nation, and especially the great
Council of the Parliament, being the representative body of the whole
Commonwealth; that neither the sun did shine, nor the rivers run their
courses, until it was taken off by the public judgment of the whole State. I
thought it concerned me, and other members of that Council, that were no less
trusted for our countries, than those in former times, and have their actions
to guide and direct us, to have the same care they had in preserving the right,
and liberties of the people, having now more cause then they had, for that the
impositions, now set on without assent of Parliament, are not upon one or two
special kinds of goods, but almost indefinite upon all, and do extend to the
number of many hundreds, as appears by that printed book of rates, and are
set in charge upon the whole kingdom, as an inheritance to continue to the
King, his heirs and successors for ever: which limitation of estate in matter
of impositions was never heard of, nor read of before as I conceive.

The inducements expressed in these Letters Patents are much upon point of
State, and with reference to the rights and practice of foreign princes; For
this I will not take upon me to enter into the consideration of such great
mysteries of policy, and government, but will only put you in mind of that I
observe out of Tit. Tit. Liu. 8.
Livius the Roman Hi storiographer: Omnem divini, humanique moris memoriam
abolemus, cum nova peregrinaque patriis, and priscis praeferimus.

To that which has been spoken for the Kings Prerogative, I will give answer
to so much of it, as I may conveniently in my passage through this debate:
wherein I will principally endeavor to give satisfaction to such new
objections, as were made by the worthy and learned Counselor of the King that
spoke last, in maintenance of his Majesty's Prerogative.

The case in terms is this: Pat. July 28. Iac. 6.
The King by his Letters Patents before recited has ordained, willed, and
commanded that these new impositions contained in that book of rates shall be
for ever hereafter paid unto him, his heirs, and successors, upon pain of his
displeasure: Hereupon the question arises whether by this Edict and Ordinance
so made by the King himself, by his Letters Patents of his own will and power
absolute, without assent of Parliament, he be so lawfully entitled to that he
does impose, as that thereby he does alter the property of his subjects goods,
and is enabled to recover these impositions by course of Law.

I think he cannot; and I ground my opinion upon these four reasons.

1 It is against the natural frame and constitution of the policy of this
kingdom, which is jus publicum regni, and so subverteth the fundamental Law
of the Realm, and induces a new form of state and government.

2 It is against the municipall Law of the Land, which is jus priuatum, the Law
of property and of private right.

3 It is against Diverse statutes made to restrain our King in this point.

4 It is against the practice and action of our Common wealth, contra morem
majorum; and this is the modestest rule to limit both Kings Prerogatives, and
subjects liberties.

Upon the first, and fourth of these four principal grounds I will more
insist then upon the second and third, both for that in their own nature they
are a more proper matter for a Council of State, to the judgment of which I
apply my discourse (and they have not been enforced by others:) As also for
that the other two (as more fit for a bar, and the Courts of ordinary
justice) have by some professors of the Law been already most learnedly, and
exquisitely discussed.

For the first: it will be admitted for a rule, and ground of State, that in
every Commonwealth and government, there be some rights of Sovereignty, jura
Majestatis, which regularly, and of common right do belong to the Sovereign
power of that State; unless Custom, or the provisionall ordinance of that
State do otherwise dispose of them; which Sovereign power is potestas
suprema, a power that can control all other powers, and cannot be controuled
but by it self.

It will not be denied, that the power of imposing has so great a trust in it,
by reason of the mischiefs may grow to the Commonwealth by the abuses of it,
that it has ever been ranked among those rights of Sovereign power.

Then is there no further question to be made, but to examine, where the
Sovereign power is in this Kingdom; for there is the right of imposition?

The Sovereign power is agreed to be in the King: but in the King is a twofold
power; the one in Parliament, as he is assisted with the consent of the whole
State; the other out of Parliament, as he is sole, and singular guided merely
by his own will. And if of these two powers in the King one is greater than
the other, and can direct and control the other; that is, Suprema Potestas,
the Sovereign Power, and the other is subordinata.

It will then be easily proved, that the power of the King in Parliament is
greater than his power out of Parliament, and does rule and control it; for
if the King make a grant by his Letters Patents out of Parliament, it binds
him and his successors, he cannot revoke it, nor any of his successors; But
by his power in Parliament he may defeat and avoid it; and therefore that is
the greater power.

If a judgment be given in the Kings Bench, by the King himself (as may be,
and by the Law is intended) a writ of Error, to reverse this judgment, may be
sued before the King in Parliament, which writ must be granted by the
Chancellor, upon bill indorsed by the King himself, as the book is 1 H. 1 H.
7.19.6
7.19.6. And the form of the writ of Error is, that it being directed to the
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Lib. ntrac. fol. 302. c. 1.
Quia in recordo and processu, ac etiam in redditione judicii loquelae, quae
fuit in Curia nostra coram nobis, Error intervenit manifestus ad grave damnum,
etc. Nos errorem (si quis fuerit) modo debito corrigi, and partibus praedictis
plenam and celerem justitiam fieri volentes, in hac part vobis mandamus, quod
Recordum and processum loquela illius cum omnibus ea tangentibus, in praesens
Parliamentum nostrum sub sigillo tuo distinct and aperte mittas, and hoc
breve, ut inspectis, etc. nos de Consilio and advisamento Dominorum
spiritualiu^ and temporalium, ac Communitatis in Parliamento nostro praedicto
existentis, ulterius pro errore illo corrigendo fieri faciamus quod de jure and
secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae fuerit faciendum. So you
see the Appeal is from the King out of the Parliament, to the King in
Parliament; the writ is in his name; the rectifying and correcting the errors
is by him, The book is not so, that the Commons should meddle.
but with the assent of the Lords, and Commons, than which there can be no
stronger evidence to prove, that his power out of Parliament is subordinate to
his power in Parliament; for in Acts of Parliament, be they laws, grounds, or
whatsoever else, the Act and power is the Kings, but with the assent of the
Lords and Commons, which makes it the most sovereign and supreme power above
all, and controulable by none. Besides this right of imposing, there be others
in the Kingdom of the same nature: As the power to make laws; the power of
Naturalization; the power of erection of arbitrary government; the power to
judge without appeal; the power to legitimate: all which do belong to the
King only in Parliament. Others there be of the same nature, that the King may
exercise out of Parliament, which right is grown unto him in them, more in
those others by the use and practice of the Commonwealth: as denization,
coynage, making war: which power the King has time out of mind practiced,
without the gainsaying and murmuring of his subjects: But these other powers
before mentioned have ever been executed by him in Parliament, and not
otherwise, but with the reluctation of the whole Kingdom.

Can any man give me a reason, why the King can only in Parliament make laws?
No man ever read any law, whereby it was so ordained; and yet no man ever read
that any King practiced the contrary: Therefore it is the original right of
the Kingdom, and the very natural constitution of our State and policy, being
one of the highest rights of sovereign power: So it is in naturalization,
legitimation, and the rest of that sort before recited.

It has been alleged that those which in this Cause have enforced their
reasons from this Maxim of ours (That the King cannot alter the Law) have
diverted from the question.

I say under favor they have not; for that in effect is the very question now
in hand; for if he alone out of Parliament may impose, he alters the Law of
England in one of these two maine fundamental points. He must either take his
Subjects goods from them, without assent of the party, which is against the
Law; or else he must give his own Letters Pattents, the force of a Law, to
alter the property of his subjects goods, which is also against the Law.

That the King of England cannot take his subjects goods, without their
consent, it need not be proved more then a principal; it is jus indigena an
old homeborne right, declared to be Law by diverse statutes of the Realm: As in
34. E. 3. cap. 2. That no office of the Kings, 34. E. 3. c. 2.
or of his heirs, shall take any goods of any manner of person without the
assent and good will of the party, to whom the goods belonged. The same is
declared in many other statutes made against prisages and purveyances. Neither
have ever any Kings attempted to go plainly and directly against that right;
but have devised certain legal colors and shadows for their wrongful doing
in that kind, Commissions, Loans or Privy Scales, Benevolence
which I do find were of three sorts: by way of Commission; by way of Loan; by
way of Benevolence. Commissions of another were the most insolent; for they
went out (as it were by authority to levy aid of the people upon great
necessity of the Common wealth) These were condemned in Parliament 21. E. 3.
Number. 16. upon a grevious complaint made of the use of them by the Commons, unto
the King in Parliament: wherein the people do pray the King, that he would be
pleased to remember how at the parliament held the 17. year of his reign, and
at the last Parliament, That is, the Parliament.
it was then accorded, and granted by their said Lord the King and his
counsel, that there should go out no commissions out of chauncery for
hobbeleries, Archers, and other charges to be levied upon the people, if they
were not granted in Parliament; which ordinances were not observed; by reason
whereof, the people were impoverished and decayed, for which they prayed the
King that he would be pleased to take pity of his people, and the ordinances
and grants made to his people in Parliament to affirm and hold; And that if
such Commissions go out without assent of Parliament, that the Commons, which
are grieved thereby, may have writs of supersedeas, according to the said
Ordinance, and that the people be not bound to obey them.

To this the Kings answer is:

Siul tiel imposition fuit fait per grand necessity, and ceo del assent des
Prelates, Countes, Barons, and aut grandes and ausomes des Commons adonque
presents, Neant moins nostre Seignior le Roy^ne voet que tiel imposition non
duement fait, soit treit in consequence, eins voet que les ordinances don't
cest petition fait mention soit bienment gardes. The latest time that ever King
attempted that course of exaction was 17. Stowes annals. 17. H. 8.
H. 8. upon the taking of the French King at Pavie, by the forces of Charles
the fifth: Cardinal Wolsey having a purpose to put the King into a war,
about that quarrel, and finding his cophers empty, advised this way, to send
out Commissions, and by them to levy aid of the people, according to the value
of their estate; But this gave such discontent to the whole Realm, that it
caused in many places an actual rebellion; and the Cardinal being called to
give an account of this bad advice, did justify this fact by the example of
Joseph, who advised Pharaoh to take the fifth part of his subjects goods: But
when he saw that would not serve the turn, he falsely laid it upon the
Judges, informing the King, he did it by their advice, being resolved by them
of the lawfulness of the fact. So you see that great Churchmen found more
safety in matter of government of our Commonwealth, in making a false report
of a point of the Common Law, than in a true text of the Scripture. And if any
Churchmen will endeavor by application of the text of Scripture, to overthrow
the ancient laws, and liberties of the Kingdom, I would advise them to be
admonished by the ill success of the Cardinal, in this particular action, and
by the miserable catastrophe of his whole life and fortunes. Loans and Privy
Seals.


Loanes, and apprests were those, which we call Privy Seals, which though
they were more moderate in show, yet being made against the good will of the
parties, were as injurious indeed as the other. The Commons in Parliament, Rot.
pat. 25. E. 3. number. 16.
25. E. 3. Number. 16. made a grievous complaint to the King against the use of
them, and prayed, that none from thenceforth should be compelled to make loans
against their will, and they gave this reason in their petition: for that it is
against reason, and the franchise of the land, and prayed that restitution
might be made, to those that have made such loanes.

To this the Kings rescript was; It pleases our Lord the King, it be so.

Lastly, came in those kind of exactions, Benevolence.
which were termed by the fair name of Benevolences; but they became so
odious, as they gave the occasion of a good law to be made against themselves,
and against all other shifts, and devices, by what new terms soever imposed
upon the subjects: the Law is 1. R. 3. cap. 2. and is thus: 1 R. 3. c. 2.
The King remembering how the Commons of this his Realm, by n^^ and unlawful
inventions, and inordinate covetise, against the law of this Realm, have been
put to great servitude, and important charges and exactions, and especially by
a new imposition called a Benevolence, enacteth by the advice etc. That the
Subjects and Commons of this land from henceforth shall in no wise be charged
by any such charges, or impositions called a Benevolence, nor by such like
thing.

But if you will deny, that the King does in this case t^ke the goods of his
subject without his assent, then you must fall upon mine other alternative
proposition; That the Kings Patent has in this case the power of a law, to
alter property: for how can he recover the imposed by a legal course of
proceeding, and by judgment in his Court, but upon a title precedent him,
before the action brought, which title must be a property in the same imposed?
and how comes he by that property, but by his own Letters Patents, by which
he declares he will have that same as an imposition? For the judgment gives
not the right, but only does manifest and declare it, and gives execution of
it: So in this point, the question is, whether the Kings Patent has the force
and power of the Law, or not: for if it be not maintained that it has, it can
never be concluded, that he can transfer the property of his subjects goods
to himself, without the assent of them; for quod meum est, sine facto meo
alterius fieri non potest. And if you give this power to the Kings Patent, you
subject the law, and take away all rules and bounds of settled government, and
leave in the subject no property of his own, neither do you by this advance
the Kings power and prerogative, Bracton l. 1. c. 8.
but you make him no King; for as Bracton says, Rex est ubi dominatur lex, non
voluntas.

So we see that the power of imposing, and power of making Laws are
convertibilia and coincidentia; and whosoever can do the one, can do the
other; And this was the opinion of Sir John Fortescue that reverend and
honorable Judge, a very learned professor of the Common Law, and chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, Fortescu de laudibus Leg. Ang. cap. 9.
in the time of Henry 6. ^^s words are these in his book, De laudibus Legum
Angliae cap. 9. Non Potest Rex Angliae ad libitum leges mutare regni sui;
principatu namque nedum regali, sed and politico ipse dominatur: Si regali
tantum praeesset iis, leges mutare posset; tallagia quoque, and cateraonera
imponere, ipsis inconsultis, quale dominium leges civiles indicant, cum dicunt
quod principi placuerit, legis habet vigorem; sed long aliter potest
Rexpoliticis imperans, quia nec leges ipse sine subditorum assensu mutare
poterit, nee Subjectum populum renitentem enerare peregrinis impositionibus. In
which place I must intepret unto you, that peregrinae impositiones be not
strange and unheard of impositions, as was urged by the worthy gentleman that
spoke last; but impositions upon traffic into, and out of foreign Countries,
which is the very thing in question: Fortescue de laud. Leg. Ang. cap. 36.
further in the thirty sixth Chapter, he says, of the King of England, Neque
Rex ibidem per se, aut ministros suos tallagia, Subsidiae, aut alia quaevis
onera imponit ligeis suis, aut leges little mutat, velnovas condit, sine
concessione vel assensu totius regni sui in Parliamento. So he makes these two
powers of making Law, and imposing to be concomitant in the same hand, and that
the one of them is not without the other; He gives the same reason for this,
as we do now, but in other words, because (as he says) in England it is
principatus mixtus, and politicus, the King has his Sovereign power in
Parliament, assisted and strengthened with the consent of the whole kingdom:
and therefore these powers are to be exercised by him only in Parliament. In
other Countries they admit the ground of the Civil Law, quod principi
placuerit, legis habet vigorem; Because they have an absolute power to make
Law, they have also a power to impose, which has the force of a Law in
transferring property. Ph. Com. l 4 cap. 1. l 5. ca. 8.
Philip Comynes, that lived at that time, in his fourth book the first chapter,
the fifth book, the eighth chapter, takes notice of this policy of England,
and commends it above all other States, as settled in most security: And further
to our purpose lays this ground, That a King cannot take one penny from his
Subjects without their consent, but it is violence. And you may there note the
mischiefs that grew to the kingdom of France, by the voluntary impositions
first brought in by Charles the seventh, and ever since continued, and
increased to the utter impoverishment of the Common people, and the loss of
their free Council of three estates: And if this power of imposing were
quietly settled in our Kings, considering what is the greatest use they make of
assembling of Parliaments, which is the supply of money, I do not see any
likelihood to hope for often meetings in that kind; because they would provide
themselves by that other means. And thus much for my first reason grounded
upon the natural constitution of the policy of our kingdom, and the public
right of our nation.

2. Com. Law.
For the point of Common Law, which is my second Reason, it has been well
debated, and nothing left unspoken that can be said in it; and therefore I will
decline to speak of that, which other men have well discussed, and the rather,
for that there is nothing in our Law-book directly, and in point of this
matter; neither is the word (imposition) found in them, Dier. 1. E. 165.
until the case in my L. Dier, 1. Eliz. 165: for we shall find this business
of an higher strain, and always handled elsewhere, as afterward shall
appear: yet I will offer some answers to such objections, as have been made on
the contrary in point of Common Law, and have not been much stood upon by
others to be answered.

The objections that have been made are these; that from the first Book of the
Law, to the last, no man ever read any thing against the Kings power of
imposing; No judgment was ever given against it, in any of the Kings Courts at
Westminster: Other points of prerogative as high as this, disputed and debated,
his excess in them limited, as in the book of 42. 42. Ass. p. 5.
Ass. pl. 5. where the Judges took away a Commission from one, that had power
given by it to him under the great Seal, to take ones person, and to seize his
goods before he was indicted. 1. and 2. E. Dier. 175.
So Master Scrogs case, 1. and 2. El. Dier. 175. the power of the King in
making a Commission to determine a question of right, depending between two
parties notably debated, and ruled against the King, that he could not grant
it.

To this I answer, that causes of this nature (of which the question now
handled is) have ever been taken to be of that extraordinary consequence, in
point of the Common right of the whole kingdom, that the State would never
trust any of the Courts of ordinary justice with the deciding of them; but
assumed the cognizance of them into the high Court of Parliament, as the
fittest place to decide matters, 2. Ed. 3.7.
so much concerning the whole body of the kingdom, As 2. Ed. 3.7. it appears,
that Ed. 1. had granted a Charter to the men of great Yarmouth, that all the
ships of Merchants, coming to the port of Yarmouth, should land their goods at
their haven, and not at any other haven at that port, as at Garneston, and
little Yarmonth, which were members of that port This was very inconvenient for
the Merchants, and a great hurt to traffic, and therefore the Charter was
questioned in the time of Ed. 2. and adjudged good by the Counsel: but the
parties not contented with this judgment, in the second year of King E. 3. by
an order in Parliament made upon a petition there exhibeted against this grant,
brought a Scire facias out of the Chancery returnable in the kings bench, to
question again the lawfullnesse of the Patent, and in that suit, the cause was
notably Debated, and those reasons much insisted upon that have been enforced
in this case; As that of the Kings power in the custody of the ports: But the
matter so depending in the ordinary Court of justice, a Writ came out of the
Parliament, and did adjourne it thither again, where it gave occasion of a
good Law to be made, to prevent the like grants, and to make them void
notwithstanding any judgment given upon them, and to make such judgments also
void. The Statute is, 9. E. 3. c. 1. 9. E. 3. c. 1. everyal en and denizen may
carry his Merchandise where it pleased him, notwithstanding any Charter granted
or judgment thereupon. 16. and (...) Re^. 1.
And in the Parliament rolls, 2. H. 4. number. 109. we find a notable record,
which gives warrant for the proceeding in Parliament, in this manner as has
been in this Case, notwithstanding the judgment in the Exchequer, and declares
to the Kingdom, that notwithstanding the great wonder made by some men,
nothing has been done in this business by those that serve in the Parliament,
but in imitation of their worthy predecessors in the very like case. In the
second year of H. 4. the Commons show that in the time of R. 2. by the means
of John Waltham, Bishop of Salisbury, Treasurer of England, wrongfully without
authority of Parliament, and by reason of a judgment given in the Exchequer,
16. and 17. R. 2. by the Barons there against certain Merchants of Bristow,
and other places, passage had been taken for wines, otherwise than in ancient
times had been, and therefore they prayed, they might pay their prise wines, in
the manner they had used to pay, notwithstanding any judgment given in the
Exchequer, or other ordinance made by the said Treasurer, contrary to the
ancient usage; which petition the King granted, and the judgment thereupon
became void, and the prisage wine has been paid contrary to the judgment
ever since.

In 1. 1. El. Dier 165.
El. Dier. 165. upon the complaint, made by the Merchants, of the impositions
set upon cloth by Queen Mary by her absolute power, without assent of
Parliament; the cause was thought too weighty to be decided in any one Court;
but (as it appears in the book) it was referred to all the Judges of England,
who diverse times had conference about it. So it may well be, there is nothing
against it in our year books, for there is nothing of it.

Another objection was this, which was made in the last argument, viz. That
Custom is originally due by the common Law of England, It can then have no
other ground or cause; but merely by the Kings royal prerogative, as a right
and duty originally belonging to his Crown: which if it be, it must
necessarily follow he may impose, for that is but the exercising of that right.
To prove this was alleged the case 39. 39 E. 3.13.
E. 3.13. by which case it appears, that King John had a custom of eight
pence on a tonn of wine in the part of South-hampton, but the book does not
tell you that the King had it by prerogative, and he might have it as well
otherwise: as by prescription, or convention, which shall rather be intended,
by reason of the certainty of the sum paid; for if it were by prerogative,
he might take sometimes more, sometimes less at his will, the right being
indefinite, and the quantity limited only by his own Discretion. 18. El Dier
352.
A common person may have such a custom certain, as, 18. El. Dier 352. the
Mayor of London has the twentieth part of salt brought into the City by
Aliens, which is a great imposition, but is good by prescription originally and
has received greater strength since, by acts of Parliament made, for the
confirmation of the liberties and customs of the City of London. So it
appears, Dier 43.
that John of Britain had Custom of the ships that arrived at his port of
little Yarmouth, worth twenty pounds per an. And these instances do infer,
that a Custom may be otherwise then by prerogative, and therefore it is no
good argument to conclude, the King had such a custom, Therefore he had it by
prerogative.

The book in 30. H. 8. Dier 43. 30. Hen. 8. Dier 43.
was much pressed on this point, which says that custom belonged to the King
at Common Law, and does instance in wool, woll fells, and leather begun at the
Common Law, but abridged by the Satute of 14. E. 3. ca. 21. stat. 1. 14. Ed. 3.
c. 21. statn.
r. but this appears to be a great error, and mistaking in the book; for we
do find that that custom of woolls, wooll-fells, and Leather was begun by a
grant in Parliament, as appears in statute 15. E. 1. ca. 7. the words be
Granted to us by the Commonalty aforesaid, and the last mention before was that
the King had granted to the Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of
land, etc. Novem. 3. Ed. 1. the King recited in his letters patents, That
Prelati magnates actota Communitas mercatorum Regni, granted this new custom.
And so the ground and motive of that opinion being false, all grounded upon
that must needs be erroneous.

It was objected that the King holds at this day the increase of four pence
in the pound, over due custom, paid by Merchants Aliens according to the
purport of the Charta mercatoria 31. E. 1. Rot. char. 31. E. 1. nu. 44. in Turri
by mere right of prerogative at the Common Law; for by that grant of the
Merchants he cannot hold it, they being no body politic at the time of the
grant; and therefore the grant is merely void to bind in succession, And yet
the Merchants Aliens do pay it at this day.

It is agreed, that by the Common Law a contract with a number not incorporate,
binds not succession; but we must take notice, that they, by whom that grant
was made, of the augmentation of Custom, by threepence in the pound, and
other increases, 31. E. 1. were Merchants aliens, who by the law of Merchants,
and Nations may contract to bind their successors in matters of traffic:
for their contracts are not ruled by the Common law of the Land, but by the law
of Nations, and per ^egem Mercatoriam, as the book case is, 13. Ed. 4.10. and
there was a good consideration given them by the King for this increase of
custom: as discharge of prise Wines for two shillings the Tonn, and other
immunities, which all Merchants aliens hold and enjoy at this day, by force of
that contract made 31. E. 1. For a stranger pays now but two shillings the
Tonn for prisage, whereas it stands an English man in much more: so as the
rule of commutative justice makes the contract availeable to the King against
the Merchants, because he parts with part of his prisage to the Merchant, and
makes it availeable to the Merchant against the King, because he gives him
increase of custom above that is due by law. 27. E. 3. c 26
But the statute of 27. E. 3. cap. 26. heretofore cited does make this point
clear without scruple, which confirms the Charter of 31. E. 1. entirely, and
by that the increase of custom by threepence in the pound, which is by name
mentioned in the statute, is now due by act of Parliament.

If you will have the King hold this increase of custom by Prerogative, you
go directly against his meaning; for it appears by that which presently
followed this grant, that the King took this increase of custom by way of
contract only, and not by Prerogative; for the same year following he
directs his writs to the officers of his ports, reciting the contract made
with the Aliens by Charta Mercatoria, adding further, that some Denizens were
willing to pay the like custom, upon the same immunities to them to be
granted, and does assign his officers to gather it, but with this clause, Si
gratanter and absque coertione solvere voluerint, ita quod aliquem Mercatorem
de regno, and potestate nostra ad praestationes and custumas hujusmodi invito
solvendas nullatenus distringatis. Nothing can more plainly express, that the
Kings intention was not to demand this by way of Prerogative, but by force of
the contract. If there were such a Prerogative in the Crown as of right to
have custom; how comes it to pass, this Prerogative never yet had fruit or
effect? for this I can maintain, that the King of England has not one penny
custom, or imposition upon merchandises elder than the fourth year of Queen
Mary; that he holds not by act of Parliament, and by the peoples grant: The
eldest that he has is that of wools, woolfells, and lether, and that is by act
of Parliament, as appears in the Statute 25. E. 1. cap. 7. 25. E. 1. c. 7.
the tonnage and poundage by Parliament in the first year of every Kings
reign.

The Aliens increase of custom by Parliament 27. E. 3. 27. E. 3. cap. 27.
cap. 26. then this Prerogative has been much neglected, that it was never
called on to be put in execution, until now of late years.

Concerning the statutes made for restraining our Kings, from the exercise of
this pretended Prerogative, Statutes 3.
which is the third matter I stand upon: Those that have maintained the Kings
Prerogative in this point, have endeavored to interpret those statutes, to
extend only to restrain him from imposing upon wool, woolfells, and lether,
which are staple commodities: And the reason they give for this restraint, more
than for other goods, is because the King, by statute, is restrained to a
custom certain for those commodities, as the half mark a sack of wool, and
half a mark three hundred woollfels, and thirteen shillings four pence a
last of lether; and therefore great reason he should not exceed this custom in
these commodities.

This objection receives many answers: First it appears both by the express
letter of diverse of the Laws made in this point by the occasion that induced
the making of the Laws, and by the execution of them, that all other wares and
merchandises, as well as those of the staple, were within the purpose and intent
of those Laws: Secondly, the reason aleadged, why there should be restraint
for the staple commodities, rather than for the other, is mistaken; for the
Lords and Commons did grant to E. 1. by act of Parliament the custom of the
half mark for wool, woolfels, and lether, which was matter of mere grace and
liberality, and includes no restraint in it, but rather a favorable
extention, quite contrary to the sense of the objection; according to that rule
of interpretation, Gratiosa ampliari decet, odiosa restringi. And admit some
Laws be made expressly to restrain impositions upon wool, woollfels, and
lether, by reason that the occasion of making such Laws was the actual
imposing, upon those goods at that time, shall we not by good construction,
Secundum mentem extensivum legis, extend this law to other wares and
merchandises, that are within the same mischief? If we look to the reason of
the law, we shall make no doubt of it; for that is, because the impositions
were without assent of Parliament, not because they were upon such, and such
commodities. Besides those Laws so made are declarativae juris antiqui, non
introductivae novi.

In the enumeration of those statutes, which I conceive make directly to this
purpose, I will endeavor rather to answer the objections made against them,
than to enforce the sense and meaning of them, which is very plain and open,
and needs no interpretation. The first statute enforced is, Mag. charta cap.
30. made in the ninth year of H. 3. by which it is enacted, that all Merchants
shall have free egresse, and regresse, out of, and into this Realm, with their
goods and merchandises, to buy, and sell, sine omnibus malis tolnetis per
antiquas, and rectas consuetudines: in which words we may infer, that both
the use and right of imposing are absolutely excluded, and debarred; for
Consuetudo, which in this case is to be taken for Usage, which is mos (not
improperly for Portorium, a duty paid in money, as our English word Custom, in
one sense does signify) implies a beginning, and continuance by consent, and
will of the parties, not by power, and enforcement which cannot be a custom;
and therefore it cannot be an imposition: for that arises mercly out of the
will and power of their imposer, and is against the will of him, upon whose
goods it is set: But take Consuetudo either for mos or portorium, the epithetes
with which it is qualified antiquum, and rectum, do describe it to be of that
nature, that it cannot be an imposition: for antiquum, in legal construction,
is that which is time out of mind, that is not an imposition: for then, by
continuance of time, it should grow aright by prescription, and were
justifiable: Rectum implies a limited right, which infers, there may be a
wrong and exceeding of that right, which is not in impositions: for if there be
a right in the King to impose, the quantity, time, and other circumstances are
in his discretion; the right is illimited: And if he set on never so great an
imposition, there is as much right in it, as if it be never so small: the
excess makes it a burden, but not a wrong.

We may further observe, that in the statute, malum tolnetum, which is evil
toll, is set down by way of antithesis to antiqua and recta consuetudo; by
which is inferred, that exactions upon wares and merchandises, not qualified
with these two properties of antiquum and rectum, are evil and unjust. This is
made more evident by a Record in the Tower of the sixteenth year of H. 3.
which was a mandat sent by the King to the Customers of his ports for the
execution of this law made in 9. H. 3. Rot. claus. 16. H. 3. number. 20
whereby it is commanded, Quod omnibus Mercatoribus in portum suum venientibus
cum vinis, and aliis merchandizis scire faciant, quod salvo and secure in
terram Angliae veniant cum vinis and mercandizis suis, faciendo inde rectas and
debitas consuetudines, nec sibi timeant de malis tolnetis, quae us faciat Rex,
vel in terra sua fieri permittat. By this record the word Consuetudo is
interpreted to be mos, not portorium, otherwise it should have been solvendo
consuetudines, not faciendo. Also these words antiquum and rectum in the
statute in this writ are rectum and debitum, which does more enforce a
certainty of right and duty, which by no means can be intended in impositions.

Objections against this law were made in the last argument. First, that it was
made for Aliens: this is true; the words of the Law do plainly show it was
made for Aliens: but if the State was so careful to provide for them; shall we
not judge that with Denizens it was so already? and that this statute was made
to extend that liberty by act of Parliament to Aliens, which Denizens had by
the Common law: succeeding times did so conceive of it, 2 E. 3. c. 9.
as appears by the statute of 2. E. 3. cap. 9, the words are, that all
Merchants, strangers, and Princes may go and come with their merchandises in
England, after the tenor of the great Charter, and that writs be thereupon
sent to all the Sheriffs in England, and to Majors, and Bailiffs of good towns
where need shall require.

A second objection was made in the last argument, out of these words of the
statute of M. Chart. that Merchants might freely traffic, Nisi public antea
prohibiti fuerint: by which was enforced, that the King had power to restrain
and prohibit traffic; therefore to impose. It is agreed, there may be a
public restraint of traffic, upon respects of the common good of the
kingdom; but whether that which is called publica prohibitio in the statute,
be intended by the King alone, or by act of Parliament, is a question: for such
restraints have still been by Parliament. But admit the King may make a
restraint of traffic in part, for some public respect of the common wealth,
he does this in point of protection, as trusted by the Common wealth, to do
that which is for the public good of the kingdom; but if he use this trust to
make a gain and benefit by imposing, that is a breach of the trust, and a sale
of government and protection. But more of this shall be hereafter spoken in the
answering of the maine objections.

The next law is that notable statute of E. 2^. E. 1. c. 7.
1. in the 28 year of his reign made upon the very point in question: the
words are these; And forasmuch as the more part of the Commonaltie of this
Realm find themselves sore grieved with the male toll of Woolls, that is, to
wit, a toll of forty shillings, for every sack of Wool, and have petitioned to
us for to release the same; We at their request have clearly released it, and
have granted for us and our heirs, that we shall not take such things,
without their common consent and good will, saving to us and our heirs the
customs of Woolls, Skins, and Leather granted before by the Commonalty
aforesaid. Against the application of this Law to the question now in hand,
many objections were made, some out of matter precedent to the Law, some out of
the Law it self, some out of matter subsequent and following after the Law:
For matter precedent; The Walsingham in E. 1. fo. 71.72.73. edit. per W. Came
den impres. Francofurti. 1603.
It was objected out of Tho. Walsingham an Historiograper of good credit, that
Writ of that time when the Satute was made, That in the petition of grievances
given to King E. 1. by the people in the 25. year of his reign, upon which
petition the statute was made, that they found themselves not grieved in point
of right, but in point of excess; the words are, Communitas sentit se
gravatam, de vectigali lanarum quod nimis est onerosum, viz. de quolibet sacco
40. s. and de lana fracta septem marcas; So they express the cause of their
grief, that it was too heavy; which is to be applied to the point of
excess, not of right.

To this I answer, that if the words had been (quia ost nimis onerosum) this
construction might have been made out of them; because the word (quia) had
induced a declaration of the cause of that which was formerly affirmed: but the
words are (quod nimis onerosum) which does only positively affirm that the
imposition, de facto, was intolerable for the greatness of it, which does not
therefore admit that it is tolerable, in respect of the right the King had to
impose. But this is made clear by the general word precedent in the preamble
of the petition, which does evidently infer, they grounded their complaint
upon point of right, not upon point of of excess; the words are these, Tota
terra communitas sentit se valde gravatam, quia non tractantur secundum leges,
and consuetudines terrae, secundum quas tractari antecessores sui solebant
habere, sed voluntary excluduntur. After which preamble, among the
particulars, this of forty shillings upon a sack of Wool is ranked, but with a
dependencie of that expressed in the preamble, for the point of right. But
seeing we light upon History, which though it be of small authority in a Law
argument; yet being the History of our own Realm, has fit and proper use in
the common counsel of the Realm, Matthew. Westminster. fo. 430. Edit. p^r H. Savile
mil. Francofurti 1601.
I will pursue it a little further. Out of Matthew. Westminster. a Writer, that lived
much nearer the time of the Law made, then Thomas Walsingham; he says, That
the Commons by their petitions required, Ne Rex de coetero tallagia usurparet,
and voluntarias super his inductas exactiones de coetero quasi in irritum
revocaret; by which it appears, that the point of the complaint was, that the
exactions laid on them were voluntary, that is, at the Kings will, without
assent of Parliament. Out of the Law it self, it has much been pressed, as
first the Commons made petition to the King, whereupon they infer out of the
nature of the word (petition) that their proceeding was by way of grievance,
for the excess and inconvenience, as a matter of grace, not in course of
justice for the wrong.

To this I answer, that considering the quality of the parties to this action,
it being between the King and the subject; duty and good manners does induce
gentleness and humility of terms, without blemish, or diminution of the
force of right. It is according to the demeanor of Job, Job. 5.15.
cap. 9. v. 15. Though I were just, yet would I not answer, but I would make
supplication to my judge. But in our forms of Law, be the right of the subject
never so clear, manifest, and acknowledged by all; yet if his own be detained
from him by the King, he has no other writ or action to recover, but a mere
petition, Supplicat celsitudini, etc. So as if the word petition to the King
infer defect of right in the petitioner; there can be no case where the King
can do the subject wrong.

A second objection out of the body of the Law is, that the King does release
that imposition of forty shillings, which implies a right settled in him. But
to this I answer, that it is no necessary inference, that wheresoever a
release of right is: for it is used for claim only, or where possession was,
though wrongful, and that in majorem securitatem, quia abundans cautela non
nocet; But in this case, a release was very expedient, and for some respect
necessary, to extinguish a right the King had in this imposition against the
Merchants themselves: For this imposition, though it were not set on by assent
of Parliament, yet was it not set on by the Kings absolute power; but was
granted to him by the Merchants themselves who were to be charged with it: so
the grievance was the violation of the right of the people, in setting it on
without their assent in Parliament, not the damage that grew by it; for that
did only touch the Merchants, who could not justly complain thereof, because
it was their own act and grant. 22. E. 1. Origin. in Scac. Rem. These.
This appears by two notable records, the one 22. E. 1. A writ to the
Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer in Ireland, to discharge the Merchants
there, of impositions on Woolls; in which the King recites, Licet in subsidium
Guerra Regis pro recuperanda terra Vasconia, mercatores gratanter concesserunt
per biennium vel triennium, si tantum duraverit Guerra, de sacco lanae, etc.
The other record is the Writ of publication that in 26. E. 1. went out after
the Statute of 25. In 26. F. 1. mem. Sca. Rem. These.
in which Writ the King recites thus, Cum nos ad instantiam Communitatis Regni
nostri remiserimus custumam 40. s. nobis nuper in subsidium Guerrae noctrae
contra Regem Franciae concessum, etc. A third objection made out of the body of
the Statute, by those which have argued on the contrary part was upon these
words, that the King would take (no such things) without common consent: by
which words they conceived the intention of the Law, was limited precisely to
impositions set upon wool, and not on other commodities, which are not such
things, but other: And for this they allege this reason, That it was not
probable when the complaint was only for an imposition on Wool, that the King
would give a remedy for other things not spoken of, for which there was no
cause of complaint.

To this a full answer is given many ways: first out of the (Saving) in the
Act, which extends to other things than to Wool, as to Wooll-fells and
Leather; therefore the purview of the act by these words (such things)
extends to more than the Wool; for there needs no Saving, but for that which
is contained in the purview. Secondly, the reason alleged, that no more by
likelihood should be remedied, but for Wool; because only that was complained
of, is false: For the complaint of the Commons was not only for this imposition
on Wool; but diverse other burdens and grievances of the like nature. And this
will appear if we compare all the parts of the Law. the one with the other:
for this Law is in the form of a Charter written in French, and begins,
Edward by the grace of God, etc. And is an entire grant, and instrument without
fractions, sections, and Chapters, as it is now printed, and contains in it,
next before this last clause concerning the impositions on Woolls, which in the
printed Book is Cap. 6. That the King, for no business from thenceforth, will
take no manner of aids, mises, nor prises, but by common assent. This word
(mises) in French signifies properly impositions, derived of the word mitto,
in Latin (to put) so the word (such things) is a conclusion to all the
premises, and has relation not only to that which is made Cap. 7. by the
Printer, and concerns the male toll of Woolls; but to that precedent which is
(all otheraydes) impositions, and takings.

The Writ of publication of this Statute sant out to all parts in 26. Me^^.
S^ac in 26. E. 1. Rem. These.
E. 1. makes plain this construction, the words of it are, Concedentes quod
custumam illam velaliam, sine voluntate, vel communi assensu non capiamus:
These words (vel aliam) are indefinite, and extend to any other whatsoever,
besides that of Woolls. The Writ does further discharge Merchants for the
Commodities of Wooll-fells, and Leather, which are not complained of by name in
the Statute; and therefore the Law was intended to other impositions, as well as
to those upon Woolls.

The objection made out of matter subsequent to the Statute was this, that
notwithstanding this Law of 25. E. 1. impositions that before the statute had
bin set on other Merchandise than Woolls, were still answered after the
Statute; and for instance of this was alleged, that whereas 16. E. 1. an
imposition of 4. s. 16. E 1. Orig. R. These.
the Tonn was set upon Wines brought into the Kingdom, an account was made of
this in the exchequer in 26. E. 1. as by the records there appears; by which
it seems that the Law of 25. E. 1. was not taken to extend to wines, and such
other Commodities, other than Woolls named in the Statute. It is true, such an
imposition was set on by E. 1. in the sixteenth year of his reign, and an
account made for it 25. and 26. 25. and 26. E. 1. de count. T. Mich. R. These.
But it appears by the record of the account, that it was made for the time
ended before the Statute made: As from the eighteenth of May, 16 E. 1. to 23
Jul. 22. E. 1. But there is no record, that ever any account was made for any
money received for that imposition, for the time after the Statute made;
neither was it very willingly answered before; for it appears by the record,
that it was ten year after the setting of it.

The third Satute alleged on the behalf of the Subject is that 34. E. 1. ca.
1. the words are these, 34. E. 1. ca. 1.
No tallage or aid shall be taken or levied by us, or our heirs in our
Realm, without the good will and assent of our Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, Knights, burgesses, and other freemen of the land. Against this was
objected, that this Statute was intended only upon the taxes and impositions of
things; The word Auxilium makes it clear, that it is to be intended further
then of things within the realm; for tallagium is commonly intended of
Domestical taxes, but auxilium is the most usual term for impositions upon
goods imported and exported, as by the acts of Parliament by which such
impositions are given to the King, in which they are called most commonly by
the name of Aids, as proceeding of good will and benevolence.

The fourth Satute alleged on this part is that of 5. 5. E. 2. ca. 14 Rot.
Ordi^.
E. 2. ca. 14. just in point of the matter in question; and therefore I will
set it down as I find it Verbati^n in the record in the tower, Ensement
novelles customs sont levies, and ancients enhaunces come sur levies drapes,
vine, aver du pcis, and aut chooses purguoy les Merchants veynont pluis
vilement, and meynes de bien, menynont en la terre, and les Merchants
estrangers de murront pluis longment que ils soloyent faier, pur le quel
demoure les chooses sont le pluis enhaunces que ils ne Soloyent estre, al
damage de roy, and de son people. Nou^ ordonomus que touts manners de male
tolls levies puies de Coronement de Roy Ed. faier de Roy Henry (...) ^^^irement
oustes, and de tout estreints pur touts jours, nient ^^^iristeant le Chartre
que le dict Roy Ed. fist as Merchants aliens, pur ceo que il fuit fait contra
le grand Char. and encountre le Franchise de la City de Londres, and sans
assent de Baronage, etc. Savant neque don't al Roy le custom de leynes, peulx,
and de quirs, etc, si aver les doet.

By this Law is recited, that by the leving of new coustomes, and by the
raising of old, traffic was destroyed, and all things made dear; And
therefore all new impositions and customs were dscharged Charta mercatoria, by
which custom was increased on aliens, was taken away, and the reason alleged;
Because it was sans assent de Baronage, and against the great Charter. And this
is further which this clause, Saving to the King his custom of wool,
woll-fells and Lether, Si aver les doet. Great wars have been raised against
the credit of this Law in the Parliament house, and three things have been
especially objected against it; First, that it is no Law, for it was enforced
upon the King, by some of the nobility that were too strong for him, the Realm
being then in tumult and mutiny about the quarrel of Pierce of Gaveston, so
never had the Kings free consent; but he gave way unto it for fear of greater
mischief: Secondly, that in it self it is unjust, as in taking away the
custom granted to the King by Charta mercatoria 31. E. 1. and in making doubt
whether the King should have the custom of wools, etc. by those words, Saving
it to him, Si aner les doet.

The third objection is, that if it were a Law, it is repealed.

To these I give particular answers.

To the first: that this statute was made both at the instance of the King, and
people, with a purpose and intention on all parts to settle things in a stay
and order, both in the Kings house, and Commonwealth: the King and his nobles
standing in good terms, when this business was taken in hand; and it was
begun and ended with great solemnity and ceremony: for the King in the third
year of his reign gave Commission under his great Seal to 32. Lords
spiritual and temporal; Com. 16. M^r. 3. E. 2. Rot. ordin. 5. E. 2.
of which there were eleven Bishops, eight Earls, and thirteen Barons; they
being as Committees of the higher House to devise ordinances, for the good
government of of his house and his Realm. In which Commission he does for the
honor of God, the good of him, and of his Realm, of his freewill grant to
the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and others elected by the whole Kingdom,
full power to ordain the State of his house and Realm by such ordinances, as
by them should be made, to the honor of God, the honor and profit of holy
Church, the honor of himself, the profit of him and his people, according to
right and reason, and the oath he made at his Coronation.

These joining with others of discreet Commons in Parliament, and taking every
of them a solemn oath for their sincere demeanor in the business, did make
this and other ordinances, which were so well liked of by the King, that after
they were made, he took an oath to observe them, Pullic. 3. Kal. Oct. 5. E. 2.
Rot ordin. P^t. 5. Oct. 5. E. 2. Rot. ordin.
and caused them to be published in Paul's Churchyard by the Bishop of
Salisbury, by denouncing excommunication, against all that should wilfully
infringe them: And by his Letters Patents dated 5. Oct. 5. regni sui, did send
them through the Realm to be published, and from thenceforth to be observed,
thereby signifying his great liking and approbation of them; after which they
had the force and power of Laws given unto them in the Parliament, in the
fifth year of his reign.

The second objection, which is the injustnesse of the law, instanced in two
points; the taking away of Charta mercatoria, and the doubting of the Kings
right to the custom of wolls, woll-fells and Lether, etc. To the first of
these, I deny it to be unjust, but to be according to the law of England, and
liberty of the Kingdom: for that Charter did contain in it diverse grants of
things, which were not in the power of the King to grant, without assent of
Parliament; as the trial per medietatem linguae, and other things tending to
the alteration of the Law, and burdening of the people; and therefore that
Charter never had his undoubted and settled force, until it was confirmed by act
of Parliament, but lay asleep almost twenty years together, without being put
in execution, between 5. E. 2. and 27. E. 3. when it was confirmed, for the
doubt that is supposed to be made in the statute of the Kings right to the
custom of wool, wooll-fells, and Lether I take it there is no such doubt
made: For the words (Saving the kings right to the custom of woolls si aver
les doet) have this construction, that is, at such times as he ought to have
it: so the word (si) has the signification of (quando) for it had been a folly
to have made a Saving of that, of the right whereof they had doubted, neither
is it likely but that they would have taken it away, if it had not been
lawful; but there was no color to doubt of the right of it, for it was given
by act of Parliament, and ever continued in force without challenge, or
exception to the lawfullnesse of it.

The third objection is, That this Statute is repealed: To this I plead, Nullum
vale recordum. If it be repealed it must be by Act of Parliament, for
unumquodque dissoluitur i^sdem modis quibus est colligatum: I and others have
searched the Records of the Realm, and endeavored by all means to inform our
selves of the truth herein, and we can find no Act of Parliament of repeal:
The truth is, some Kings finding these Laws not to sort to their wills and
humors, have endeavored to suppress them, but they didnever yet obtain a
repeal of them by Act of Parliament.

But it is further urged, That although there were no formal repeal of the
Law, yet it was never put in execution as a Law, but even presently upon the
making was rejected, and use and practice went quite against it: And for
instance hereof, a Record was vouched that E. 2. held himself so little bound
by it, as that in the 11 year of his reign he set an imposition without
assent of Parliament upon Wool, Wooll-fels, Leather, Wines, Cloth, averde
pois, and diverse other kind of Merchandises. To this I answer, that if it were
true, that a distinct and impotent King, as he was, did contrary to the Law;
does this make the Law void and no Law: But if we look into the whole Record,
and skanne this action of E. 2. from the beginning of it, unto the end, we
shall find it a very good instance to prove the practice and execution both of
this Law of 5. E. 2. and of that in 25. E. 1. for it is true that E. 2. in the
11 year of his reign did borrow of the Merchants a certain sum of money
above the due custom of Wool, Wooll-fels, Wine, averdepois, Leather, and such
other goods imported and exported; But it appears by the Record, he took it
but for one year; he took it by the advice and counsel of the Merchants:
and he took it per viam mutui. as a loan. The direction of the Writ is, Rot.
claus. 11. E 2.
Collectoribus mutui nobis per mercatores alienigenas and indigenas de certis
rebus and Merchandisis usque ad certum tempus faciendi. This was done in good
terms, he did not claim it as his right, but did borrow it, which I do
think is a good evidence against his right: But what became of this? the State
would not abide it, for all these fair shows. And therefore afterward the
King sends out other Writs by which he discharges all merchandises of this
loan, saving only Wool, Wooll-fels, and Leather, and for the loan taken upon
those commodities, it was limited to continue but until Michaelmas after, and
good security was given to the Merchants by the Customers to pay themselves by
way of defalcation out of the Customs which should be due after Michaelmas,
those sums which were so borrowed of them. The words of the Record are worth
the observing, Rot. finium 11. E. 2.
Cum pro expeditione guerrae Scotiae, and alijs arduis and urgentibus
necessitatibus nobis multipliciter incumbentibus, pro quarum exoneratione quasi
infinitam pecuniam refundere oportebit, pecunia plurimum indigeamus in
presenti, and nuper pro eo quod exitus regni and terrarum nostrarum simul
cumpecunia nobis in subventione praemissorum tam per Clerum quam Communitatem
regni nostri concessa ad sumptus praedictos cum festinatione qua expediret
faciendos, non sufficient, exquirentes vias, and modos quibus possemus pecuniam
habere commodius and decentius pro praemissis de consilio and advisamento
quorundam mercatorum tam alienigenarum quam indigenarum viam invenimus infra
script, viz. And so sets down the manner of the loan, and the security for
the payment of it: This (I take it) was neither an imposition, nor a wrong in
any respect. Also by the first Record it appears, that the loan set on
Wines, averdepois, and such other commodities, besides Wool, Wooll-fels and
Leather were presently discharged by E. 2. which shows they were taken to be
within the intent of the Statute of 25 E. 1.

The fifth Statute alleged on the behalf of the subject is that 14. 14 E. 3.
Stat. 1. ca. 21.
E. 3. Stat. 1. ca. 21. by which the Commons pray the King to take no more then
the old custom of the half mark. The King prays aid of the Commons for a
time above the custom upon his necessity of wars. And the conclusion is that
by that Act the King does grant that after the feast of Pentecost twelve
months following, he will take no more of Wools, Wooll-fels and Leather, but
the old Custom, and does promise to charge, set, or assesse upon the Custom
but in manner as aforesaid.

The sixth Statute is 14. E. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 1. 14 E. 3. stat. 2. ca. 1.
The King does grant by way of Charter to the Prelates, Earls, Barons,
Commons, Citizens, Burgesses and Merchants, that they be not from thenceforth
charged nor grieved to make any aid or sustain charge, if it be not by the
common consent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other great men, and
Commons of the Realm, and that in Parliament.

These two Statutes grew upon occasion of an Imposition set on Wool by the
King without assent of Parliament: Little has been objected against them, but
only to the first, that it was obtained of grace, and not upon instance of
right, which they gather out of the words of the Law, which are, The Commons
pray the King that he would stablish, that from henceforth no more but the old
custom be taken. The like reason may be made against the King out of the same
words in the same Law: for the King in the same Act prays the Commons to give
him an Imposition upon Wools for a time above the old Custom: but the Record
of the Petitions exhibited in Parliament, upon which these two Laws are made,
clears the objection.

The first was delivered by the Lords in this form, Rot. pa^l. 13. E. 3. number.
5.
Les grands volunt, that the maletoll set on Wools newly, be altogether abated,
and that the old custom beheld, and that they may have this in point of
Charter, and by inrollment in Parliament. This word (volunt) had been too high
for a suit of grace, and therefore must be intended of right. The Commons
Petition in form, is somewhat humble, but in effect and purpose is rough and
stern: Rot. parl. 13. E. 3. nu. 13.
the words are these, The Commons pray that the maletoll of Wools be taken as
it was used in ancient time, which is now enhaunced without the assent of the
Commons, and (grandes) as we conceive, and that if it be otherwise demanded,
that every one of the Commons may arrest them without being challenged.
According to these Petitions, the first of these two Laws, is by inrolment in
Parliament: the second is in form of a Charter: the first does express some
special commodities: the second does reach generally at all.

The seventh Law directly touching this point, 14. E. 3. s^at. 2. ca. 2.
is that 14. E. 3. stat. 2. ca. 2. The King does grant according to the great
Charter, that all Merchants denizons, and forrainers may without let safely
come into the Realm of England with their goods and Merchandises, and safely
tarry, and safely return, paying the Subsidies, customs and other profits
reasonably due. Upon the words of this Law, was great advantage taken, in this,
that besides custom and Subsidy, which comprehend all the certain and
ordinary duties, the King has upon the and wares and goods of Merchants, there
are other profits spoken of to be due: these they affirm cannot be understood
but of Impositions by the King without assent of Parliament.

To this I answer; if they were not duties due to the King besides, Custom and
Subsidy, which might satisfy the intention of these words, this objection
might have had some color in it; but it is plain that besides these two,
there are other profits due to the King upon Merchants goods, as Scavage,
Tonage, and the like.

And you shall find a Petition in Parliament, Rot. parl. 50. E 3. nu. 163.
50. E. 3 against the raising of these above the old rate.

The eight Law is E. 15. E. 3. stat. 2. ta. 5.
3. stat. 2 ca. 5. whereby it is enacted that every Merchant may freely buy and
sell, and pass the sea with their Merchandises of Wool and all other things,
paying the Custom of old time used, according to the Statute made the last
Parliament in Midlent, which was the stat. 14. E. 3. stat. 2. cap. 2. This Law
does expressly exclude the novelty of Impositions.

The ninth Law is that 18. 18. E. 3. stat. 1. ca. 3.
E. 3 stat. 1. ca. 3. Whereby it is enacted that the sea be open to all manner
Merchants to pass with their Merchandises where it shall please them.

The tenth is 27. 27. E. 3. st. 2. ca. 2.
E. 3. stat. 2. ca. 2. for the assurance of Merchant strangers and other, the
King does will and grant for him and his heirs that nothing shall be taken
over the due Customs, nor taken of them to his use by color of sale, or in
other manner against their wills.

The eleventh is 38. E. 3. ca. 2. 38 E. 3. ca. 2.
that all manner Merchants aliens and denizens may buy and sell all manner of
Merchandises, and freely carry them out of the Realm, paying the Customs and
Subsidies thereof due.

The last is 22. H. 8. ca. 8. 22. H. 8. ca. 8.
by which it was enacted that Tables should be set up in ports, by which the
certainty and very duty of every custom, toll, and duty or sum of money to
be demanded and required of wares and Merchandises shall and may plainly
appear and be declared, to the intent that nothing be exacted otherwise then
in old time has been used and accustomed.

By this late Law it appears that the judgment of of the whole Parliament
was at that time, that nothing was due upon Wares and Merchandises, but that
which was certain, and had been anciently due, by which Impositions are
excluded, whose qualities are novelty and incertainty, as being set on, as
present occasion moves, and proportioned for quantity and other circumstances,
as the will of the King directs.

These are the Laws which I conceive most directly tend to the restraining the
Kings of England from the exercise of that irregular power of imposing, at the
first offered by them to be put in execution, yet not pressed as their right,
and never practiced but upon opposition of the whole State, and at last
deserted and given over until of late, As by that which follows in the
fourth place will appear.

My fourth and last assertion is, contra morem Majorum. In this I will make an
historical perlustration of the times past, whereby I will discover and make
known what passages have been in this business in this Kingdom, and
especially in the high Court of Parliament for the space of 300 years and more
last past, since the beginning of the reign of E. 1. sithence which time, and
not before this Kingdom has grown into the glory and reputation of foraigne
traffic. And as a worthy Gentleman of the Kings ^earned Council, made
certain considerations upon this question, framed and strengthened out of the
greatness of his wit and reason: so I grounding my self upon the practice of
former times, which is the safest rule where^y to square the right both of King
and people in this Common wealth, where their right is jus consuetudinarium, a
right that grows by use and practice, I will propose unto you certain
observations out of the action and experience of former times until the
reigns of the two late Queens; by which you may the better ground and frame
your judgments in the determination of the right in this question.

My first observation is in point of circumstance, that there never was any
Imposition set, but in time of actual war, and duplicatis vexillis: they were
set on very rarely and sparingly, but for a short time, and that certain and
definite, and upon some few commodities, and that by the assent of the
Merchants that were to bear the burden. In our time the occasion not so
sensible, the continuance to be perpetual, the number many hundreds, almost no
kind of Commodity spared. I will give you some few Instanof these
circumstances ces out of the Records themselves.

The maletole of Wool set on by King E. 22. E. 1. orig. Scacc. Rent. These. 22.
E. 1. mem. Scac. R. These. T. Mich.
1. which gave the occasion of the Stat. 25. year of his reign was given by
Merchants. The Record says, Mercatores gratanter concesserunt in subsidium
guerrae Regis, It further shows, it was for his necessity of war, which
then was great also.

For the time of E. Rot. parl. 17. E. 3. nu. 28.
3. there need not many instances, for his whole reign was almost an actual
warfare. As in the sixth year of his reign for his war in Scotland and
Ireland. In the thirteenth year of his reign for his war in France, several
Impositions were set on.

In the seventeenth year of E. 3. the Record in the Tower, mentions that
forty shillings Imposition was upon a sack of Wool by the grant of Merchants,
and it was in the time of War.

In the twentieth year of King E. 3. Rot. parl. 20. E. 3. nu. 18.
it appears in the Record, that the Imposition then put upon Wools, was by
the assent of Merchants for two years, for the necessity the King had in his
passage over the sea, to recover his right, and to defend the Realm.

My second observation is, never any Imposition was set on by the King out of
Parliament, but complaint was made of it in Parliament, and not one that ever
stood after such complaint made, but remedy was afforded for it, Et quod Rex
inconsulto fecit, consulto revocavit, his Sovereign power controlled his
subordinate. In which it is a thing very notable, that the King in no one Case,
ever claimed, or so much as ever named his right or prerogative, which no doubt
would have been done, if it had been thought due, but gave satisfaction to the
complaint by one of these three ways, either by discharging them quite and
making some good Law against them. Secondly, by entreating the people to hold
them some short time by their favor. Thirdly, by waving his present
possession, and taking that of their gift by Act of Parliament, as an aid
which he had set on by his absolute power as an Imposition.

Instances of the first 25. E. 1. 25. E. 1. ca. 7. Rot. part. 38. E. 3. n. 36.
the Imposition of Wools taken off, and a Law made against it, and the King
undertook for him and his successors to do so no more: 38. E. 3.26. 38. E. 3.
cap. 2.45. E. 3. cap. 4.17. E. 3. cap. 10, 11. R. 18. E. 3. cap. 3. st. 1.21.
E. 3. n. 11. R. Parl.
the Impostion of three shillings four pence on a sack of Wool put off upon
complaint, and a Law made against it, 38. E. 3. ca. 2. the like Statute 45. E.
3. c. 4. upon a complaint of an Imposition on Wools made in Parliament, 45. E.
3. n. 42. Rot. Parl.

Instances of the second 21. E. 3. nu. 11. a petition upon an Imposition of 2.
s. upon a sack of wool, 2. s. upon a tun of wine, and six pence upon aver
de pois, all discharged presently, saving the two shillings upon a sack of
wool, and for that entreated that it might stay till Easter following, and so
it did, and was then taken away. 25. E. 3. n. 22. rot. parl.


Instance of the third 25. E. 3. nu. 22. the Commons made petition against an
imposition of forty shillings upon a sack of wool granted to the King by the
merchants, showing that they ought not to be bound by their act, The King did
not claim right or justify, but because his wars were great upon his
request had it granted unto him for two years by Act of Parliament, and
pretended no title of Prerogative, neither was it ever spoken of.

My third observation is that our Kings have acknowledged that it is not their
right, Orig. in Scau. 31. E. 1. R. These.
E. 1. in his writs he sent to the officers of his parts to levy three pence
on the pound over the old custom, of the Denizons as well as of the Aliens,
and to suffer the Denizons to enjoy those privileges the Aliens did enjoy by
the payment of the increase of Custom, does give this direction expressly. That
they should not take it of Denizons against their will, The words of the Record
express it very fully, Cum mercatores extranei and alienigenae pro quibusdam
libertatibus eis per nos concessis and prisis nostris quibuscunqueremissis,
nobis de bonis and merchandisis suis quibuscunque infra regnum and potestatem
nostram adducend. ultra antiquas custumas dare concesserint praestationes and
custumas subscriptas, viz. and so fetteth down the increases, and amongst the
rest this three pence upon the pound, and so proceeds, Ac quidam mercatores
de regno nostro and potestate nostra, ut ipsis dictis libertatibus and
immunitatibus uti and gaudere, and quod de prisis nostris quieti esse possint,
praestationes and custumas hujusmodi de bonis and merchandisis suis nobis
solvere velint, ut accepimus, assignavimus vos, etc. ad custumas and
praestationes praedictas de mercatoribus de regno and potestate nostra
colligend. qui eas gratanter and sine coercione solvere voluerint. Ita tamen
quod aliquem mercatorem de dicto regno and potestate nostra ad praestationes
and custumas hujusmodi nobis invito solvend. nullatenus distringatis. Surely if
E. 1. had claimed the prerogative of imposing, he would never have given these
cautions in the requiring of that which he had taken to be his due, as that
they should not exact it of any of his subjects that were not willing to pay
it, nor trouble, nor distraine them for it.

In the twelfth year of E. 3. Ret. Alem. 12. E. 3. dorne. 22. in turr.
we find the Record of certain letters written from the King being then at
Barwick in the Scottish wars, unto the Archbishop of Canterbury, in which
letters the King seems to have a great confidence in the devotion of the
Archbishop, and therefore earnestly entreats him to further his enterprises
with his prayers to God, and then adds further. Ad hoc pater, cum populus
regni nostri variis oneribus, tallagiis and impositionibus hactenus
praegravetur (quod dolenter referimus) sed inevitabili necessitate compulsi de
eisdem oneribus ipsum adhuc relevare non valemus, dictum populum ut tantam
necessitatem nostram humiliter and benign patiatur and canitative sustineat,
and priorem (quam penes nos concepit de cetero instanter in orationibus and
eleemosynis suis, oneribus praedictis, quae non ex malitia vel presumptione
voluntaria ipsum gravant, non obstantibus) exhibeant caritatem, indulgentiam
muncribus and aliis modis, quibus secundum Deum videbitis piis exhortationibus
inducatis, and nos penes eundem excusitis, speramus namquesper Dei gratiam,
cujus manus cunctis indigentibus sola sufficiens, and largiflua comprobatur,
beneficiis compensatius dictum populum visitare and consolari pro loco and
temporeopportunis.

The principal thing I note out of this Record upon the very point of this my
third observation, is, that the King intending to excuse himself of the
burdens by him laid on the people, and to avoid the blemish of wrong and
injustice in laying thereon, says they were not onera ex presumptione
voluntaria, that is, burdens that he presumed to lay on at his own will,
whereby he condemns impositions without assent of Parliament, which are
(onera ex voluntate Regis) to proceed of presumption, which does clearly
exclude claim of right, and disproveth the lawfulness of the act. But there
are diverse other notable passages in the Record worthy our marking. As out of
the word (praegravantur) used by the King, we may gather he did account these
Impositions a grievous burden to his people, which shows his own pity of
them. He says further, Dolentes referimus, showing his grief and remorse at
it, and inevitabili necessitate compulsi, he did it constrained by unavoidable
necessity, showing he was forced to it against his will, by that which
violateth and breaks all law, which infers, he would not maintain his
action by law; Adhuc relevare non valemus; this insinuates, he would ease them
in good time; caritatem exhiberent, they should afford him charity in the
bearing of them, as if so be in point of justice or right they need not, Penes
cundem excusetis, the Bishop should excuse him to the people, By this he did
clearly leave the point of justification, and so of right: lastly he promises
he would visit and comfort them benefic^s compensativis, would give them
recompense for those sums he had so raised of them; which showed that he
claimed them not as due, for then he needed not give recompense for them.

In the one and twentieth year of E. Rot. Parl. 21. E 3. n. 16.
3. a petition was exhibited in Parliament, that Levies be not made by
Commission (so they be in this case) nor other things laid upon the people
unless they be granted in Parliament, The Kings answer is, If any such
impositions were made, it was by great necessity, and with the astent of the
Prelates, Barons, and some of the Commons present; yet he will not that such
Impositions not duly made be drawn in consequence. Here the King
acknowledges an Imposition not to be duly made though with the consent of the
Higher House, and some of the Commons, because it was not in full Parliament;
much rather he would have thought so, if it had been by the King alone.

King E. 4. (that was a rough and warlike Prince, and was more beholding to his
sword in the recovery of his right to the Crown then to the affection of the
people) at a Parliament held the seventh year of his reign made a Speech to
the Commons, Sir John Say being then Speaker, in which speech is contained very
notable matter, and very pertinent to our purpose; and because the Record is
not in print, I will set down the Kings speech verbatim as it is entered upon
the Parliament roll, and then I will make a paraphrase upon it, John Say, Rot.
parl. 7. E. 4. The record begins, Memorandum^ quod die veneru 3. die Parl.
and ye Sirs come to this my Court of Parliament for the Commons of this my
Realm, The cause why I have called and summoned this my present Parliament is,
that I purpose to live upon mine own, and not to charge my subjects but in
great and urgent causes concerning more the Weal of themselves, and also the
defense of them and of this my Realm, rather than mine own pleasure as
heretofore by Commons of this Land has been done, and borne unto my
progenitors in time of need, wherein I trust that ye Sirs, and all the
Commons of this my Land will be as tender and kind unto me in such cases as
heretofore any Commons have been to any of my progenitors, And for the good
will, kindness, and true hearts that ye have borne, continued, and showed to
me at all times heretofore, I thank you as heartily as I can: also I trust
ye will continue in time coming, for which by the grace of God I shall be to
you as good and gracious a King, and reign as righteously upon you as ever did
any of my progenitors upon Commons of this my Realm in days past, and shall
also in time of need apply my person for the Weal and defense of you, and of
this my Realm, not sparing my body nor life for any jeopardy that might happen
to the same.

Out of this we may observe first the Kings Protestation to live of his own,
and not to charge his subjects; by which I gather he did acknowledge a certain
and distinct property of that which was his subjects from that which was his
own, which excludes the right to impose at his will, for if that be admitted,
the subjects property is proprietas pr^caria not certain how much of his, is
his own: for that is his which the King will leave him, for there is no limit
or restraint of the quantity, the right being admitted, but only the Kings
will.

The second thing I observe is this, that in charging of his subjects he would
confine himself between these two bounds; the one, it should be in great and
urgent causes concerning more the Weal of them, and the defense of them and
his Realm, that his own pleasure; wherein he condemns those occasions, that
grew upon excess of private expense by over great bounty, or otherwise, and
admits only such as grow by reason of wars, or other such like public
causes concerning the whole State: the other bound or limit is, that those
burdens should be secundum morem majorum, as heretofore had been done and
borne by the Commons to his ancestors in time of need. The third thing I
observe is, that he acknowledged these burdens did proceed out of their good
will and kindness, and not out of his right and prerogative; out of these
words, that he trusted they would be as tender and kind to him in such cases
as heretofore any Commons had been to his progenitors: And lastly, we may
note the recompense promised by the King to his subjects, for their good wills
and kindness, his goodness and grace, his just and righteous government; the
jeopardy of his body and life for their Weal and defense. Did this King assume
to himself a ^ight to lay burdens on his subjects at his own will without
their assents, that offered to buy them at his need with the price of his
blood, the most sacred relic in the Kingdom?

My fourth observation is that in all petitions exhibited by the Commons in
Parliament, against Impositions, the very knot of their grief, and the
principal cause of their complaint has been expressed in those petitions,
that the impositions have been without assent of Parliament: by which is
necessarily inferred, that their grief was in point of right, not of burden.

In 11. Rot. parl. 21. E. 3. nu. 11.
E. 3. nu. 11. the complaint of the Imposition of two shilling upon a sack of
wool, two shillings upon a tonne of wine, six pence upon aver de pois, the
cause of grievance expressed because it was done Sans assent de Commons.

25 E. R. Parl. 25. E. 3. n. 22.
3. n. 22. In a petition the Commons complain that an imposition upon wools
was set by the consent of the merchants, they pray that Commissions be not
made upon such singular grants, if they be not in full Parliament, and if any
such grants be made, they may be held as void.

17 E. 3. n. 28. R. Parl. 17. E. 3. n. 28.
The Commons in their petition inform the King, it is against reason they
should be charged with impositions set on by assent of merchants, and not in
Parliament.

My fifth observation is, that whenever any petition was exhibited against
impositions, there was never any respect had of the quantity, but they were
ever entirely abated, as well where they were small, as where they were great;
no request ever made to make them less when they were great, nor excuse made
of their ease when they were exceeding small; which shows that it was not the
point of burden or excess was respected in their complaint, but the point of
mere right.

25. E. 3. nu. 22. R. Parl. 25. E. 3. nu. 22.
Forty shillings set an imposition upon a sack of wool, upon complaint, all
taken off, and no suit to be eased of part, because it was too great.

36. E. 3. nu. 26. ibid. 38. E. 3. nu. 26.
Three shillings and four pence upon a sack of wool, all taken off, and no
excuse made for the smalnesse; for 21. E. 3. nu. 11. two shillings a sack, 21.
E. 3. n. 11.
two shillings tonnage, and six pence poundage.

50. E 3. nu. 163. R. Parl. 50. E. 3. nu. 163.
A great complaint was made in Parliament by the Commons that an imposition of
a penny was set upon wools for Tronage over and above the ancient due which was
but a penny, and so the subject was charged with two pence. Also that a penny was
exacted for Mesonage, which was but an halfepeny; which Impositions the Record
does express did amount to an hundred pounds a year. This petty imposition
was as much stood upon in point of right, as the other great one of forty
shillings, and was taken off upon complaint in Parliament without either
justification or excuse for the smalnesse of it.

My sixth observation is, that those which have advised the setting on of
impositions, without assent of Parliament have been accused in Parliament for
giving that advice, as of a great offense in the State, and have suffered
sharp censure and great disgrace by it. Neither do I find that the quality
of the person has extenuated the blame, as 50. E. 3. William L. Latimer
Chamberlain to the King, and one of his private Council was accused by the
Commons in Parliament of diverse deceits and extortions and misdeeds, and among
other things, that he had procured to be set upon wool, wooll-fells, and
other merchandises, new impositions, to wit, upon a sack of wool eleaven
shillings, which the L. La^imer sought to excuse, because he had the consent
and good liking of the merchants first: But judgment was given against him
that he should be committed to prison, be fined and ransomed at the Kings will,
and be put from being of the Council, and this procuring of impositions to be
set on without assent of Parliament is expressly set down in the entry of the
judgment for one of the causes of his censure.

Richard Lions a Fermor of the Customs in London the same year was accused in
Parliament for the same offense; Rot. parl 50. E. 3. n. 17, 18, 19, 20.
he pleaded, he did it by the Kings command, and had answered the money to the
Kings Chamber: yet was condemned and adjudged in Parliament to be committed to
prison, and all his lands and goods were seifed into the Kings hand, and at the
last the hate against these authors of impositions grew so that 50. E. 3. in
the same Parliament, a petition was exhibited in Parliament to make this a
capital offense; the Record is very short, and therefore I will set it down
verbatim. Item pry le dit Common que foit ordain per statute en cest present
parliament de touts ceux qux cy en avaunt mittont on font pur lour singular
profit novels impositions per lour authority demesne accrocheants al eux any ul
power de riens que soit establi en parliament, sans assent de parliament, que
ils eyent judgment de vie and member, and de forisfacture. To this rough
petition the King gave a mild and temperate answer, Courge la Common ley come
estoit al avaunt use.

My seventh observation is the cessation between 50. E. 3. after this censure
in Parliament, and 4. Mariae, almost two hundred years, during which time no
King did attempt to impose without assent of Parliament: and yet we find in
the Parliament rolls, that there was not one of those Kings that reigned in
that time, but had impositions granted him upon fit occasion by Act of
Parliament upon all goods and merchandiles, and at diverse times during their
Reigns, sometimes more, sometimes less upon the tonne and pound, but ever for
a time certain, and definite; so the use of them was not given over, but the
power of imposing was so clearly and undoubtedly held to be in the Parliament,
as no King went about to practice the contrary.

But to this cessation that was of great weight and credit in our evidence, a
color was given by the other side to avert the inference made upon it, against
the Kings right, that is, that during that time, there was so great a revenue
grew to the Crown by double Custom paid for all merchandises both in England
and at Castis by reason of an Act of Parliament made 8. H. 4. which was, that
no goods should be carried out of the Realm but to Calls, and by reason that
the merchants paid Custom both there and here for the same goods that in the
seven and twentieth year of Henry the sixth the Custom of Callis was 68000.
pounds the year: a great sum if you consider the weight of money then, what
price it bare, and by reason hereof Princes not delighting to charge their
munnuting subjects but when need is, being so amply supplied otherwise, did not
put that prerogative in practice. To this I answer, that if that were true that
was urged, it might be some probable color of the forbearance of imposing;
but I find it to be quite contrary, and that by Record: for there was no such
restramt of all commodities not to be transported to any place but Callis, but
only wools, wool-fells, leather, tin, and lead, that were staple wares,
which by the stature 37. E. 3. were to be transported thither, and not to any
other place, and the staple continued at that place for the most part from that
time until long after 27. H. ^. but there was no double Custom paid both here
and there by the same owner: but the yearly profits of the Customs of Callais
at those tiems were so far short of that which has been alleged in 27. H.
6. that it appears in an Act of Parliament 27. 27. H. 3. ca. 2.
H. 6. cap. 2. printed in the book at large, that the Commons do complain
that whereas in the time of E. 3. the Custom of Callais was 68000. l. per
annum, at that time, which was 27. H. 6. by reason of the ill usage of
merchants, it was fallen to be but 12000. pounds the year, so then there was
great cause in that respect to have set on impositions by reason of that great
abatement of Customs, and yet it was not then offered to be done without
assent of Parliament. But if you look a little further into the extreme
necessities of those times, you shall find there never was greater cause to
have strained prerogatives; for it appears in an Act of Parliament 28. H. 6.
that it was then declared in Parliament by the Chancellor and Treasurer who
demanded relief of the people for the King, both for payment of his debts, and
for his yearly livelihood, that the King was then indebted 372000. pounds,
which now by the weight of money amounts to above 1100000. pounds, and that
his ordinary expenses was more than his yearly revenue by 19000. pounds yearly:
so if ever there was cause to put a King to his shifts, it was then; yet we
see they did not venture to put in practice this supposed prerogative. It
further appears in that statute that the people among those reasons they
alleged why they were not able to retain the King, gave this for one, that
they had so often granted him tonnage and poundage upon merchandises, by which
it appears he took nothing of merchants by imposition without grant, for if
he had, no doubt they would not have stuck to have put him in mind of it. But
I pray consider what became of this motion of the Chancellor and Treasurer:
the proposition had depended in Parliament many years; the effect was, the
people entreated the King to resume all grants he had made from the beginning
of his Reign until that time, being the twenty eight year of his reign,
excepting such as were made upon consideration valuable, that he might so
enable himself by that mean by which he had impoverished himself and the
whole Kingdom: This took effect, and the Statute of Resumptions was thereupon
made the same year, which Record because it is not in print, and declares
these things with great gravity and authority: I will set down the very text
of it, so much as is material to our purpose.

Prayen your Commons in this your present Parliament assembled to consider, 28.
H. 6. Stat. de Resump. inturri Land. not printed.
That where your Chancellor of your Realm of England, your Treasurer of
England, and many other Lords of your Council, by your high Commandment to
your said Commons, at your Parliament holden last at Westminster, showed and
declared the State of this your Realm, which was, that ye were indebted 372000.
l. which is grievous, and that your livelihood in yearly value was but 5000.
l. And forasmuch as this 5000. l. to your high and notable State to be kept,
and to pay your said debts, will not suffice: therefore that your high Estate
may be relieved. And furthermore it was declared, that your expenses necessary
to your household without al other ordinary charge came to 24000. l. yearly,
which exceeds every year in expense necessary over your livelihood 19000. l.
Also pleases it your highness to consider, that the Commons of your said
Realm be as well willing to their power, for the releeving of your Highness,
as ever was people to any King of your Progenitors that ever reigned in your
said Realm of England: but your said Commons been so impoverished, what by
taking victual to your household, and other things in your said Realm, and
naught paid for it, and the quinzime by your said Commons so often granted, and
by the grant of tunnage and poundage, and by the grant of Subsidy upon
Woolls, and other graunts to your Highness, and for lack of execution of
justice, that your said poor Commons be full nigh destroyed, and if it should
continue longer in such great charge, it could not in any wise be had, ne
borne: wherefore pleases it your Highness the premises graciously to
consider, and that ye by the advice and assent of your Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and by the authority of this your present Parliament, for the
consideration of your high Estate, and in comfort and ease of your poor
Commons, would take, resume, seize and retain in your hands and possession all
honors, etc.

This was very plain dealing by the people with their King, and this is the
success of the demand of supply and support had in those days, being
required in point of gratification, without any recompense or retribution for
it. Thus then we have cleared this point, that between 50. E. 3. and 4.
Mariae, there was not one imposition fet without assent of Parliament.

Queen Mary in the fourth year of her reign, upon the wars with France, set
an Imposition upon Clothes for this consideration, that the custom of Woolls
was decayed, by reason for the most past they were made into Clothes, which
affoorded little custom; for that which in Wool, paid for custom and
subsidy 40. s. made into Cloth paid but 4. s. 4. d. To recompense this by an
indifferent equality, there was set upon a Cloth 5. s. 6. d. which imposition
did not make up the loss sustained in the custom of Wool, by 13. s. 4. d. in
40. s. This was Iustum, but not Just. This religious Prince environed with
infinite troubles in the Church and Commonwealth, and much impoverished by her
devotion, in renouncing the profits of the Church lands that were in the Crown
by the suppression, was the first that made digression from the steps of her
worthy Progenitors, in putting on that imposition without assent of Pasliament;
for that very consideration of the loss of custom, by turning of Wool to
Clothing, came into treaty in the 24. year of E. 3. when the art of clothing
began first to be much practiced in this Kingdom, and then in the recompense
of the loss so sustained in the decay of custom of Woolls, there was set upon
a Cloth by act of Parliament above the old custom, 14. d. for a Denizen, and
for an Alien, 21. d. This is recited in a Record in the Exchequer, 48. E. 3.
rot. 2. R. (...) origin. Orig. in Scacc. 48. E. 3. To. 2. R. These. 1. El. Dyer
so. 165.
But I pray you examine how this imposition of Queen Mary was digested by the
people. We see in the Case in my Lord Dier 1. Eli. fo. 165. that the Merchant
found great grief at it, and made exclamation and suit to Q. Eliz. to be
unburdened of it: The very reason of their grief expressed in that case is,
because it was not set on by Parliament, but by the Queens absolute power; So
that was the ground of that complaint, the very point of right.

This cause was referred to all the Judges, to report whether the Queen might
set on this imposition without assent of Pailiament: They diverse times had
conference about it, but have not yet made report for the King, which is an
infallible presumption, that their opinions were not for him; for it is a
certain rule among us, that if a question concerning the Kings prerogative, or
his profit be referred to the Judges, if their opinions be for the King, it
will be speedily published, and it were indiscretion to conceal it; but if
there be no publication, then we make no doubt, but that their opinions are
either against the King, or at least they stick, and give none for him.

The same Queen Mary upon restraint of bringing in of French commodities
occasioned by the then wars with France, set an imposition upon Gascoigne
Wines, which continues yet: So the kingdom of England by the injustice of
that Prince was clogged with those two heavy impositions contrary to the right
of the Kingdom, and the acts of her Progenitors.

Queen Elizabeth set on that upon sweet Wines, which grew also upon the
occasion of the troubles with Spain. That upon Allome was none, it was rather
a Monopoly to Master Smith the Customer of London, for the engrossing of all
Allomes into his own hands, for which privilege he gave a voluntary
imposition upon that commodity: It was like the privilege granted to John
Pechey of the sweet Wines by E. 3. for which the Patentee was called into the
Parliament house, 50. E. 3. and was there punished, and his Patent taken away
and cancelled.

What impositions have been set on in the Kings time, I need not express, they
are set down particularly in the book of rates that is in print, they are not
easily numbered: the time for which they are raised is not short, the Patent
prefixed to that book bearing date 28. ^uln 6. Iacobi will instruct you
sufficiently in that point; they be limited to the King, his heirs and
successors: which I suppose is the first estate of Fee simple of impositions
that ever man read of.

My eighth and last observation is upon tunnage and poundage given to the King
of this Realm, upon Wares and Merchandises exported and imported, which is an
imposition by act of Parliament, and as it will appear, was given out of the
peoples good will, as a very gratification to the King, to enjoyne him thereby
from the desire of voluntary impositions, and to conclude him by that gift in
Parliament from attempting to take any other without assent of Parliament, for
after the ceasing of voluntary impositions, these Parliamentary ones were
frequent in the times of the King that succeeded, but they were never given but
for years, with express caution how the money strould be bes^owed, As toward
the defense of the Seas, protection of traffic, or some such other public
causes: sometimes special sequestrators made by the act of Parliament, by
whose hands the money should be delivered, As 5. 5. R. 2. Rot. Parl. 7. R. 2 n.
13.10. R. 2. n. 12. 7. R. 2. n. 12.
R. 2. cap. 3. in a printed Statute. The rates that were given were very
variable, sometimes ii. s. tunnage and vi. d. poundage, as 7. R. 2. iii. s.
tunnage, and xii. d. poundage, 10. R. 2. which grants were not to endure the
longest of them above a year, xviii. d. tunnage, vi. d. poundage, in 17. R. 2.
iii. s. tunnage, and xii. d. poundage granted to H. 4. in the thirteenth year
of his reign for a certain time, in which Statute there is this clause, That
this aid in time to come should not be taken an example to charge the Lords
and Commons in manner of Subsidy, unless it be by the wills of the Lords and
Commons, and that by a new grant to be made in full Parliament in time to come.
This clause in good and proper construction may be taken to be a very
convention between the King and his people in Parliament, that he should not
from thenceforth, nor any of his Successors set on impositions without assent
of Parliament. The like imposition was granted to H. 5. Rot. parl. 1. H. 5. n.
17.
in the first year of his reign for a short time toward the defense of the
Realm, and safeguard of the Sea upon condition expressed in the act, that the
Merchants Denizens, and estrangers coming into the Realm with their
Merchandises, should be well and honestly used and handled, paying the said
Subsidy as in the time of his Father, and his noble Progenitors Kings of
England without oppression, or extortion: In the end of which act the Commons
protested, being bound by any grant in time to come, for the purposes aforesaid.

H. 6. in the one and thirtieth year of his reign, Rot. parl. 31. H 6. 12. E.
4. c. 3. 6. H. 8. c. 12. 1. E. 6. c. 13. 1. Ma. c. 18. 1. El. c. 19. 1. Iac. c.
33.
had tunnage and poundage given him for his life. E. 4. had it given him the
third year of his reign, as it appears in a Statute 12. E. 4. cap. 3. H. 8.
in the sixth year of his reign, and all since in the first year of their
reigns have had it given them for term of their life, and being now so
certainly settled in it, do reach further at that from which they are in
conscience and honor excluded by this voluntary gratification: For can any
man give me a reason, why the people should give this imposition of tunnage and
poundage above the due custom upon all commodities, if the King by his
prerogative might set on impositions without assent of Parliament; and were not
that a wea^e action in a King, to take that of his people as a benevolence from
them, with limitation of the same, and in what it should be employed, and how
they will be used for it, and for what time he shall have it, which he might
justly take without their consents, unclogged of these unpleasing incombrances.

The Statute of tunnage and poundage made in our times that are altogether
inclined to flattery, do yet retain in them certain shows and rumors of
those ancient liberties, although indeed the substance be lost, as in the Srat.
1. lac. cap. 1. Iac. c. 33.
33. we declare that we trust, and have sure confidence of his Majesty's good
will toward us, in and for the keeping, and sure defending of the Seas, and
that it will please his highness, that all Merchants, as well Denizens as
Strangers coming into this Realm, be well and honestly entreated and demeaned
for such things whereof Subsidy is granted, as they were in the time of the
Kings Progenitors and Predecessors without oppression to them to be done. By
this clause as it now continues, the true intent of this Statute appears to
be, that there ought no other imposition be laid upon Merchants besides these
given by this Statute, and this intention has been well interpreted by use and
practice from the time of E. 3. to the time of Queen Mary, as before is
declared.

Thus much of this last reason made from observation, and the action of our
Nation. I will answer now such maine objections as have been made against the
peoples right, and have not been touched by me obiter in my passage through
this discourse.

That which has been most insisted upon is this, that the King by his
prerogative Royal has the custody of the Havens and Ports of this Island,
being the very gates of this Kingdom; that he in his royal function and
office is only trusted with the keys of these gates; that he alone has power
to shut them, and to open them when, and to whom he in his Princely wisdom
shall see good: that by the Law of England he may restrain the persons of any
from going out of the Land, or from coming into it: That he may of his own
power and discretion prohibit exportation and importation of goods and
merchandises; and out of this prerogative and pre-eminence, the power of
imposing, as being derivative, does arise and result, For Cui quod maius est,
licet, and ei quod est minus licitum est: So their reason briefly is this, the
King may restrain the passage of the person, and of the goods; therefore he
may suffer them not to pass, but sub modo, paying such an imposition for his
sufferance as he shall set upon them: for the grounds and propositions laid in
this objection, I shall not be much against any one of them; others of them
must be qualified ere they be confessed, but the inference and argument made
upon them, I utterly deny; for in it there is mutatio hypothesis, and a
transition from a thing of one nature, to a thing of another; As the premises
are of a power in the King only fiduciary, and in point of trust and
government, the conclusion inferres a right of interest and gain; Admit the
King has Custodiam portuum, yet he has but the custody, which is trust, and
not Dominium utile; He has power to open and shut upon consideration of
public good to the people and State, but not to make gain and benefit by it:
The one is protection, the other is expilation. Portus sunt Publici.
The Ports in their own nature are public free for all to go in and out, yet
for the common good, this liberty is restrainable by the wisdom and policy of
the Prince, who is put in trust to discern the times when this natural
liberty shall be restrained. In 1. H. 7. fo. 10. 1. H. 7.10
in the case of the Horentines for their Allome, the Lord chief Justice Hussy
does write a Case, that in the time of E. 4. a Legate from the Pope being at
Calice to come into England, it was resolved in full Council (as the book
says) before the Lords and Judges that he should not have license to come into
England un^esse he would take an oath at Calice, that he would bring nothing
with him that should be prejudicial to the King and his Crown.

The King by the Common Law may send his Writ, Ne exeas regnum to any subject
of the Realm, but the surmise of the Writ is, Quia datum est nobis intelligi,
quod tu versus parts exteras absque licentia nostra clam destinas te
divertere, and quamplurima nobis and coronae nostrae preiudicia prosequi,
Fitzh. N. B. 85. b.
Fitzh. N. B. 85. b. So in point of government, and Common good of the Realm,
he may restrain the person: but to conclude, therefore he may take money; not
to restrain, is to sell government, trust, and common justice, and most
unworthy the divine office of a King. But let us compare this power of the King
in foreign affairs, with the like power he has in Domestique government.
There is no question but that the King has the custody of the gates of all
the Towns and Cities in England, as well as all the Ports and Havens, and upon
consideration of the Weal public may open and shut them at his pleasure, As if
the infection of the sickness be dangerous in places vicine to the City of
London, the King may command that none from those places shall come into the
City: May he therefore set an imposition upon those that he suffers to come
into the City? So, if by reason of infection he forbid the bringing of Wares,
and Merchandises from some Cities or Towns in this Kingdom to any great Fair
or Mart, Shall he therefore restrain the bringing of Goods thither unless
money be given him by way of imposition?

The King in his discretion in point of equity, and for qualifying the rigor
of the Law, may enjoyne any of his Subjects by his Chauncellor from suing in
his Court of Common Law: May he therefore make a benefit by restraining all
from suit in his Courts, unless they pay him an imposition upon their suits?
2. E. 3.7.
In 2. E. 3. in the case of the Earl of Richmond before cited, the King had
granted unto the men of great Yarmouth, that all the Ships that arrived at the
Port of Yarmouth, which consisted of three severail Ports, great Yarmouth,
little Yarmouth, and Gerneston should arrive all at great Yarmouth, and at no
other place within that Port. The lawfulness of this Patent being in question
in the Kings Court, it was reasoned in the Kings behalf for the upholding of
the grant, as it is now, that the King had the custody of the Port, he might
restrain Merchants from landing at all in his Kingdom: Therefore out of the
same power might appoint where, and in what Haven they should land, and in no
other; This Patent was demurred on in the Kings Bench, as being granted against
the Law, but the Case depending was adjourned into Parliament for the weight
and consequence of it, and there the Patent was condemned, 9. E. 3. cap. 1.
and a Law made against such, and the like graunts.

The Presidents that were vouched for maintenance of this power of restraint in
the King, were four, produced almost in so many hundred years, Rot. parl. 2.
E. 1. n. 16. Rot. fin. 2. E. 1. n. 17. Rot. claus. 10. E. 3. dor. 31. Rot.
claus. 17. H. 6. in dors.
whereof two were in the second year of E. 1. one in the tenth year of E. 3.
another in the seventeenth year of H. 6. since which time we hear of none
but by Act of Parliament, as they had been usually and regularly before. To
these I will give answer, out of themselves, out of the common law, out of
diverse statutes, and out of the practice of the Commonwealth. The restraint in
the time of E. 1. the one of them was to forbid the carrying of wool out of
the Realm, the other was to forbid all Traffic with the Flemings. That of
10. E. 3. was to restrain the exportation of ship-timber out of the Realm.
That of 17. H. 6. to prohibit Traffic with the subjects of the Duke of
Burgundy. These presidents are rare, yet they have in them inducements out of
public respects to the Commonwealth; for the rule of Common law in this
case, I take it to be as the reverend Judge Sir Anthony Fitzherbert holds it
in his writ of Ne exeas regnum in Na. Br. Fitzh. N. B. 85.
that by the Common law any man may go out of the Kingdom, but the King may
upon causes touching the good of the Commonwealth restrain any man from going
by his Writ or Proclamation, and if he then go, it is a contempt. This
opinion of his is confirmed by the book, Dier. 1. El. 165. Dier. 13. El. 296.
1. Eliz. fol. 165. Dier. 12. and 13. Etiz. Dier. 296. In like manner if a
subject of England be beyond sea, and the King send to him to repair home, if
he do it not, his lands and goods shall be seized for the contempt, and this
was the case of William de Britain E. of Richmond. 19. E. 2. 19. E. 2.
He was sent by the King into Gascoine on a message, and refused to return,
for which contempt his goods, chattels, lands, and tenements were seized into
the Kings hands: 2. and 3. P. and M. Dier. 128.
the Record is cited, 2. and 3. Ph. and M. in my L. Dier. fol. 128. B. and the
law there held to be so at that time upon a question moved in the Queens
behalf against diverse that being beyond the seas refused to return upon
commandment sent unto them to that purpose: the same is again for law
confirmed in the Duchess of Suffolk, Dier. 2. El. 176.5. R. 2. cap. 2.
case 2. Eliz. Dier. 176. but the Common law was altered in this point by the
statute of 5. R. 2. cap. 2. by which the passage of all people is defended that
they may not go without license except the Lords and other great men of the
Realm, merchants, and soldiers: so for the merchants which are the people
dealt withal in the business in hand, the Common law remains as it was
before the statute, and so it was held, 12. Dier. 12. El. 196.
El. Dier. 196. where the case was, An English merchant being a Papist went
over sea, and being there, did settle himself to remain there for enjoying
the freedom of his conscience: it was moved here in England, that his going
without license should be a contempt, because he went not to traffic as a
merchant, but for the cause of Religion: it was resolved, no such averment
would be taken in this case, for that the very calling and vocation of being a
merchant did give him liberty to go out of the Kingdom when he would, and
therefore the secret intent of his going was not to be enquired after, Sed lex
inspicit quod vertsimilius. Therefore it was in this case held no contempt, but
at this day the law is as it was before, 5. R. 2 cap 2. for that statute is
repealed 4. Iac. 4. Iac. cap. 1.
cap. 1. And all men whatsoever are now at liberty by the Common law to pass
out of the Realm. There is only against this inconvenient liberty a
Proclamation dated at Westminster. 9. Iul. 5. Iac. Proclamati^. 9. lul. 5. Iac.
To the very same effect in point of restraint of passage with the statute of
R. 2. So the subject is in this much the more at ease and liberty than he was
before: that his going over sea without license does not induce any forfeiture,
but only incurreth the censure of a contempt, and therefore it were to be
wished that some firm law might be made in the case both for the execution of
so good a point of policy, and for the more quiet of the State, in knowing the
certainty of the punishment for the offense.

This liberty and freedom of merchants has been strengthened and confirmed by
many notable laws before recited, as 14. E. 3. st. 2. c. 2.15. E. 3 st. 2. c.
5.18. E. 3. st. 1. c. 3. 14. E. 3. st. 2. c. 2.15. E. 3. st. 2. c. 5. 18. E. 3.
st. 1. c: 3.
and diverse other, and therefore though it be admitted that the King may
restrain persons and goods, yet it may well be denied, that he has power of
himself alone without assent of Parliament simply and indefinitely to restrain
all traffic in general, or to shut up all the havens and ports, and to bar
the vent and issuing of wares and merchandises of the whole Kingdom, as
appears plainly that this has been done this three hundred yeersor near
thereabouts by Act of Parliament only, and that the Kingdom of England made
this matter of Traffic so tender a case to deal in, as that it has ever
held it a matter fit for the consultation of the great Council of the
Kingdom, and for no other.

In 11. E. 3. 11. E. 3. cap. 1.
the exportation of wools was prohibited by Act of Parliament, in which statute
there was this clause, until that by the King and his Council it be thereof
otherwise provided: which power so given to the King to be used for the good of
the Commonwealth gave occasion to him to abuse it to his profit and commodity
by giving licenses of transportation to all that would give forty shillings
upon a sack of wool above the due Custom. This appears in the Records in
the Exchequer, 13. 13. E. 3. R. These. rot. 2.
E. 3. Rot. 2. Ram. These. I will describe the Record that you may perceive the
ground of it the better, Rex collectoribus Cu^tumae in portum^gnae Iermouth
salutem. Quia concessimus dilecto and fidel^nostro Hugoni de Wriothsley, quod
ipse viginti and saptem saccos^anae and demid. de lanis suis propriis in portu
prae dicto cariare and eas usque Antwerpe ad stapulam nostram ibidem ducere
possit, solvendo ibidem dilecto clerico nostro Willielmo de Northwell custodi
guarderobae nostrae 40. s. pro quolibet saoco pro custuma and subsidio inde
nobis debitis, etc. vobis mandamus quod praedict. Hugon. dictos viginti septem
saccos lanae and dimid. in portu praedicto cartare permittatis, etc. And
another the same year. 13. E. 3. rot. 12. R. These.
Rex collectoribus custumae, etc. Cum nuper ordinaverimus quod passagium
lanarum, etc. apertum existeret, and quod sigillum nostrum quod dicitur Coket,
quod prius claudi and sub serra custod^^^ mandavimus aperiretur, and apertum
teneretur, ideo vobis mandavimus quod sigillum praedictum in portu praedicto
aperiri, and apertum teneri faciatis, and omnes illos qui hujusmodi lanas
cariare and ducere velint permittatis, receptis prius ab iisdem. viz. de
mercatoribus and aliis indigenis 40. s. de quolibet saeco ^anae. Diverse other
such sales of traffic occasioned by this parliamentary restraint were made
between 11. 14. E. 3. st. 2. c. 2. 15. E. 3. c. 5. st. 2.
E. 3. that the restraint was made, and 14. E. 3. that this inconvenience being
espied, the sea was opened by statute, and the restraint removed 14. E. 3.
stat. 2. cap. 2. 15 E. 3. cap. 5. star. 2. And this forty shillings so exacted
was complained of, as an imposition in Parliament, and the occasion and the
effect were both taken away together by Act of Parliament, 14. 14. E. 3. ce.
21. st. 1. stat. 2. cap. 1.
E. 3. stat. 1. cap. 21. and stat. 2. cap. 1.

It followed in all Kings times sithence the death of E. 3. that this opening
and shutting of the havens, restraining and enlarging of traffic was done by
Act of Parliament.

I will give one instance in the Reign of every King, 5. R. 2. c. 2. st. 2.
5. R. 2. cap. 2. stat. 2. For the passage of wool, wool-fells, and leather,
6. H. 4. cap. 4. 6. H. 4. c. 4. 2. H. 5. c. 6. st. 2.
For the traffic and commerce with merchants aliens, 2. H. 5. cap. 6. stat.
2. For the restraint of staple commodities to places certain, and for the
traffic of the merchants of the west, 27. H. 6. cap. 1. 27. H. 6. cap. 1.
that is enacted in Parliament which is contained in the Proclamation, 17. H 6.
cited for a president, that is, because the Duke of Burgundy made an ordinance
whereby the traffic of the English Nation was restrained, that therefore the
Englishmen should not traffic with the subjects of the Duke of Burgundy. 4.
E. 4. cap. 1. 19. H. 7. cap. 21.
The same thing enacted upon the like occasion 4. E. 4. c. 1.19. H. 7. c. 21.
the importation of diverse commodities forbidden as being prejudicial to the
manufactures within the Realm. 6. H. 8 cap 12. 6. H. 8. cap. 12.
The exportation of Norfolk woolls out of the Realm forbidden. 26. H. 8. cap.
10. 26. H. 8. ca. 10.
Power is given to the King to order and dispose of the traffic of merchants
at his pleasure, and the reason is given, because otherwise the leagues and
amities with foreign Princes might be impeached by reason of restraint made
by diverse statutes then standing on foot, whereby it appears that it was not
then taken to be law, that the King had an absolute power in himself to order
and dispose of the course of traffic without help of a statute. 2. E. 6.
cap. 9. 2. E. 6. cap. 9.1. and 2. P. and M. c. 5.
Exportation of leather restrained. 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. The exportation of
herring, butter, cheese, and other victuals forbidden. 18. Eliza. cap. 8. the
exportation of tallow, 18. El. cap. 8.
raw hides, leather. So in all times no use of Proclamations in matters of this
nature, but Acts of Parliament still procured: wherefore in mine opinion it
behooves them that do so earnestly urge this argument, (the King may restrain
traffic, therefore may impose,) to prove better then they have done, that the
King may restrain traffic of his own absolute power: for as the natural
policy and constitution of our Commonwealth is, we may better say, that is
law which is de more gentis, then that which flows from the reason of any man
guided by his general notion and apprehension of power regal in genere not in
individuo.

The last assault made against this right of the Kingdom was an objection
grounded upon policy, and matter of State, as that it may so fall out that an
imposition may beset by a foreign Prince that may wring our people, in which
case the counterpoise is, to set on the like here upon the subjects of that
Prince, which policy if it be not speedily executed, but stayed until a
Parliament, may in the mean time prove vain and idle, and much damage may be
sustained that cannot afterward be remedied.

This strain of policy makes nothing to the point of right; our rule is in
this plain Commonwealth of ours, Oportet neminem esse sapientiorem legibus:
if there be an inconvenience, it is fitter to have it removed by a lawful
means, than by an unlawful: but this is rather a mischief than an
inconvenience, that is a prejudice in present to some few, but not hurtful to
the Commonwealth: and it is more tolerable to suffer an hurt to some few for a
short time, than to give way to the breach and violation of the right of the
whole Nation: for that is the true inconvenience, neither need it be so
difficult or tedious to have the consent of the Parliament, if they were held
as they ought, or might be; but our surest guide in this will be the example
of our ancestors in this very case, and that in the time of one of the most
politic Princes that ever reigned in this Kingdom. 7. H. 7. cap. 7.
7. H. 7. cap. 7. You shall find an Act of Parliament, in which it was recited
that the Venetians had set upon the English merchants that laded Malmeseyes at
Candy four ducats of gold upon a But, which in sterling was eighteen
shillings the But. It was therefore enacted that every merchant stranger that
brought Malmesey into this Kingdom should pay eighteen shillings the But over
and above the due Custom used, this imposition to endure until they of Venice
had set aside that of four ducats the But upon the Englishmen.

Much has been learnedly uttered upon this argument in the maintenance of the
peoples right, and in answering that which has been pressed on the contrary,
but my meaning is not to express in this discourse all that has or may be
said on either side, but only to make a remembrance somewhat larger of that
which I my self offered as my symbolum toward the making up of this great
reckoning of the Commonwealth, which if it be not well audited, may in time
cost the subjects of England very dear. My hope is of others that labored
very worthily in this business, that they will not suffer their pains to die,
and therefore I have forborne to enter into their province. I will end with
that saying of that true and honest Counselor Philip Comines in his 5th.
book the 18. chap. That it is more honorable for a King to say, Ph. Comines
l. 5. c. 18.
I have so faithful and obedient subjects, that they deny me nothing I demand,
than to say, I levy what me list, and I have privileges so to do.

After the Kings right to impose had been thoroughly examined in Parliament, and
there determined not to be in him alone, without assent of Parliament, among
other Petitions of grievance given unto his Majesty, this hereafter was
concerning impositions.
THE policy and constitution of this your Majesty's kingdom appropriates unto
the Kings of this Realm, with assent of Parliament, as well the sovereign
power of making Laws, as that of raxing or imposing upon the subjects goods or
merchandises, wherein they justly have such a propriety, as may not without
their consent be altered or changed: This is the cause that the people of this
kingdom, as they have ever showed themselves faithful and loving to their
Kings, and ready to aid them in all their just occasions, with voluntary
contributions: so have they been ever careful to preserve their own liberties
and rights when any thing has been done to prejudice or impeach the same: And
therefore when their Princes, either occasioned by war, or by their over great
bounty, or by any other necessity, have without consent of Parliament set on
impesitions either within the Land, or upon commodities exported or imported by
the Merchants, they have in open Parliament complained of it, in that it was
done without their consents, and thereupon never failed to obtain a speedy and
full redress without any claim made by the Kings, of any power or prerogative
in that point. And though the Law of propriety be original and carefully
preserved by the common Laws of this Realm, which are as ancient as the
Kingdom it self, yet those famous Kings for the better contentment and
assurance of their loving subjects agreed that this old fundamental right
should be further declared and established by act of Parliament, wherein it is
provided that no such charge should ever be laid upon the people without their
common consents, as may appear by sundry Records of former times.

We therefore your Majesty's most humble Commons assembled in Parliament,
following the example of this worthy care of our ancestors, and out of our duty
to those for whom we serve, finding that your Majesty without advice and
consent of your lords and Commons, has lately in time of peace set both
greater impositions, and far more in number then any your noble ancestors did
ever in time of War, do with all humility present this most just and
necessary petition unto your Majesty, that all impositions set without assent
of Parliament, may be quite abolished and taken away, And that your Majesty
likewise in imitation of your royal progenitors will be pleased, that a Law in
your time, and during this Session of Parliament may be also made to declare
that all impositions of any kind set, or to be set upon your people, their
goods or merchandises, save only by common consent in Parliament are, and shall
be void: Wherein your Majesty shall not only give your subjects great
satisfaction in point of their right, but also bring exceeding joy and comfort
to them who now suffer, partly through the abating of the price of native
commodities, and partly through the raising of all foreign, to the overthrow
of Merchants and Shipping, the causing of a general dearth, and decay of all
wealth among your people, who will be thereby no less discouraged then
disabled to supply your Majesty when occasion shall require.

FINIS.
20. Maii, 1641.
AT a Committee appointed by the honorable House of Commons, for examination
of Books, and of the licencing and suppressing of them, etc.

It is ordered that this Treatise be published in Print, unless the Licencer
shall show good cause to the contrary,

EDWARD DERING.


