The Loyal Nonconformist; OR, An Account what he dare swear, and what not.
I Fear an Oath, before I swear to take it;
And well I may, for it is the Oath of God:
I fear an Oath, when I have sworn, to break it;
And well I may, for Vengeance has a Rod.
And yet I may swear, and must too, it is due
Both to my Heavenly, and my Earthly King:
If I assent, it must be full and true;
And if I promise, I must do the thing.
I am no Quaker, not at all to swear;
Nor Papist, to swear East, and mean the West;
But am a Protestant, and shall declare
What I cannot, and what I can protest.
I never will endeavor Alteration
Of Monarchy, or of that Royal Name,
Which God has chosen to command this Nation,
But will maintain his Person, Crown and Fame:
What he commands, if Conscience say not nay,
(For Conscience is a greater King than he)
For Conscience Sake, not Fear, I will obey;
And if not Active, Passive I will be.
I Will pray that all his Subjects may agree,
And never more be crumbled into parts;
I will endeavor that his Majesty
May not be King of Clubs, but King of Hearts.
The Royal Oa^ I swear I will defend;
But (...) Ivy which does hug it so,
I swar that is a Thief, and not a Friend,
And about Steeples fitter for to grow.
The Civil-Government I will obey;
But for Church-Policy I swear I doubt it;
And if my Bible want the Apocrypha,
I Will swear my Book may be complete without it.
I dare not swear Church Government is right
As it should be; but this I dare to swear,
If they should put me to it, the Bishops might
Do better, and be better than they are.
Nor will I swear for all that they are worth,
That Bishoprics will stand, and Doomsday see;
And yet I Will swear the Gospel holds forth
Christ with his Ministers till then will be.
That Peter was a Prelate they aver;
But I Will not swear't when all is said and done
But I dare swear, and hope I shall not err,
He preached a hundred Sermons to their one.
Peter a Fisher was, and he caught Men:
And they have Nets, and in them catch Men too;
Yet I Will not swear they are alike, for them
He caught he saved: these catch, and them undo.
I dare not swear that Courts Ecclesiastic
Do in their Laws make just and gentle Votes;
But I Will be sworn that Burton, Pryn and Bastwick
Were once Ear-witnesses of harsher Notes.
Archdeacons, Deans and Chapters are brave men,
By Canon, not by Scripture: but to this,
If I be called, I Will swear, and swear again,
That no such Chapter in my Bible is.
I Will not condemn those Presbyterians, who
Refused Bishoprics, and might have had'em:
But Mistress Calamy I Will swear does do
As well as if she were a Spiritual Madam.
For Holy Vestments I Will not take an Oath
Which Linen most Canonical may be;
Some are for Lawn, some Holland, some Scotscloth;
And Hemp for some is fitter than all three.
Paul had a Cloak, and Books, and Parchments too;
But that he wore a Surplice I Will not swear,
Nor that his Parchments did his Orders show,
Or in his Books there was a Common Prayer.
I owe assistance to the King by Oath;
And if he please to put the Bishops down,
As who knows what may be, I should be loath
To see Tom Beckets Mitre push the Crown.
And yet Church Government I do allow,
And am contented Bishops be the men;
And that I speak in earnest, here I vow
Where we have one, I wish we might have ten.
In fine, the Civil Power I Will obey,
And seek the Peace and Welfare of the Nation:
If this will not do, I know not what to say,
But farewell London, farewell Corporation.
R. W.

Printed in the Year, 1666.


