A SERMON, Preached at Kingston upon Hull: UPON The Day of THANKES-GIVING after
the Battle, and that marvailous Victory at Hessam-Moore, near YORK.

By J. W. B. D.

printer's or publisher's device LABOR ET CONSTANTIA

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for Matthew Walbank, and are to be sold at his
shop at Grayes-Inne Gate. 1644.

A SERMON Preached at Kingston upon Hull, upon the day of Thanksgiving, after
the BATTLE; and that mavelous Victory, at Hessam-moore, near YORK.
Ezra. 9. The last clause of the 13. and 14 verses, And has given such
deliverance as this. Should we again break thy Commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? etc.


THe people of Israel saw that they were in evil case, when they were to make
the whole number of bricks, and yet want straw, Exodus 5.7.8. and in what case
may (...) Ministers of the Gospel think themselves to (...) that are to
compose their whole number of Sermons, and yet went books: Such has been the
m^ery of the parts of my acoustomary residence: that not only our goods
within, nor our cattle without our apparel to cloth us, or our ^ands and
livings to seed us, can suffice their insatiable inhu^nin; and miserable
ingluvious^ess^, but the very wealth of our callings, the fruits of many cold
winters, and hot summers studies, ou^ books, our maniscripts, our whole
Libraries are def^ced, plundered, (I may not say stolen, that is out of use,)
burned or tor^e in pieces, or for the honor those creatures give to the
subject matter therein contained, they use them to give fire to their Tobacco
pipes, or for worse offices; In qualia incidimiu tempora? was the complaint of
the glory of the Roman language long ago: Lord into what manner of times are
we sa^^en? ^urely we may use the words of the Prophet, Lamentations 1.10. The
enemy has stret^hed out his hand over all our pleasant things. and as for us
we sigh, and are in heavin^ss^, whilst the present ^ries in the Church of God,
say like those of old, Lament. 1.16. Let us (...) certainly this is the day we
looked for: we have (...) and seen it. Oh but let our comfort be this, God
will certainly say to their wickedness, as to the waves of the Sea: Job
38.11. Hithert, shall thou come, and no far her, and here shall thy proud waves
be stayed, and call to mind this of the good Prophet, Jeremiah, in the great
distress of the Church of God, Lam. 3.31, 32. The Lord will not forsake for
ever: But though he send affliction, yet will he have compassion according to
the multitude of His mercies: but I draw nearer the words of the text.

This Book in which lies the words of our text, is styled the Book of Ezra,
and no doubt but was penned by him: would you know who this Ezra was? you may
read Chap. 7.12, He was a Priest, a Scribe of the Law of the God of Heaven,
one that coppied out the Scripu^es and the Law of God revealed from Heaven; a
man inspired with the Spirit of God, a pious man, a famous instrument for the
good of Gods Church, and a great promoter of reedifying of the second Temple,
what the Prophet Jeremiah had foretold, Ezra the Priest lives to see performed,
and that in a twofold respect. First, in regard of the return out of the
captivity of Babylon. Secondly i^ regard of the building of the second Temple,
for the return of the captivity. Ier. 29.10. After seaventy years be
accomplished at Babylon, I will visit you, and porfor ne my good word toward
you, in causing you to re^urne to this plaoe: yea, and to that end that wicked
men may see; that it is no privil^dge to be an instrument of punishing the
people of God. Jeremy 25.1. at that time when J deliver you, I will punish the
King of Babylon, and that Nation, (...) their iniquity. In the (...), long
ago; and that the Nations may know, that the words of the Prophets were not
wind^, I will bring against that La^d all that Jeremiah has prophesied against
it, and against the Nations. That return. I say, which Jeremiah foretold, Ezra
lived to (...), Ezra 2.1. Ezra 8.1. And some of those (...) that went (...)
with Ezra Oy^^ may read of Ezra. 7.6, 7.

Secondly, for the building of the Temple, you may read, Ezra 1, 1 2, 3.
foretold also by Isaiah, Chapt 44. last, that says of Cyrus, he is my
Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: Even saying to Jerusalem, Thou
shall be built, and to the Temple thy foundation shall be land; And (...) City
and let go my Captives not for (...) No (...) fold for (...) shall be (...)
Na^, he was so far stcan taking any price (...) ward, that he canfed much to
be given to them, Ezra 1.4. Whosoever remains in any place where he (...) of
his place (...) with (...), and with gold, with good (...) the (...) will
offering for the House of God that is (...) This (...) that the hea^^s of King^
(...) the hand of God, and what (...) they shall perform.

Secondly, that he can make strangers to (...) truth the favorers of his
Church, as (...) to pro^ate his honor.

Thirdly, and lastly, (...) they (...) need to bring (...). God so overrules
the King of Persia, that when the period of the persecution of Gods people is
come, they shall come out: But after such a delivery as this, says Ezra, shall
we again break his Commandments? and after such a delivery (...), shall we
again break thy Commandments?

In the Text, not we these five points.

First, a gracious Commemoration.

Secondly, a pious Interrogation.

Thirdly, a particular Explication.

Fourthly an Expostulation.

Fifthly, the effect^, and they are two.

A gracious Commemoration, And has given us such (...) as this.

A pious Inter rogation, Should we again break thy (...).

A particular Explication. And join in affinity with the people of these ab
(...) nations.

An Expostulation, Woulast then not be angry. The effects sollow.

The viewing of the fort^er should restrain us from the latter: and Gods
unspeakable mercy work upon our obdurancy. Of these then in Order: and first of
the gracious Commemoration, or the rehearsal of his gracious dealing with his
people, in giving them such deliverance as this. And has given us such
deliverance as this.

In the Text mention is not only made of a Deliverance, but magnified with an
emphasis, of such a deliverance; such deliverance as this. Many a time did God
deliver his people, but such a deliverance as this, ought to be of special
notice. Many a time God did deliver them, as we may see in the Book of Judges:
but yet which was such a deliverance as this? The deliverance out of Egypt was
a more miraculous deliverance, but not such an easy and peac^able deliverance
as this.

When God will punish, it is be that delivers into the hand of the enemy, Judge.
2.14. When Gods anger was hot after the death of I^shua, it was he that
delivered them into the hand of the spoyler, that spoiled them: but when he
would show mercy, he also delivers them out, sometimes by miracles, sometimes
by the ordinary means of men, Judges 2.16. Though he thus whipped them,
nevertheless he raised up Judges which delivered them out of the hand of these
that spoiled them. Yet amongst many of their deliverances we shall in diverse
respects not finds such a deliverance as this: And has given as such
deliverance as this.

In which words we have three things to explain.

First, what is meant by this deliverance.

Secondly, let us see in what respects it is so emphatically magnified with
such a deliverance.

Thirdly, and lastly, how God was said to give them such a deliverance.

I answer, first, that this Pronoune (this) notes out in that first point some
particular deliverance.

Secondly, that this particular deliverance was their freedom from the seventy
years captivity in Babylon, Ezra 2.1. Ezra 7.13. Thus you briefly see what
this paticuler deliverance was.

Secondly, let us see in what respects it is so emphatically magnified, (with
such a deliverance) We may observe that it is worthy an emphasis in these five
respects.

First, in regard of the freeness of it.

Secondly, in regard of the peaceablenesse of it.

Thirdly, in regard of the honourablenesse of it.

Fourthly, in regard of the fasenesse of it.

Fifthly, and lastly, in regard of their Accommodation with all conveniences.

First, inregard of the freeness of it, ne mine cogene, nemine propaguante, no
man forcing rt, no man fighting ^or it, Ezra 9.9. He extended mercy to us in
the fight of the Kings of Forsia, three of their Kings severally one after
another freely decreed it: first Cyrus, Ezra 1.1. in the very (...) of his
reign he makes a Proclamation for it. (...) of the Records, finding that
(...), makes a second, Ezra 6.1. Yea, and this Decree was made so strongly, and
backed with such per^^ty, if not observed, Ezra 6.11. That whosoever should
alter this word, the timber was to be palled (...) from his house, and set up
for a Gallows, and be hanged thereon^ and not only so, but the house it self
was to be made a Dunghill: Yea, and the freenes of Dar^^^ his spirit was such
for this delivering, and the Temples re-edifying, that he commanded it should
be done with speed. Thirdly, Artaxerxes, Ezra 7.12, 13. He made a Decree that
all the people of Israel that would go with Ezra, and with the Priests and
Levits, they might go: thus we (...) the freeness of it, whereas other
deliverance were not wrought without blood and compulsion from captivity.

When Lot and his people were taken Captives in the overthrow of the Kings of
Sodo^^s and Go^^orah, Abraham his Uncle delivered him; but it was nt without
blows and bloodshed, Genesis 14.14, 15, 16. Abraham armed 318. of his trained
Band, and he and his servan^s divided themselves against the enemy by night,
wherein he showed both his wisdom, and skill, in coming upon them in so many
seveall companies, and by night, in pur^^^ing them at such a time as they least
^uspected an onset. And he brought (...) back, the women, the people, and off
the goods. Again, Judges 3.8. when Israel had provoked God anger by their
unlawful marriages; and their Idolatry, he sold them into the hands of
Cusham-zishathaim King of Mesopotamia, to whom they were in bondage and slavery
eight years; and when they cried, he raised Othniel up for a deliverer: but
not without war, and bloodshed, and constraint, v. 10. And Judges 4.3. when
they sinned again, God punished again, and delivered them into the hands of
Jabin King of Canaan for twenty years. Deborah and Barak delivered them, but
not freely, but by a strong hand, and by blood, verse 15. I might instance in
many, but what need we more. Thus we see what a deliverance this was in regard
of the freeness of it no jarre, no war no bloodshed.

Secondly, in regard of the peaceablenesse of it. Though Pharach had consented
to let Israel go out of the bondage of Egypt. Exodus 11.31. Rise up, and get
you forth from among my people, etc yet for all this they went not away
peceably, but with much murmuring and pursuit, Exodus 14 and 5; The heart of
Pharaoh, and his servants were turned against the people: and verses 8, 8.
Pharaoh and the Egyptions pursued after them 1 and all the horses, and
Charriots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his Army, and overtook them
incamping by the sea. Here was no such thing in deliverance out of this
Egyptian slavery, as was in the deliverance from the Babylonish Captivity.

Thirdly in regard of the honourablenesse of it, they were not sent away stripped
branded, or dishonored or with disgrace, or in confusion, but upon
consultation had with their Priests, and Elders, and the most honou^rable
amongst the Persians reflecting upon them, and the better tanks together with
the Poorer, marched out orderly.

Fourthly, in regard of the safenesse of it: no enemies at their coming out no
Amelcks in the way, no such wilderness drought, fiery Serpents, or a forty
years journey, as from Egypt.

But Ezra 7.9. Upon the first day of the first month, they began to go up
from Babylon, and upon the first day of the fifth month were at Jerusalem,
according to the good hand of God upon Ezra, and Ezra 8.22, 23. I was ashamed
to require of the King an Army, and horsemen, to help us against the enemy in
the way, because we had spoken to the King saying, The hand of our God is upon
all them that seek him in goodness: but his power and Wrath against all them
that forsake him. And humbling themselves before God by fasting and prayer, God
did so preserve them, that no enemy in the way troubled them: but verse 31. The
hand of God was so upon them, that he delivered them from the hand of the
enemy, and of such as laid wayt by the way.

Fifthly, and lastly, in regard of their accommodation for all conveniences,
Ezra 1.4. Wheresoeve they sojourned (as you have heard) the men of that place
were to accommodate them with silver, gold, goods, beasts; besides the
free will offerings of the house of God. And Ezra 7.15, 16. Ezra was to carry
over silver and gold, which the King and his Counselors had freely offered to
the God of Israel, and all the silver and gold that he could find in the
Province of Babylon. And verse 19. They were to take back all the Vessels of
the Temple which Nabuchadnezzer had plundered from thence. And verse 20. If any
thing else were necessary, it should be paid out of the Kings Treasures. Cast
all these things together, and then tell me, if it might not well be
emphatically expressed with such a deliverance as this. And has given as such
a deliverance as this.

The third point is, that God gave this deliverance. How did he give it?

Answer. By working upon the hearts, and minds, and spirits of the Kings of
Persia, freely to grant it; which lets us see how the hearts of Kings are in
the hands of God, to move when, and what he will, Ezra 1.1. The Lord stirred up
the spirit of Cyrus, King of Persia, that he made a Proclamation, etc. v. 3.
Whosoever would go up to Jerusalem to build the Temple, he might. And Ezra 6.9.
see how God stirred up the spirit of Darius to second this. And Ezra 7.13.
Artaxerxes had his heart also so wrought upon by God for his peoples good, that
he made a Decree in his time to the same end. Thus you see in brevity how God
gave such a deliverance as this. And has given us such deliverance as this.

This may teach us when we are in captivity, prison, or misery, not to exclude
Gods hand from working our happiness. If friends intercede, yet are they
stirred up of God. It is he likewise that inclines the hearts of the
Captivators to hearken to their requests, overruling their spirits for his
own honor, and his peoples peace, so that we may say to such instruments, as
David to the widow of Tikoab, when he instructed her first, and then employed
her for the reducing of Absolon into his fathers favor, 2 Samuel 14.19. Is not
the hand of Ioab with thee in all this? So may we say, is not the hand of god
with you in all this?

And now from their such deliverance, give me leave a little to look upon our
late deliverance; which when we have discoursed a while, we shall find worthy
an emphasis, and (a such deliverance) too: Concerning which, take this half a
dozen of points. First, the name of the enemy, to whom in some places no less
than a second Caesarian fortune, veni, vidi, vici, came, viewed, and overcame.
Some Dunghill spirits, and daunted hearts were vanquished with shows, never
came to blows: the many advantages the enemy gained by treachery, celerity,
and vigilance made them looked upon by some as formidable. Their Treachery
breaks vows, promises, and covenants, as Sanpson did his threeds of Tow; and
so they may gain their own ends, they conscience not the medinums, but often
use inhumane cruelty to a stooping and submitting enemy, which one day shall
more disadvantage their designs than all their policies have put them for ward.

Secondly, Celerity, seldom monething it upon any one design, or grazing
their Quarters too low in any corner of the Kingdom, but by swift motion
visits one Country after another, dividing the prey, and taking the spoil of
what they never sweat for. If any victory for our impiety, it is approved to
the utmost: whence we might surely learn something.

Thirdly, and lastly, their Vigilance in scouting by horse, and intelligence by
foot, which are the two eyes of an army to look into the very bowels of an
enemy. How advantagiously of late did they choose out their ground upon which
God would have them receive their overthrow? no doubt more busied to find out
those than him. How suddenly did their Alarm reach the enemy: which put the
chief Commanders to an hasty collection of their spirits? how furious their
first assault? how gradually did god abate their pride? It puts me in mind
what I have read of the French, that in the first onset they are more than men;
but ever after less than women. God would let man see that an Arm of flesh
could not prevail against him. Though in their presumption they thought to
have devoured up all with open mouth. but they sought against more than they
saw, not more than they felt, against a Deity, who made an impresse upon their
impiety, and was pleased to give his poor people victory against all their
Treachery, Celerity, and Vigilance.

Secondly, such a delivery, if we consider their quantity: But thi^ we cannot
express punctually: some relate 20000 some 23: thousand, some much more, but
magnus minimus, the least number great. Yet was God pleased from all these to
deliver us; and as the Psalmist has it, When they would have eaten up our
flesh, they stumbled all fell, and all the men whose hands were Mighty, found
nothing.

Thirdly, such a delivery, if we respect their quality: men of s^ill, men of
will, yea, and men of ill too; men of cruelty, men of blood, men as yet not
satiated with the blood of the Saints, many of them foreign and savage
beasts, in the shapes of men: others of them bloody, obstinate, and malicious
Papists, who are glad to see the day they may be loosed out of their Collers,
to worry such as have for many years kept them in by the power of good Laws:
yet themselves even then had small cause to complain, for they were laid upon
them with a gentle hand: but alas now who feels not the misery of that
undeserved clemency? many others their associates strengthen their hands
against them innocent, and faithful in the land, whose consciences can assure
them before that great Tribunal, that they are forced to stand up as true
English hearts for their lives, for their liberties, for their religion, for
their tender posterity, that are but themselves renewed, and should bear their
names; yet they will not see the bent of those to whom they associate, but help
unnaturally with fire and word to waste the land of their nativity: the very
heathen may rise up in judgment against them for this: What though these tell
us how they hate Popery, and are as much for the Protestant Religion (truly
called Catholic) as the best. We may answer them in St. Austins words in
another kind, Verba quid audeo, facta dum video, to what end do they give us
such words, when we see such deeds? when they have imprisoned as many Mass
Priests, as they have done painful Pastors, and learned and godly Preachers;
and plundered as many Papists, as they have robbed good Protestants, and made as
much room for Sermons, as they have made for sacrificing, hisce peractis,
causam ventibabimus, then we are willling to hear their plea, till then they
do but surdo canere, spend words upon us for their profession in vain. What
though they be not so devoyd of reason, as directly to aim at that advance:
yet in directly, and by consequence, reason must nearer inform them, that that
faction by their means cannot out be strengthened. And what though they gain a
bubble of honor for themselves in their course, yet their posterity would
curse them for beslaving their liberty, Isaiah 7.2. The Prophet tells us that
Aram was joined with Ephraim, but now Ephraim is joined with Aram, for fear
that Judah should want spoiling. Yet Isaiah 8.9, 10. Mark what God said by his
Prophet, Gather together on heaps, O ye people, and ye shall be brok^n in
pieces, and hearken all ye far Countries: gird your selves and ye shall be
broken to pieces: gird your selves and ye shall be broken in pieces: take
council together, yet it shall be brought to naught: pronounce a decree yet
shall it not stand; for God is with us.

Fourthly, their resolution, most of them being desperately wicked, whom Satan
has principled to make haste for hell: there is no design so desperate as
some of them will not attempt, though usually they be Bulletted, and fired out
of this life for it: and are sent to meet with such matches as will keep fire
for ever. They will vow, curse, and swear, and for fear that God should forge
to punish their sin, they desire him to damn them; and diverse of them have
dyed (with God damne-me in their mouths:) and in their vows would say, that
this, or that they would do; this, or that Town they would have by such and
such a time; never taking God within the lists of their resolves; as if they
would either have it without him, or else never. These are rebellious against
god in their hearts, and disobedient in their lives, and these their
resolutions God often infatuates and frustrates, that all the world may see
their blind and desperate folly. Gods foyling of so many of these men, of
these desparate resolves, who in their approaches still march up furiously like
Jehu, and look as if they were Lords before blows, who having perceived the
siege raised before York, blessed themselves in the height of their terror,
and felt their courage rise together with the siege, flattering themselves with
an undoubted hope of a most glorious victory: Thus far God suffered the waves
of their pride to grow higher, and higher: but let not him that puts on his
Armor, boast himself like him that puts it off. Hessam-Moore proved not a
Stopford, a Liverpoole, or a Bolton, which two latter, though for a long time
bravely defended, yet alas at length so great a multitude over-powred their
strength: famous little Bolton, who had twice before quelled the pride of a
daring enemy, and repulsed him with shame; who can think of thee without
sorrow? that at the third onset GOD should let thee suffer; wherein one example
of cruelty is to be rigistred to all posterity; that when the Town was taker,
and much savage dealing exercised upon the poor, and so well disposed
inhabitants, one amongst the rest they pistolled and running behind a Table
they cut his throat, and ^^tched his Bible, upon which they iss^ed out his
blood in abundance, Vsque quo Domine, usque quo This doubtless was for the
love they bore to the Protestant Religion, videat Deus, and judecet. Yet the
proud waves of their wicked design stay not here, but as bearing down all
before them, they coast it to another Country, till they come to their fatal
foil, where God seemed to have said to them as to the waves of the Sea, Job
38.11. Hitherto shall thy proud waves come, but no further, here shall you be
stayed. They found Hessam and harder Country; there was more Iron and Steel
waited for them there, more Iron and Smoke to welcome them than another place:
They never dreamed of making such haste home, when they came on, as afterward
they made use of. Let Israel know, and thankefully acknowledge, that this has
GOD done.

Sixthly, and lastly, of so many wording men, let us but take notice of the
paucity of swording men, it is well known that we had no small body at the
first onset, but too many of the common soldiers did too soon face about: Let
them thank me for the term, but they know my meaning; oh where was the
remembrance of their vow, of their Covenant, of that Cause which concerns many
millions of men, women and children: yet thus they backed those noble, valiant,
resolute and hardy spirits, when they should have elbowed them in the field; to
whom next under God thousand thousands owe deserved honor. God has gone
before us in it, therefore we may safely follow: He was pleased to give them
the honor of the day, who is the giver of victories in battles. Cast all
these together, consider them well, remember all their Circumstances, and then
do but tell me, f this delivery merited not an emphaticall expression too;
with such a deliverance as this And has given us such a deliverance as this.

Such a deliverance, by which our Consciences are kept from thraldom, our
lives from the merciless cruelty of the enemy: our Towns from their robbery,
our Religion (dearer than our lives) from their slavery, our Country from
their insolency, our wives and children from their tyranny. Such and no less
was our deliverance than this. And has given us such deliverance as this. So
much for that point.

I come now to the second, the pious interrogation, should we again break: by
Commandments? As if he had said, we did thus before the Captivity, and thou
did punish us; and having had such miserable experience of the fruit of our
ways, let us not again break thy Commandments? Should we again break thy
Commandments?

2. Again: That is though we have been in Captivity, and served seventy
years under the lofty Lords of Babylon, yet God having delivered us from it in
great mercy, should we requite him by our impiety, by breaking his
Commandments? And should we again break thy Commandments?

What Commandments? surely in a large sense all the Commandments, the whole
Law; but more especially those against Idolatry, and matching with strangers,
or the daughters of Idolaters, being of a false and strange Religion, Deus.
7.8. Thy daughter thou shall not give unto his son, nor his daughter shall
thou take unto thy son, for fear of turning him from the religion of the
true God. But alas this they had done, they had matched with Idolaters, which
was one of the greatest sins that Ezra bewayles, Ezra 9.2. The people took
of their daughters, for themselves, and their sons, so that the holy Jeed had
mingled themselves with the people of those lands. Yea, the hand of the Princes
and ^ulters, had been chief in this trespass: Yea, I do easily believe, that
great men are apt to lead the rest wrong, and to trespass against God first,
and the deeplyest, and verse 7. he confesses his own sins, and the sins
of his people, and of their fathers: Since the days of our fathers have we
been in great trespass, until this day: and the next words following in the
Text, Should We again join in affinity with the people of these
a^hominations? And see what good Nehemiah says to this point, Neh. last 27.
Shall we hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to trespass against our
God in marrying strange wives? especially considering what a deliverance we
have had.

Whence we may note that Gods deliverance of us out of former misery, should be
a motive to us to make us beware of after impiety, having delivered us, shall
we again sin. John 5.24. When our Savior had cured Bethesdaes Cripple, he
instructs him how to make use of this benefit, and how to behave himself for
after tim^s: Behold thou art made wh^le, sin no more lest a worse thing come
unto thee. Rather learn to serve God the better, considering what he has
done for thee, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I well
deliver thee; and then what follows, thou shall glorify me. O consider what
God has done for us, and shall we again follow our drunkenness, our
covetousness, our oppression, our parti^ll d^aling with deli quents, our
trespasses in doing Gods work negligently, our profanation of the Lords day,
and the like. Shall we thus requite the Lord for what he has done for us? oh
no, lest as Joshua said, Josh. 24.20 to the people of Israel: If ye forsake
the Lord, and serve strange Gods, then he will return and bring evil upon
you, and consume you after he have done you good. So if we return to these, or
the like former sins, God also will return to plague us after he have done
us good. Therefore take heed that we again break not his Commandments. And
shall we again break his Commandments?

I now come to the third part, the particular explication of the former
Interrogation, and join in affinity with the people of these abominations. In
which words we have three things to observe and explain.

First, what is meant by these people.

Secondly, what by joining in affinity with them.

Thirdly, and lastly, what these abominations were.

First, what by these people? I answer, first generally. Secondly, More
specially. Generally this was common to them, with the Ephesians, and all other
Gentiles, Ephesians. 2 12. That they were without Christ being aliants from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenant of Promise, having no
hope, and Without God in the world, That is, without the knowledge of God in
the world, neither knowing what be was in himself, nor what he would be to
them, without the comfortable feeling of Gods spirit within their Consciences,
without the right rule of service and obedience to him, following dumb Idols
as they were led. For Psalm 96.5. All the Gods of the Nations were Idols: And
Psalm 115, 4. Their Idols are sil^er and gold, the work of men's hands. There
was but one true God, and they were all ignorant of him. In Jury is God well
known, faith the Psalmist, his Name is great in Israel; sed non fecit taliter
omni nationi; he has not dealt so with every nation, neither have the heathen
any knowledge of his Laws.

2. More specially: What these people were you may see, Ezra 9. latter part of
the first verse, they were Canaanites, Hittites, Perezites, Jebusites,
Amorites, Moabites; nay yet more, the Egyptians, and the Amorites: Lord how
fowly was this people gone wide of thy way? with which of the abominable
Idolaters amongst the Nations had not they transgressed? First, observe what
God had commanded them, Thou shall have no other Gods but me. And some of the
learned think, that because the Jews were so prone to Idolatry above all other
sins, that the Lord put this Commandment in the first place: and how often
does God inculcate this in Scripture, showing them the vanity, rediculousnesse,
and insufficiency of all other Gods.

Secondly, God had given them express charge concerning the most of those
nations in particular, that they should not meddle with them for Contracts,
Covenants, marriages, or the like, Deuteronomy. 7.3. First when God shall bring thee
into a land which thou shall possess, and cast out many nations before thee:
Hittites Girgashites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizites, Hivites, Jebusites,
seven Nations, greater and mightier than thou; then were they to smite them,
and utterly to destroy them, to make no Covenant with them, nor show mercy unto
them, nor to make any marriages with them, etc. And yet you see how point
blanke they did quite the contrary with these nations: For first, they destroy
them not, and therefore God used them ever after as instruments to plague them,
and in great danger to have destroyed them.

Secondly, they made marriages with these very nations, of which they were so
expressly forbidden.

Thirdly, not with one or two of them only, but with all about them, 2 Kings
17.15. having once broken the hedge of modesty, and obedience, they sinned
without limit, committing wickedness even with greediness. And when the great
men, or the Princes and Rulers, had once made it an example, who had the chief
hand in it, Ezra 9.2. the inferiors made bold scon the follow, till it grew so
common, that no great matter was made of it: for communes and custom of sin,
out-faces the cry that is made against it.

Fourthly, observe that these several nations served several gods, some one
Idol, some another; so that Israel was now for as many several gods as they
had married wives of several Nations: and what now becomes, of Thou shall have
no other Gods but me?

Fifthly, and lastly observe, that Israel had known, that God had cast out
these several nations for such like sins as they were now fallen into; for
as the Psalmist says, They were mingled amongst the heathen, and learned their
works: they joined in affinity with the people of these abominations. And
should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the
people of these abominations? So much for the first point.

Secondly, let us see what is meant in joining in affinity with them.

Answer. It is to make marriages with them, and to be linked to them in
kindred, giving their daughters to the sons of the Heather, and intaking of
the daughters of the heathen to their sons, which affinity god had forbidden,
and abhorred it; and yet this had overspread almost the whole face of the
people, Ezra 10.12. We are many that have transgressed this way, yea Princes,
Priests, Rulers, Levits, Commons, and almost all, Ezra the 10. from the
eighteenth to the end. And Nehem. last Chapter, from the three and twentieth
Verse to the seven and twentieth Verse. I saw Jews, says he that married
wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab, and their children spoke half in the
speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews language, but according to
the language of each people. And I contended with them, and cursed, and reviled
them, plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, ye shall not give
your daughters unto their sons, nor take their daughters unto your sons, or
for your selves; Did not Solomon King of Israel sin by these things? yet
among many nations were there none like unto him: but he grievously offended in
joining in affinity with several and many of the people of these
abominations. And shall we again break thy Commandments in joining in
affinity with the people of these abominations?

In affinity: there cannot be affinity between them, but the sequells will be
disadvantagious to the people of God: for they will induce them to more
familiarity than can well stand with their integrity, and by fair words work
weak and unstable souls from the way of God, Numbers 25. the three first
verses, When Israel was enticed by the beauty of Moabs daughters to commit
whoredom with them, having no such abode as with those they had married and
dwelt with: Yet from this they are enticed further to spiritual whoredom;
they called the people to the sacrifice of their gods: and they forsooth were
so complementall and so affable, that though the God of Israel, which had
brought them out of the Land, had said enough to the contrary, yet they did
eat and bowed down to their gods, and Israel joined himself to Baal-Peor,
and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, etc. and sour and twenty
thousand fell of the plague for it. Thus God made them know him by feeling,
whom they would not regard by hearing. And how truly herein did that of the
Prophet Hosea appear, Hos. 4 11. Whoredom, Wine, and new Wine take away the
heart: And when the heart and affections are once gone in Gods service, what is
all the body worth besides; for even as a man cannot see without an eye, nor
hear without an ear, nor taste without a tongue, no more can a man serve God
without an heart; leave that behind him, and bring all the rest to Gods house,
and it is vain. God will say of that, as Joseph did of Benjamin, See my face no
more, except you bring your brother Benjamin. So see my face no more in my
house, in mine ordinance, except you bring me heart and affections with you.
You know who said, Filimi damihi cor, My son give me thy heart: But the
wisest man under the arches of heaven had his heart stolen away by Idolatrous
women, 1 Kings 10. wherein Solomon's worth, wealth, wisdom is wonderfully
magnified, Chapter 11.1. An eclipse comes that over-shadowes all this glory, as
thus: But King Solomon loved many outlandish women, together with the daughter
of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and
Hittites: and in the three next Verses, see what follows.

These were nations that God forbad the children of Israel to match with, for
sear of turning them after their gods: but Solomon clave unto these in love,
he had seven hundred wives that were Princes and three hundred Concubines, and
his wives turned away his heart, yea, when he was old. When then say some did
he repent? Truly Josephus in his Antiquity, and Beller^ine in his Polemicals
speak but harshly of him. His salvation is not questioned by me: But I
suppose, that though his wives drew away his heart when he was old; yet he
repented when he was older; witness his book of Ecclesiastes wherein his
folly is acknowledged and bewailed; only note this by the way; what the wit,
and wisdom of man is, without the assistance of God; when the Lord leaves a
man to lean upon his naturalls, or artificial Wisdom, it is not able to
support him. Therefore as the Prophet says, Jeremiah 9.23. Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom, for the wisdom of the world is but foolishness
with God, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.19. And Deuteronomy. 17.17. God has given
charge that the King of Israel should not multiply wives unto himself, that
his heart turn not away. Yet you see that thongh God had given this charge,
and had appeared unto him twice, and had so plainly manifested his will unto
him, yet Solomon fell from the way that God had shown him, and becomes as vile
as many of the heathen, and goes beyond many of his ignorant and common
subjects, in affinity with the people of these abominations: And shall We
again break thy Commandments, in joining in affinity with the people of
these abominations?

Let us now come to the third and last point, to know what these abominations
were.

It was an abomination to God to have his people, to whom he had made
himself known, to fall off to serve Idols, and dunghill gods, that had but
the name of gods, not the nature. In the first Book of Kings, the eleventh
Chapter, Solomon is said to go after Milcom, the abominations of the
Ammonites, but it was not the Ammonites abomination: that is, the Ammonites
did not actually abhominate it: but that was an abomination in the sight of
God, and should have been so in the sight of all his people. Not only
Abominable, but Abomination its self in obstracto. And verse 7. He built an
high place for Chem^sh, the abomination of Moab; he stowed his affection
first, and then costs and goods to promote Idolatry. And verse 8. He did the
like for all the strange wives, which burnt Incense and Sacrifice to their
gods. Wonderful, so weak a Sex outstrip so wise a man in their constancy,
every one of them constant to her god; and Solomon unconstant to his. He
brought over to all theirs, and none of them brought over to him. Dumb Idols
shall gain more Devotion, than the eternal, and ever-living god. Lord what is
man in his own strength? if the illuminating spirit of God shine not into the
darkness of his heart, he will travail but in darkness to darkness. And
not only here, but in many other places of the Scriptures, Idolatry, or giving
honor unto Idols, is called abomination: Deuteronomy the seventh Chapter, the
two last verses: The graven Images of their gods shall ye burn with fire,
etc. Yea, and the very silver that was upon them was an abomination to the
Lord: Why so? because it helped to beautify them, and adorn them; by reason
of which, the people were more mad upon them, and did more reverance them: so
that God accounted it as accursed things, and his people might not bring it
into-their houses. Ezekiel 8.6. Son of man see thou not what they do? even
the great abominations that the house of Israel commits, etc. What were those
abominations? Verse 10, 11. Every form of creeding things, and abominable
beasts, and all the Idols of the house of Israel portrayed upon the wall round
about; and before them there stood seventy men of the Ancients of the house of
Israel, there they had Consers, and a thick cloud of Incense went up. This was
to be offered to God, not to Idols. In the fourteenth verse more abomination,
Women weeping for T^mmuz. In the sixteenth verse more abominations, Men
turning their backs toward the Temple of the Lord, and worshipping the Sun.
2 Chronicles 34.3.4. Josiah having taken away the high places, Groves, carved
Images, molten Images, and the Images of Baal; in the last Verse he is said to
have taken all the abominations out of the Land.

Secondly, another branch of their abominations, was the pollution of one
another against the light of nature. Romans 2.14, 15. When the Gentiles, which
have not the Law, (tht in the written Law of Moses) do by nature the things
contained in the Law; these heaving not a Law, are a Law unto themselves,
having the dictate of reason, and conscience to guide them, they show the
works of the Law, (that is, such works as the Law injoynes) written in their
hearts; their consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing,
or excusing one another. Yet these against the light of nature uncovered the
shame of their nearest flesh and blood with those grand abominations.
Leviticus Chapter 18 from the 6. verse to the 24. Then he adds after a
particular nomination of all those abominations; defile not your selves in any
of these things. For not in one, or two, or three of them only, but in all
these abominations forenamed, the nations are defiled, which I cast out
before you; and surely, if they were defiled with all the abominations
reckoned up in that place, they might well be termed a people of abominations
indeed. And shall we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity
with the people of these vbhominations.

With the people of these abominations. Whence we may observe, that Idolatry
and sins done against the light of nature, are abhominatious before God, 1
Pet. 4.3. Idolatry is called abominable, abominable Idolatries, and here I
say in abstracto, abomination; and they render the people that practice them
abominable, and to be abhorred in the sight of God, Levit. 26.39. And in the
place of St. Peter fore alleged, you may see what the rest of their sins
were: they walked in lasciviousness, lusts, (you have the particulers in the
eighteenth Chapter of Leviticus) excess of wine, banquetings, revellings, etc.
which the dictate of right reason might have kept them from.

Such as these are an abominable people, or people of abominations. And has
not that noble County of Lancashire too lately seen and felt the like
abominations in this their last Alarm, from that Country-plundering army,
did ever the Heathen in excess of wine, revelling, banqueting, in
lasciviousness, or lawless lusts exceed them: have they not ravished women,
defiled Virgins? and some of them made their boasts of the generallity of their
intentions that way; whereupon, from credible report, some poo^e innocent, and
well-affected women, and virgins have become as distracted, other drowned
themselves upon it for grief, as ashamed ever after to look their friends in
the face, or any longer to live: other resisted to death, and were pistolled,
so that we have cause to take up the Prophet Jeremiah's complaint, Lamentations
the last Chapter, the eleventh verse. They ravished the women in Zion, and the
maids in the Cities of Judah. But God remembered them in his appointed time, and
some of them will do so no more.

Now concerning Idolatry, it may be committed two ways, either when man
worships somewhat for God which is not, as the grossest, and most corrupt
amongst the Heathen did; or else when a man worships the true God after a false
manner: and thus the Papists are gross Idolaters. First, conception. Secondly
practice. First conceptive. The vulgar Papists, which the more learned cause to
err, they conceive of God, so as he is represented unto them in Images and
Pictures, which help to frame their conceit like that of the Anthropomophites,
to conceive of God as of an old man sitting in heaven, or sub humana speciae,
as Cicero says, the most of the nations conceived of the great God. Thus in
their mil conceiving of God they make an Idol of him, framing unto themselves
such a God as there is not: yea, daring to paint the Trinity, as subject to
humane sense, and resembling a spiritual and unbounded essence, by an humane
and corporeal shape. In this sense it is truly said, Hab. 2.18. that the
Image is a teacher of lies, because it causes another thing like unto its
self to come into a man's mind; when as that thing which it pretends to
resemble, is nothing like it, but differs from it plusquam genere. A Pidgeon
may better resemble a Sheep, than a finit, corporeal, organicall sheep can an
infinite, incomprehensible, and spiritual essence. Thus Jeremiah the tenth
chapter, and the eighth verse, The stock is a doctrine of vanity, it can
resemble nothing but vain, and unprofitable things: Yet thus be stocks,
images, or corporeal representations, are the vulgar Papists taught to
conceive of God: so that they are Idolaters conceptive.

Secondly, they are so peactice, they bow to graven Images, and do not worship
God immediately in Christ, but by Saints, Angels, Pictures, or corporeal
representations, or the like trash of humane invention, unwarrantable in the
substance of Gods worship: thus though they pretend to worship the true God,
yet it is in false manner. To whom I say, as the Pharisees to Christ, By what
authority do they these things? Nay, and do not diverse of them sin also
against the light of nature, in marrying within the degrees prohibited in
sacred Writ; and yet they (Alter Deus in terris) will not boggle to dispense
with that too, and so by consequence should be of greater power than that power
that made the Law: surely in these they are before God a people of
abominations, And shall we again break thy Commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of those abominations?

The reasons why so accounted before God, may be these: the first may be
drawn from the manner and nature of their worship and service: it is of their
own invention, shuffling out that which God in great mercy and wisdom from
heaven has manifested in his word: as if that were not eminent enough, Matthew
15.3. Christ said to the Pharisees, Why do ye transgress the Commandments
of God by your tradition? Alas in the ninth Verse, In vain do they worship
me, teaching for doctrine the Commandments of men. GOD did his people off^r
Sacrifice; but he left not it not to the matter what, or the manner how for
man to prescribe. If a man had sacrificed and offered a Dogs neck, or Swines
blood, (as it is in the Prophet) would not GOD have abhorred it?

Well, is this so, that Idolaters, and sins against the light of nature, or
the Dictamen of right reason, are abhominatious to God? This then may be an use
of instruction to teach us what to judge of them: they are abominable in GODS
sight: God loathes their sacrifices, and abhorres their service, and cannot
away with their practices. Let them vant whilst they will in their words,
varnish what they can in their works, beautify the works of their own hands
with gold, silver, and outward ornament, to make them inamoured of them, God
sees the works of their hearts are naught, and that this their way is their
folly: it may be plausible to carnal eyes. but in Gods eyes no better than
abominations. And shall we again break thy Commandments, and join in
affinity with the people these abominations?

Secondly if so: then a Use of reproof to such that affect this affinity, and
take delight in their needless familiarity, and go about to defend, excuse,
or plead for them, or the like, seeing God himself has passed sentence upon
them, and let God be true, and every man a liar.

Thirdly, and lastly, if so, (as you have heard) then every people cannot be
saved in their own Religion, practicing according to their own devised
principles, as some fondly have feigned. For as there is but one God, so but
one Baptism, and one truth, as says the Apostle, and whosoever shuffles out
this truth, and practices according to their own principles, shall be sure to
come short of that reward which the faithful sheep of Christ who hear his
voice, shall attain unto.

Thus much for that point.

The Expostulation follows, Would thou not be angry with us?

This Expostulation implies a strong affirmation, as not only here, but in
many other places of sacred Writ, as if he should have said; doubtless thou
would be angry with us: Now God is not subject to any passion, or
perturbation of mind, as men are: And therefore this, and many such like
speeches are spoken (...) humanitus, after the meanner of men. God is not angry
affective, but effective, not by any turbulent passion, as the creature is. God
is not angry affective, but effective, not by any turbulancy of internal or
subjective passion; but is so said to be in regard of the effects, as when God
does to men, as one man in his anger does to another; then God is said to be
angry as to frown upon him, to chide him, to dis-affect him, to strike him,
punish him, kill him, or the like: and hen God does the like, then he is said
to be angry; for these and the like are the signs of his anger.

Would not thou be angry with us? Angry with us, for what? the foregoing
words import; For joining in affinity with the people that live in Idolatry,
and uncleanness. whence note, that it is the peoples impiety that provokes God
to be angry, Deuteronomy. 32.21. These provoked me to anger with their vanities. And
Deuteronomy. 31.16.17. God having foretold how the people should go a whoring after
other gods in a strange land, and that they would forsake him, and break the
Covenant which he had made with them: then he tells them that for this his
wrath would wax hot against them: and then see the fearful effects of it in
that place. To the like purpose read the seventh Chapter of Jeremiah, the 18,
19, and 20. Verses. And Psalm. 78. from 30. to 34. where the many benefits are
Catalogued which God did for Israel, yet they were not estranged from their
lust: but whilst the meat was in their mouths the heavy wrath of God came upon
them, slew the fattest of them, and smote down the chosen men that were in
Israel: for all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous
works; therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in
trouble. And Verse 58. they provoked him to anger with their high places, and
moved him to jealousy with their graven Images. And Numbers 25.3. when the
Israelites had committed whoredom with the daughter of Moah: It is there said,
That the anger of the Lord was kindled against them. Thus we perceive the
Doctrine plain, and the Scriptures are every where copious of it.

The reasons why a peoples impiety provokes God to be angry are many: I will
only content my self with these three.

The first may be drawn from the purity of Gods nature, to which nothing is
more opposite than the ugly impurity of sin, Hab. 1.13. Thou have purer eyes
than to behold evil, and thou can not look on iniquity. That is, thou can
not look on it, via approbationis, or delectationis, sed via indignationis,
thou can not look upon it by way of approbation, or delectation, but by way
of indignation.

The second may be drawn from the holiness, and equity of the Law of God,
which is transgressed; and so God made angry by a peoples sin, when they
prefer their own lust, before the observance of such a Law, Deuteronomy. 4.8. What
Nations is there that has statutes and judgments so righteous as all this Law
which I set before you this day. And shall he not be angry then at the breach
of such a Law.

The third and last may be drawn from man himself: God is angry to see man
work his own ruin, that the sweet poison of sin should bewitch him to
destroy himself: When God had forewarned Israel of sin, and yet saw him
sin against what he had forewarned him of. See how mournfully he
expostulates with them: Why will ye dye, O ye house of Israel? And Hos. the
sixth Chapter, from the fourth to the eighth Verse, Oh Ephraim what shall I do
unto thee? Oh Judah what shall I do unto thee; for your goodness is as the
morning cloud, and as the early dew is goes away, therefore have I showed them
by the Prophets; I have slain them by the words of my mouth, and they
judgments are as the light that goes forth, etc. But they like men have
transgressed the Covenant, there have they dealt treacherously against me. Thus
God is angry to see his own Image defaced, and that men should walk in
darkness, rather than light, when he had so clearly made the way of salvation
known unto them.

Well, is this so, that a peoples impiety provokes God to be angry? this then
plainly lets us see what it is that has so much provoked Gods wrath and anger
against this land and nation. Oh it is sin.

First, it is great and grievous sins.

Secondly, such sins unpunished.

Thirdly, and lastly, such sins also unrepented of in private.

For the first, What sin is it that England has not been guilty of? what
sin was in Israel that has not been in England? I will run but through
some capital ones, by way of parallel, and ex pede Herculem, etc. was it
shedding the blood of the Prophets, Luke 13.34. what havoc was made of such as
could be catched in the Marian days? and how much more should be spilled now,
if the bloody and cruel Romanists, and such like, could but attain their
ends: but their curb is, that they have so many of their Priests in prison
already, that they dare not begin to give way to their fury to the full, for
fear that these Pot-mongers (yet holy Catholics) do too speedily answer it,
and be helped toward their purgatory in an hempen string. Yet so many as God
suffers to fall into their hands, they do use most basely, doggedly, and
unworthily, and irreverendly, testifying by their facts, what they wish in such
cases: and these times can tell what inhumanity and cruelty have been used to
some of them, even to the very death.

Secondly, was it pollution, or profaning of the Sabbath? Ezekiel 20.13. We
have profaned our Christian rest, or Sabbath, if a man may so call it, and no
be accounted a Sabbatarian, because the word is Hebrew; I know no reason else,
the world knows we mean no Jewish Sabbath? but be it the Lords day,
equivolently we mean the same; no thanks to some that we have a day to
humble our selves in before God, and acknowledge our sins, and confess our
faith, and learn his will, called by either name. We have profaned this by a
Law, and have set men at liberty to sin: so that God might have the name of
it, and man's lusts, and the devils most of the practice. Before we restrained
the preaching of the Word, and so quarrelled with the Prophets, that we made
them weary of Preaching, and for fear that they should urge some Law to curb
men from sinning, they let them have liberty as by Law, that they might sin
without curbing; and as if the corrupt nature of man were not apt of its self
enough to sin, the wind of such wickedness has blown in the sails of it.
Blessed be the name of the Master and Lord also of that day, that we have lived
to see a godly direction for the reformation of it.

Thirdly, was it shameful swearing, and swinish drunkenness? we have herein
exceeded our neighboring Kingdoms, and other Countries: The Belgian Soldiers,
and the Indian Pipers showed us but the way; the Disciples have exceeded their
Masters: Drink and Tobacco are become almost as relatives, Posito uno poniter
etiam and alterum, or like body and shadow they sollow one the other. I may
safely say no two creatures in England have been more abused of latter years,
especially Tobacco; many give fire here, that will not charge an enemy: and if
you ask most of them why they take it, being young, and in perfect health and
strength, they will say, they can give you no reason for it, but because others
take it: surely they sin in so needless mispending of that creature, which
has its natural and medicinal effects as other Herbs have, being rightly
used. this is like the answer of a no -- Religion Gentlewomen I have heard of
in Lancashire, who saying her Husband was a Protestant, was asked the reason
why she also went not to the Church? to whom she would give no reason but
this, Because it was not the fashion of the Gentlewomen in that Country to do
so: Many take it only to keep them from being idle: and I have known diverse
to have brought such a necessity upon themselves hereby, that they could not be
without it. If an old fire-house, and common Tobacco-taker be but without smoke
a month together, they are both in danger to fall in pieces.

In the days of yore, England was the most temperate of all the Northern
Countries: and in the days of our fathers it was as great a wonder to have
seen a man drunk, as it was of late upon a market day to have seen a man
with money sober. The Apostle tells us in his time that those that were drunk
were drunk on the night: but in our times they were drunk on the night, and
all the day too. It was our honor when it was but said the drunken Dutch; it
was our shame when it might have been said, the drunken English. Before the
phrase run (as drunk as a Beggar: but now of late Beggars could get no room
to be drunk in for swarms of Gentlemen. Of late our land was over-flowne with
drinks (but woe unto us that we have sinned) now it is as over-flowed with
blood. Oh a drunken devil is hard to cast out: this kind indeed will not out,
without fasting and prayer.

Fourthly, was it swearing or blasphemy? it was so common in Israel, that the
Prophet complained, that the Land mourned because of Oaths. And in England,
Oaths have striven with words: and our children have no sooner learned to
speak than they have learued to swear. Bravadoes think that they cannot be
terrible enough without swearing. Joshua won far more battles with fewer
Oaths: nay some graceless gentlemen have thought it a grace to their speech:
it may be so, for they often use it before they dine: and as if old oaths were
out of date, and had worn away their vigor, they have devised new ones to
help them on with more expedition toward the Brimstone mines. Tavernes,
Tipling-houses, Courts, Countries, Cities, Towns, Chambers, streets, have all
of them abounded herein. Lord, how many oaths have been sworn in one town,
upon one market day? how many in a week then? how many thousand thousands in a
year? and we have used it in all these places many years? how should the Lord
choose but be angry with us?

Fifthly, was it whoredom, or all manner of uncleanness? Thus was it in
Israel: Jeremiah 5.7. Though I fed them to the full, yet they committed
Adultery, and assembled themselves by companies in Harlots Houses. They
frequented Stews, and whore-houses, and spent their strength in the houses of
Strangers; and has not this been a great part of our gull-gallants practice
in the time, or the apprentiship of their folly? and what have they more to
boast of, than their uncleanness? I have with much grief observed it to have
been the customary, and almost continual discourse of these men at their
Tables and have boundred their discourse; give me leave to say, within the
compass of these four H. H. H. H. A Hound, an Horse, an Hawk, and an Whore God
has taken up their minds now with somewhat else, and what fruit have they now
of such passages concerning these as of which they may be ashamed? how freely
would these spend their bloods in needless and rash duells? Let us see how
much of it they will now spend to succor the Land of their nativity.

Sixthly, was it pride. Isaiah 3.16. The daughters of Zion were haughty, and
walked with stretched out necks, and wanton, or wandering eyes, walking and
mincing it as they went, and made a tinkling with their feet. Are the daughters
of England behind with them in this? And was it pride in the daughters of
Israel, and no pride in the daughters of England? Was it sin in them, and
none in these? or is not the God of Israel the God of England? Yes, but was
there ever peccatum sine palio? a naked sin, that had no excuse to cover it?
I think not. The first sin that ever was committed, was no sooner in the
world, but our first Parents had provided a cloak too of excuse for it, but it
could not hide it from God, no more than figleaves could their shame. Oh, alas
in ours, it is but the posture of good breeding, it is but a comely framing of
their pace, and a carrying of their bodies with a grace.

For answer, I say they may be postured in humility, paced without affected
nicity, and apparrelled in modesty; But when these are done affectedly, to set
themselves out for the applause of Popularity, we know certainly, that its none
of the least impiety, and will bring the like plague to these, that he did to
those.

Do they think that this Scripture is out of date, 1. Tim. 2.9 10. Wherein
they are taught to array themselves in comely ^pparell, with shamefastness,
and modesty. Now all sorts of apparel are not comely for all sorts of people:
Neither can every one with shamefastness and modesty wear so good, or such
and such, as God has made much above them in Birth, Worth, or Calling, though
they were able to get it, not with broyded Hair, or Gold, or Pearl, or costly
apparel. See the Geneva note upon that place, but as becomes women that
profess the sear of God, with good works, 1. Pet. 3.5. After this manner in
time past did both women that trusted in God attire themselves, and were
subject to their husbands. Yet these were many of them very holy women, and
come of good stock, and families, such as Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and the like:
If these with a good conscience might safely have worn all the apish toys,
and outlandish fashions that were then to be found, in other nations and
countries, we know that they have been able to have compassed them; but you
hear that they were subject to their Husbands no doubt in that particular as
well as others, to wear such apparel as they in their wisdom, and
discretion, thought most fit for them, but that was in those days, when Sarah
called Abraham Lord: yea but since that time many of the daughters of Sarah
will needs Lord it over Abraham, and carry themselves as if they had been made
for nothing else, but painted stoops to hang new fashions on, what France, what
Spain, what Polonia, what Italy can invent, or what these four Nations can
devise, only the apish English will have for a guise wherein every one sinfully
transgress their rank, and do not modestly apparel themselves according to
their callings, and stations, but every one will array themselves in as high a
manner as they can reach, as though it were lawful for a man to do all that
he might do, such people will be sure then to do somewhat which they should
not do: We have many Yeomen in England, who have better estates, then diverse
Esquires have, yet it is ridiculous in these men to be habit themselves equally
with Esquires: I might instance in many others, but of all the rest these two
especially, may be instanced in. I have lately in England observed two great
plenties, common Atturnies, and common Alehouses: but me thinks I perceive
also two great dearths, that is of worthy, and ancient Esquires, and of
substantial, and ancient Yeomen: For the former are almost all crambled up to
be Knights: O how glorious a land of Ladies then have we: For the latter, the
most of them will needs befoole themselves into Gentry, and so beget a nick
name before the time, that becomes them not: And as for great ones, some of
them also vainly lay out more upon new fashions in one six months, then
perhaps would maintain an Hospital for twice as long after: they have
forgotten it seems (or else make nothing of it) that God will visit those that
wear strange apparel. But what? should I exempt the pride of men's heels any
more, then that of their heads, or any other part of the body? surely no, what
shall I say then of gingling, and tinkling spurs, which are as nothing in these
days: Why? because custom has made them commendable. Well, but seeing it is
the fashion ^^ill not excuse a man if it be a sin: was the tinkling with the
feet with such thin curious plate, as the daughters of Sion had upon their
shoo^ sin with them: And is their tinkling with the heels none in ours? Its
true I grant it, such may for necessities sake be had, without affection, or
priding a man's self therein, he whose heart can answer thus much for him, is
well: but I sear me, where one can do thus, if the Conscience be asked, five
cannot. And if they be worn Extra necessitatem, and with affectation, and
pride, then surely whether we will, or no: We must in reason acknowledge it a
sin: permit me mine from, and then I say thus: It may be some graceless Heir of
some grave Impropriator, who was willing to out himself of what his Father
left him (not out of conscience) but being out of coin) was the first
Inventour of this fashion, who having laid the price of the steeple upon his
back, was ever after content to wear the bells at his heels: customary sinning
is an old fashion; yea so old, that I wonder that new fashion Mongers leave it
not off, and take up a better.

7. Was it loathing of Manna, or weariness in Gods heavenly Ordinances, Mat.
1.13. Ye have said what a weariness is this? and ye have snuffed at it.
(says the Lord of Hosts) oh have not we done so, and been so? And have we
not said as much in our hearts, as the Jews did, Amos 8.5. When will the New
Moon be gone, that we may sell corn; and the Sabbath, that we may set forth
Wheat, and make the Epha small, and the Shekell great; the measure too little,
and the price too great. Thus have we said, oh when will this day be ended?
The Lords day is a long day, the worldling is out of his Element, till his Nose
be over his dunghill. And what dullness and weariness have we found in our
selves at Sermons, Sacrifices, Sabboths? when but a reasonable portion of time
has been allotted to us? Surely, if we had any delight in these things, we
should soon have shaken these off: for trahit sua quemque volnptas, that which
a man has pleasure and delight in, takes away the tediousness of it.

Eighthly, and lastly, was it stubbornness and hard-heartednesse in an
impenitent state, under so much variety of mercies and judgments, Jeremiah
18.12. Notwithstanding Gods proclaiming of mercy, verse the eighth, and
threatening judgment, verse the tenth, yet they said they would walk every man
after his own imagination, and do every man after the stubbornness of his
own wicked heart. Thus again it was with the Jews, Psalm 78. almost
throughout, with interchanges of judgments and mercies: and has it not been
so with us? with how many mercies has God wooed us from our wickedness? and by
how many judgments would he have terrified us from them, by Plague,
Pestilence, Famine, Pox, cold Springs, late, and rainy harvests, decay of
trading, and the like: but we still remained with dry eyes, and hard hearts
before him; and now he has sent the heaviest of his judgments, the sword; so
that for all this his anger was not turned away, but his hand was stretched out
still: and if we should thus do still, would not thou be anrgy with us? yes
surely: And because of these and the like offenses of our Land, is Gods wrath
broken out upon the nation.

Secondly, as these sins have been grievous, so to add to Gods judgments,
they have not been punished. For if so by man they might have saved god a
labor, Numbers 25.8. compared with the eleventh, when the people of Israel
committed whoredom with the daughters of Moab 1 and amongst them one more
impudent than the rest, would sin more openly, Phineas took a Iavelin, and
ru^ne both the man and the woman through: and by this executing of justice, he
turned away Gods wrath from Israel, seeing he was zealous for Gods s^ke amongst
them. And Psalm 106.30. Phineas stood up, and executed judgment, and the
plagne was stayed: but this added to Englands misery, that though her sins
were grievous; yet notwithstanding they were rather countenanced than^^nished.
Men durst have been drunk in the open Sunshine, and have stared the
Magistrates in the face, and not any whit afraid: Nay, many of those that
should have punished it, were content to share in it: and indeed, there would
hardly any such thing as drunkenness be acknowledged in this latter age: upon
complaint and examination we could not find out any such sin: as our common
saying is, we could not see the wood for trees. There was foxing, and
distempering with drink, and a little merry, and the like: But it was too
uncivilly spoken, to say, that such a Gentleman was drunk, and the like. Well,
God shall one day set another kind of fire in the tails of these Foxes, then
Sampson did in his: and this distempering forsooth with drink so mincingly
spoken; God shall find such a distemper, as will one day exclude them out of
the kingdom of heaven.

In Courts of Justice, a Caterpillar of a Commonwealth might have hayled an
honest, innocent, and harmless man into compass, and some would have
countenanced him: whereas he had been sitter to have been committed: one or
other would have supplied him for his base designs, when better men could have
neither end, nor remedy against them.

In Courts Ecclesiastical, as the matter was of late handled, was not sin^e
bought and sold? pay Fees, and have Absolution, and repent when they could,
when they would: and in regard of the Proxis, a very Sceliton of discipline was
left, Whoredom and uncleanness was touched with a gentle hand, for fear they
should merit the Court no more, and easiness of punishment gives encouragement
to sin, or else their purses were so purged of their minerals, that our pray
was instead of a decade of Prayers, if no great hope of a second return: yet
then they were the most honest Pharisees, and did most truly pay tyth of all
they so possessed. For if they received twenty pieces, they would send two ad
pios usus to the Parish, where the fault was committed, and was not this a
golden age? God was vexed to the heart to see that no man was so zealous in his
cause, as to stand out for the punishment of sin, so he took it into his
own hand, and its a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God
to be punished: He gives now Commission to the Sword to eat flesh, and to
drink blood, until he have cased, and revenged himself of his Adversaries.

3. And lastly, as thy were unpunished in public, that others might hear and
fear, and do no more presumptuously, so they were not repented on in private,
as plainly appeared to the world, but men grew hardened in them, Ier. 5.3. Thou
have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, then have consumed them, but
they have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder then
a stone, they have refused to return, their hearts were like Nabals, or like
the Nether Milstones, they grew without remo^se, they found that of Augustine
too true, Consuetude peccandi tollit sensum peccati, custom of sin took away
sense of sin: no marvel then, if God was angry with us, having been such a
Nation as this.

This being true then, that a peoples impyety provokes God to be angry: then if
we would avoid Gods anger let us avoid sin, for he is just as well ^s
merciful. If I sin, says Job, he narrowly marks my steps, and will not hold
me innocent. And if GOD be angry, consider the inconveniences of it, and they
may deter thee from sinning.

First, if he be angry, he can arm all the creatures to be angry with him,
Job 5.23. If a man be in favor with God, the stones of the field, and the
beasts of I the field are in league with him. Even so on the contrary, if a man
be out of favor with God, these are also all out of league with him.

Secondly, when he is angry he will not hear the prayers of his children: How
long will thou be angry with thy people that prays? and Lamentations the
fourth Chapter, the two and fortieth, three and fortieth, and four and
fortieth Verses. We have finned and rebelled, therefore thou have not spared,
thou have covered us with wrath, and persecuted us: thou have slain, and not
spared: (and being thus angry with us) thou have covered thy self with a
cloud, that our prayers should not pass through.

Thirdly, and lastly, when he is angry, we are in danger of destruction every
moment, one way or other: it is a feraefull thing to be out of Gods protection.
So much for that point.

I now come to the effects, and they are two.

First, Till thou had consumed us.

Secondly, the extremity of his temporal judgments, so great till there was
no re^nant, nor escaping.

First of the former, God would consume us: That is, though now we be a great
body, yet this would destroy us off the earth, Isaiah 64.7. Thou have consumed
us because of our iniquities: And Deuteronomy 4.24. Our God is a consuming
fire, and a jealous God. Alas, if he be but angry, with the breath of his
nostrils he can blow whole Kingdoms down, or bring any people to be few in
number, and that many ways; Deuteronomy 28.21, 22. The Lord shall cause The
Pestilence to cleave unto thee, until he have consumed thee from the Land.
The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption, and with the Fever, and with a
burning Ague, and with a fervent heat, and with the sword, (that is now our
m^serie) and with Blasting, and with the Mildew, and they shall pursue thee
until thou perish Yea, and in the seven and twentieth verse; He will smite
thee with the botch of Egypt, and with the Emrods, and with a Scab, and with an
Itch, whereof thou can not be healed.

The second follows, So that there should be no remnant nor escaping. Ezekiel
6.8. God said he would leave a remnant, that there might be some that should
escape the sword, when he scattered them among the Countries. And Nehem. 1.9.
There was a residue of the Captivity, though in great affliction. Isaiah 1.9.
Except the Lord of Hosts had reserved unto us even a small remnant, we had
been as Sodom, and should have been like unto Gomorrah. That is, we had
been utterly consumed already: for it had been as easy for him to have taken
away all, as to have taken away many, and to have left a remnant. Isaiah 37.31.
The remnant should escape of the House of Judah, should take deep root
downward, and bring fruit upward: but if they should thus offend again after
the Captivity, as they had done before, then should there be no remnant, nor
escaping: but this we know was remedied by Ezra, and Nehemiah.

If a man pu^sue us in one City we may fly to another: if in one Country we
may fly to another: if in one Kingdom we may fly to another and be safe,
as Gods people have often done. But if God pursue us, there is no hiding place
nor escaping, where God will not find us out, Jeremiah 11.11. Behold I will
bring evil upon them, which they shall not be ^ble to escape: and thou they
should cry unto me, yet I will not hearken unto them. And Am^s the ninth
Chapter, and four first Verses: He that flies of them, shall not fly away,
and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered: though they dig into
hell, thence shall my hand fetch them: though they climb up into Heaven,
thence will I bring them down, and though they hide themselves in the top of
Carmel, I will search and take them out thence; and though they be bid from my
sight in the bottom of the sea, thence will I command the Serpent, and he
shall bite them: and though they go into Captivity the sword shall slay them,
and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good. Thus when God
is angry, and determines to make an end, there is no remnant, nor escaping: so
that there be no remnant, nor escaping.

FINIS.
Imprimatur

CHARLES HERLE.


