Historical Reflections ON THE BISHOP OF ROME: CHIEFLY DISCOVERING Those Events
of Humane Affairs which most advanced THE PAPAL VSVRPATION.

By JOHN WAGSTAFF, M. A. O. C.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall, for Ric. Davis; and are to be Sold by S.
Thompson at the Bishops Head in St Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

The PRAEFACE.
THese Reflections having lain by me, long enough to cool the heat of my
invention; upon a late review of them; I was emboldn^d to this Publication. And
here I dare promise the Reader, that he shall not meet with Crambe bis cocta,
or a mere garbling of other men's labors. For amongst all the various Tracts
written against the Pope, there never came any into my hands of the same kind.
Now if the novelty hereof shall invite any one to a perusal, perhaps he will
not altogether repent his pains; especially if he intend for Historical
Knowledge. In regard that this Treatise, may serve as a Praemonstratour or
Pointer out, of the most remarkable revolutions in Ecclesiastique affairs, and
the most notable junctures of time.

The thing which I chiefly aim at in the ensuing discourse is, to make it
appear; That the Hierarchical Policy of the Roman Church, was not extant in
the Learned times, when the old Roman Empire flourisht: But was contrived in
the days of ignorance, between the Bishops of Rome, and the Leaders or Princes
of the Barbarians. Nor would the truth of this assertion be in the least manner
doubted; were we not almost benighted with dark ignorance, in reference to
preceding ages. For as on the one hand; an infinite number of Books, have been
partly abolished, partly counterfeited, and Partly adulterated or corrupted: So
on the other hand; Those Books which remain entire, are for the most part
written, either by unskilful or partial pens. However from the very present
records, an unpraejudic^d man though of ordinary parts may gather; That the
modern Policy which fashions a great part of the world, as well in Church as
State did take it is beginning, since the inundations of the Northern People.

July the 20. 1660.
POSTCRIPT.
I have not quoted any Authors, for these Passages which are reflected on, in
the following Treatise. When I read the Historians, whence the foundation of my
discourse is gathered, it was not in my thoughts to make use of them this way.
Afterward reflecting on the series of affairs in Christendom, and framing
several meditations thereupon: Though I very well remembered the Historians; yet
I had forgot the names of many Historians whence I gathered it. Nevertheless I
can assure the Reader, that I have hardly mentioned any Historical passage,
which is not very obvious, in one of these three Authors, Blondus, Baronius,
and Platina.

CHAP. I. That the Roman Bishops had no supremacy over the Primitive Christians.
I Have often delighted to trace out in my mind, the footsteps of the papal
usurpations. And perhaps it will please the Reader, to give him in one view,
the several steps or degrees, by which the Roman Bishop rose unto such a
height; as to trample upon the necks, not only of his fellow Bishops, but also
of Kings and Emperors themselves. For that the Pope did not from the beginning
enjoy, his present great and Lordly power, but arrived unto it by several
gradations, in a long process of time; none but those who are either wholly
ignorant of History, or else swayed with invincible prejudice can offer to
deny. It being manifest on all hands, that in the Primitive times, the Roman
Bishops were not taken notice of, as superiors to all others; much less as
sole Vicars under Christ, and infallible dictatours of Divine truth. Indeed you
may meet in the ancient Authors, with commendations given unto the faith,
professed by the Bishops of Rome. Which is no wonder to him that considers, how
pious at first they were in their lives, how glorious in their deaths, bearing
witness to the Truth under Persecution. Besides, when the whole Christian
world was under one Empire, and Rome the Metropolis or Emperial City; It was
but rational, that the new and rising sect of the Christians, should bestow the
notabl'st men of their party in that place. Hence it came to pass, that the
Fathers dwelling in the Provinces, when they contested with Heretics, did
often commend the Roman Faith: as it were upbraiding their Antagonists, with a
departure from those, who resided in the Metropolis of the Empire, where
usually Learning and Religion do most flourish.

And to speak the truth; That advantage which the Roman Bishops had, by
dwelling in the Emperial City, was the chief temptation, at first inducing
them to affect a supremacy. For that the dignity and grandeur of a City, or
place of residence, was wont to put spirits into the Bishops residing therein,
Rome is not the only example. So did Alexandria puff up her Bishops. So did
Jerusalem Hers. So especially did Constantinople, make John the
Constantinopolitan swell with ambition and pride, affecting the title of
Ecumenical Bishop. Nay, which you will more wonder at, even so did Ravenna, when
proud with Exarchs, animate her Bishop also, in contending with the Roman for
superiority. Which contention went so far, that the Church of Ravenna by reason
of her separation from Rome, was commonly called Allocephalis. Now by how much
the renowned and ancient Rome, was more venerable in the eyes of men, than
other Cities; by so much had the Roman Bishops a fairer opportunity than
others, to put themselves forward, and usurp an unlawful power. Nor needed
they to be minded of this advantage: such of them as were of haughty spirits,
beginning betimes to make use of it; amongst whom I may justly reckon Leo
surnamed the Great. For he and several others did take all occasions to send
pragmaticall letters, up and down the world about every important business,
which happened in Christendom.

Nevertheless let no one be afraid of the Roman Bishops, and be ready to
ascribe unto them an universal Diocese, when he finds them frequently sending
stately letters, to the Bishops throughout the Christian world. Many of those
letters recorded in the book, entitled Epistolae decretales summorum Pontificum
are false and counterfeit; many adulterated or corrupted; and many if true, are
so haughtily written, as to argue the Authors pride, but not his power. For in
the pimitive times, the Christian Bishops did generally (and not only the
Roman) write often to their fellow Bishops, in whatsoever place they resided.
And this they did whether they had any power one over the other or no, merely
from a Principle of love or Christian charity. Which familiar epistolary
intercourse with one another, was in those days laudable, and almost
necessary: In regard the whole Christian world was at that time under one
Empire. Consequently they were obliged, to exhort and admonish one another,
upon a twofold respect. Partly grounded on that interest, which members of the
same Commonwealth, especially those of the same rank have with one another: And
partly grounded on that spiritual communion, which ought to be between
believers, especially those of the same calling.

But alas, had the world been persuaded in the primitive times, that the
letters of the Roman Bishop were not only charitative advisoes; but
dictatorian mandates necessary to be obeyed: As proceeding forsooth from one,
whom Christ had appointed head of his Church, and an oracle whence nothing but
veritable answers should be heard. I say, had such a persuasion possessed the
minds of men; They would have made it the common subject of their praises and
thanksgiving. Without question many Panegyricall orations, and many homilies
would have been made, upon no other theme or text, than the praises of the
Roman See, and thanks unto God, for bestowing on the Christians, a visible
unerring decider of controversy. Whereas on the contrary, if we peruse the
ancient Writers, we shall plainly perceive; how little the noise was, which the
Roman Bishops did make in their days: So little that I much wonder they were
no more talked of, considering (as I said before) their residence in the
Metropol^^ (...), and their virtues eminent in the first Bishops (...) not the
Fathers been very malignant in this case, (if the papal pretenses were true)
not to leave it set down expressly in any of their writings, That Christ made
Peter the head of his Church, and gave unto him an infallible spirit: As also
that Peter being Bishop of Rome, The following Bishops in that City succeeded,
him not only in his Bishopric; but likewise in his great privileges of
headship and infallibility. Moreover, did not the Fathers trouble themselves to
no purpose in toyling to make laborious confutations of heretics, if they
might have had present recourse to a visible unerring authority, in decision of
controversies. So that suppose the Heretics had refused to submit unto this
authority; The maine work should have been not to confute their opinions, but
to convince them of the duty of their obedience to the supreme judge.

For my own part I verily believe, that if the Bishops of Rome had been
acknowledged in the primitive times, to be what he pretends to in these days;
The eyes of all nations would have been upon, that see; to revere it, to honor
it, to bow down before it in the submission of their understandings. Nay
further, I am really persuaded; Had Christ intended such a supreme power in his
Church: Seeing it does so highly import the Church's welfare to be generally
known; We should have had it set down in Scripture, with as express terms, as
we find Justification by faith, or the resurrection of the dead. But now on the
contrary, what is there left by (...) Penmen, which may be said to patronize,
the (...) and infallibility of Peter, and the Roman Bishops^ As for Peter; how
easy were it for me, to evacuate those trivial arguments, which are drawn from
Scripture concerning him? which I forbear to do, because it is not my intent,
to insist upon Logical arguments either pro or con; but only to reflect on
Historical passages.

Wherefore I cannot choose but take notice, that when Peter came to Antioch; he
walked not according to the truth; but was guilty of a great scandal, and
thereupon withstood to the face by Paul. Who makes it his business in the two
first Chapters to the Galatians, to prove himself equal with the rest of the
Apostles. Nay when Peter (to speak according to their own phrase) was in
Cathedra; in the midst of a Council of Apostles, and other brethren: The
definitive sentence to which all did assent, proceeded from the mouth of James.

As for the Roman Bishop, you must not look to have any hint of him in
Scripture. Peter never being taken notice of, under such a capacity: Nay, Paul
in those several Epistles, which he wrote either to or from Rome, does not so
much as mention Peter. Which is somewhat strange, if Peter did dwell in that
City. For Paul is solicitous, in mentioning several others far less
considerable; whom he does either salute, or send salutations from to others.
But what if it should be granted that Peter was at Rome? I am confident it
would trouble the whole Papacy, to prove that ever he was Bishop of that City.
Paul it is certain was there, and those who contend that Peter was too, do
generally hold, they were both martired at the same time, the one by the Sword,
the other by the Cross. Why then was Peter Bishop, and not Paul? I Am sure the
Scripture says, that Paul was entrusted with the Gospel of the Uncircumcision,
as Peter with that of the Circumcision: Nay James, and Peter, and John, did
solemnly give the right hands of fellowship, unto Barnabas and Paul; That they
should go to the Gentiles, and themselves unto those of the Circumcision.

CHAP. II. How or by what causes the Pope was advanced to a supremacy in the
Church.
BUt I shall not trouble my self any longer, to make it appear; that neither
Peter, nor the primitive Bishops of Rome, had that power, which the later
Bishops pretend to derive from them: There being few in our Nation, that will
gainsay the truth of what I have said. Wherefore having already made, such
brief remarques, as plainly evince the Pope to be an usurper: I am now come to
what I did chiefly intend, namely to lay down the several steps or degrees, by
which he was advanced in his usurpations. This I shall do by reflecting on the
events of humane affairs, and giving an account in order, of the several
causes; which did cooperate toward the bringing of the intolerable Roman
yoke, on the necks of our Forefathers.

The first Cause therefore was, The removing of the Empertal seat by
Constantine. For though a good while after him, there were Western as well as
Eastern Emperors. yet after the (...) on Italy, by the Heruls first, and then
the Goths; The Emperial Majesty did entirely reside at Constantinople. Now this
City by Constantines means, was grown so magnificent and august, that it was
dearer to the Emperors, than Rome in self. Insomuch that when Bellisarius and
Narses, had recovered Italy from the Goths; The Emperors never affected, to
go and reside at old Rome, by which means the Bishop thereof, gained the more
elbow rome to play REX.

Secondly, The residing of the Italian exarchs at Ravenna. Justine the second
was Author of the Exarchy; to which kind of government the Italian writers
impute, most of the calamities afterward befalling Italy. But indeed it was
the occasion of an other guise calamity, than they were aware of. For now
neither the Emperor himself, nor so much as his Exarch resided at Rome: only
a petty companion, who was sent by the Exarchs to praeside over the City; and
was called Duke, in the same manner as the governor of Narni, Spoleto, and
other towns of Italy. Hence it came to pass, that the splendor of Imperial
Majesty being far removed, from the eyes of the Roman people: Their Bishops
shone so much the brighter, and gaind a proportionable increase of veneration.

Thirdly; The coming of the Lombards into Italy; who intending the final
conquest of that Country for themselves; made it their business to destroy the
power of the Emperor, whom they found Lord thereof. Wherefore as soon as the
Emperor began to chastise, the Insolency of any Roman Bishop, (who now by
reason of the aforementioned causes began to play tricks) The Lombard was at
hand to help him. Again on the otherside, when the Lombard out of a desire to.
win Rome it self, fell foul with it is Bishop; The Emperor for fear of
loosing his dominion, was feign to help him, whom before he did endeavor to
punish Mark how capriciously things in those days stood, and how exceeding
well they suited with the Roman Bishop Whenever he had to do with the
Lombard, he was sure of the Emperous help; And when he contended with his
Master, the Barbarian presently took his part. Thus did he rivet himself into
his Authority, between the Emperor and the Lombard; till at last by the help
of the French, He brought them both below himself, as to any Italian Dominion.

Fourthly; The reputation of Gregory, the first Roman Bishop of that name, who
was sir named the Great. This man lived in the hottest season of the Barbarian
violence, when the Empire of the Romans and their learning failed. In such an
age as that was; he being endowed with great natural parts, and well
accomplished with acquired perfections, did easily overtop his contemporaries.
Before he was Bishop; By his retiring for devotion's sake to the private life
of a Monk; By his zealous turning his own house at Rome into a Monastery; In
general, by his outward austerity and sanctity of life, he so gained upon the
Roman people; that they would not part with him, when he proffered to go into
Brittany, for to convert the Saxons. And when he was sent to Constantinople
upon public employment, he quickly obtained the Emperor's favor. Afterward
when he was chosen Bishop; By his zeal in continuing to write volume upon
volume concerning the Christian Doctrine; As also in destroying the Heathen
Authors, and those goodly buildings at Rome, which he feared might tempt the
admiring beholders to hanker after the ancient Roman glory; By his new
modelling the Christian worship, adding many inventions of his own, to make it
more splendid and pompous in vulgar eyes; By his converting the English Saxons;
By these and many other ways he grew renowned in the world, and filled
Christendom with his name. Nor did his glory expire with his life; About an
hundred years after this Gregory, our Bid in the West, and Monk Damascene in
the East, were passionate in their respects for him, and highly magnified him
in their writings. Nay generally the Monks for a long time, did so reverence
his memory that he seemed to eclipse the primitive Fathers. Now this great
esteem and high valuation which the world had of Gregory the first, did redound
upon the Roman See, and proved notably advantageous for his successors. But
nothing more strengthened their hands, than his converting our English Nation.
No people in the world for a long time after were more prodigal of their blood,
more enpensive of their estates, in behalf of the Roman Bishops, than our
English: No people more earnest in their devotion to Rome. This can be
attributed to nothing else, but their conversion by Gregory, and to that
impression which his memory had left in the minds of their Ancestors, and was
handed along from father to son. Nay what say ye, if at this very day; the
Gregorian praises be fresh amongst our English Papists, who also have a tender
regard for the memory of their Convertor Austin, and love the very Benedictines
for his sake?

Fifthly; The prodigious growth of the Saracenical Empire, founded by Mahomet
in the time of Heracltus. The Saracens cut out so much work, for the Grecian
Emperor in his Eastern provinces that he was forced to neglect, and at last
give over his interest in the West. Now this may be observed all along in
History; that the weakening of the Emperors, was the strengthening of the Popes.

Sixthly; The general deluge of Barbarians, overwhelming the Romans in the
West, much about the same time that the Saracens did in the East. Pannonia,
Italy, Spain, France, Britain, were all overrun not many years after one
another. These Barbarians coming from Climates, frozen with ignorance as well
as cold, did both give and receive, a Conquest. As they Conquered the Romans,
by their Sword: So they were reciprocally foild by the Roman Learning and
Religion. Now the Bishop of Rome, was the grand instrument of their conversion.
For in those times of general desolation, he best held his own; and was most
eminent in the eyes of the Barbarians, by reason of his residence in that
Renowned City; concerning which, before their passage over the Rhine and the
Danow, they had heard their Fathers speak of old. How feasible then was it, for
him to foist what he pleased into the belief of those men, who newly came from
worshipping such kind of Gods, as Egypt was wont to adore? Alas those silly
souls, taken up with amazement at a discovery of the true God, had neither
leisure nor ability to attend, the observing of those obtruded fopperies, which
they did imbibe together with the principles of their Religion: Wherefore if he
that first told them, of an omnipotent eternal God, whose seat was in the
highest Heavens; and of a Crucified Savior, did at the same time tell them of
a St Peter and his Successor; It Is no wonder that they believed one, as well as
the other. If Valens the Emperor be an Arrian, then all those whom he converts
will be Arrians too. For it is well known; that the Visigoths flying from
before the approaching Hun, when they had obtained their request from Valens,
for a quiet Habitation in Thrace, did not only receive from him the Doctrine of
Christ, but that of Arrius also: Insomuch that they and their posterity for a
long time after, did stoutly maintain Arrianism. So great a prevalency has
that Doctrine, which is first seated in the spirits of men. Here I shall crave
leave of the reader, to make a small digression concerning Baronius, with a
promise to trouble him so no more. Baronius in his annals will needs have it,
contrary to several Historians; that these Goths were converted to
Christianity, long before the time of Valens. His reason is, because in the
time of Constantine, they had a Bishop named Theophilus, present at the Nicene
Council. But I suppose nothing can be lawfully concluded thence, excepting
this; that some few of them were Christians in the days of Constantine: For my
part, that the body of their nation was converted, before their entrance into
Thrace, by the permission of Valens, I see no reason to believe.

Seventhly; The Collusion between Zacharias the third, and Pipin Major domo to
the King of France, Pipin made use of Zacharias's authority, toward the
decision of that ridiculous question; which was so solemnly sent to Rome.
Namely; Whether he that had the name and title of a King only, being given to
idleness: or he that was active and exercised the office and power of a King,
deserved to wear the regal diadem? Which in plain terms was this; Whether
Chilperick King of France, descended from the ancient race of Kings, having out
of respect to his own ease, entrusted the management of affairs with his
servant Pipin; might not be turned out of that throne, which his ancestors had
so long enjoyed, by his own servant, whom he had unadvisedly raised, to a
Capacity of doing it if he would? The good Pope was not ashamed of this
senseless question, nor needed he to be instructed, how profitable it was to
judge for the strongest: At length it came to this, that King Chilperick's head
was shaven, and his man Pipin's wore the Crown. Now Pipin having made use of
pontificial authority to cheat the poor Francks of their King, and to invade
the temporal Sovereignty, did out of gratitude recompense the Pope, with a
spiritual jurisdiction over the Gallicane Church. Nay further, when Desiderius
the Lombard infested Gregory the third, Pipin out of a tender regard to that
See, which had been so friendly toward him; not only by his aid delivered the
Pope, from fear of being besieged in Rome, but gave him as the Italian writers
say, the Exarchate with several other territories.

Eighthly, The Conquering arms of Charlemaign son to King Pipin; who having the
same reasons that his Father had, to indulge the pontificial See, confirmed
whatsoever his Father Pipin had granted to the Pope. Yet to make him the more
sure, Leo the third with the people of Rome, elected him Roman Emperor. Hence
it came to pass, that as far as the Conquests made by Charlemaigne did reach;
So far also did Papal authority extend: No otherwise than the Mohammedan
doctrine, did enlarge it is bounds, by the victorious arms of Ottoman.

Thus have we proceeded, to the Pope's Ecclesiastique supremacy, through eight
several causes. Of which the six former, may be accounted the more remote or
procatarctique; The two latter being those, which put together, do integrate
the principal efficient and adaequate cause. For although the six
procatarctiques, did very much embroile the Church affairs, and laid them in a
tendency to Papal encroachments: yet it is evident that the universal power,
which the Pope acquired over the Western Churches, owed it is very rise and
being, to the notorious juggling between the Roman Bishops, and the usurpers of
the French Merovingean Crown. Well therefore may the Kings of France, be styled
the eldest sons of the Papal Church: Nay rather let them be styled fathers
thereof. There being no appearance in History, of a general submission unto
the pontificiall See; until the days of the traitor Pipin, and the Emperor
his Son. But then you may perceive, as it were a bargain stroke of mutual
assistance, between the pontificial and the French tyrants. The pontificial
assistance, is made use of by Pipin, for the deposing his master, and invading
the French Crown: By Charles his Son, for the obtaining of the Western
Empire. They on the other side, in lieu of their secular Kingdoms, settle upon
the Popes an Ecclesiastique Sovereignty. Nor are they content to gratify them
only so, but they must needs be giving them a very fair temporal demeans. The
taste of which did so please their palates, that they have been ever since
hankering, to be Lords paramount over all the world, in Civil as well as
Ecclesiastical affairs. Wherefore it behooves me next to set down, the remaining
causes of the Papal encroachment; Whereby the Bishop of Rome was encouraged, to
usurp unto himself the rights of the Magistrate.

CHAP. III. How or by what Causes the Pope was not only confirmed in his
Ecclesiastical usurpation, but was also encouraged to invade the rights of the
Magistrate.
HEre I shall in the first place premise, that the causes mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, did not only advance the Pope's Ecclesiastique Tyranny; but
also had an influence upon the making of way, for his temporal usurpation. Had
he not first come to that height in the Church, he could never have dreamt of
a superintendency over the state. Likewise the causes which now follow, are to
be allowed an influence upon the Popes domination spiritual, by way of
confirming him in his unjust acquests Although I confess they do more nearly
concern his invading the rights of the Magistrate, in regard that we have
already brought him unto the highest pinnacle in the Church.

Ninthly; The donation which Pipin made, and his son Charles confirmed unto
the Pope; whereby he was possessed of a very large territory: yet not as Lord
in chief thereof, but rather as a dependant on the Empire, as appears by
several actions of Charlemaigne, and his Sons after him; which sufficiently
evince, that they kept the Sovereignty of those places still unto themselves;
however this proved such a bait of temptation, to the Pope, that he has ever
since had an unbridled lust, after the kingdoms of this world, and the glory
thereof: insomuch, that he who pretends to be the Universal Vicar of Christ,
and Deputy to Him in His Kingdom, seems unto me a pretty riddle. Our Savior
does absolutely Declare, that His Kingdom is not of this world: But I pray to
what world does that belong, which is full of armed Soldiers, walled Cities,
fortified Havens, strong Galleys, great Guns, abundance of Ammunition and
Treasures.

Tenthly; The general decay of Learning, after the days of Charlemaign: Whence
it came to pass, that the East and the West, were not more alienated one from
the other, by the distinction of different Empires, than they were, by the want
of mutual correspondence in learned entercourses. Nay it was the policy of the
Popes, by affronts done to the Emperors, and several other ways, to augment
the strangeness between the Greeks and the Latins. That so the Barbarians
being brought up in a prejudice, against the Gracians; might neglect their
language, and consequently be overcast with such a night of ignorance, that
they should not be able to see the injustice of the Papal proceedings. And
truly to the loss of the Greek tongue, may justly be imputed the loss of all
purity in the Latin; and consequently of History, Geography, skill in
Antiquity, and whatsoever savored of polite learning. Thus the whole Western
Empire were quite deprived of the benefit they might have received, by
informing their judgments in Religion, with the goodly books that were written
in Greek: Nay they did not so much as knowingly converse, with the Latin
Fathers: So that it was almost impossible for them, to be acquainted with the
infant purity of the Christian religion, which they had taken upon trust from
the Roman Bishop. Whereas if they had but well studied, the writings of those
men, whose Fathers were converted together with, nay some before the Bishop of
Rome; it would have been manifest, that he was no such man amongst the first
Christians, as he pretended himself to be amongst them: As also how
notoriously for the advancing of his own power, he had imposed upon the
credulous ignorance of their Heathen souls. Now that this tenth reason of the
Papal encroachment, is not a bare notion, or a thing merely bred in my own
private conceptions, any one will confess; who does but consider, how really
it is exemplified in the series of humane transactions. As long as this fog of
ignorance, did darken men's understandings; neither the preaching, nor the
martyrdom of thousands of people, could much prevail to the shaking off the
Roman yoke. But the case was quite altered, when at the taking of
Constantinople, the Grecian scholars were forced to sly for refuge among the
Western Christians; they every where teaching their own tongue; the reviving of
that noble language, did bring along with it, the restoration of all Learning.
So that now what neither Wicklef, nor Hus, nor Hierome of Prague, nor the
Waldenses and Albigenses could effect, that Luther and Calvin have wonderfully
performed, to the Conversion of whole Nations. As soon as the restoration of
learning had enlightened the world, men were of their own accord disposd to
follow any: who by breaking the ice as it were, should lead the way to their
spiritual freedom.

Eleventhly, The fatal discord between the grand children of Charles the Great;
who as soon as their Father Lewis the Godly was dead, fell together by the
cares about the Empire. At last they came to this composition, that Lewis
should be King of Germany, and so much of France, as lies betwixt the Meuse
and the Rhine. Charles should be King of the rest of France, except the
Province of Narbone: which together with Italy, and the title of Emperor fell
to Lotharius; who indeed ought to have been Emperor of the whole, as being the
eldest, and chosen by their Father in his life time, to be his Colleague in the
Empire: Thus was the Empire of Charlemaign cantonized by his Nephews, and at
last brought to a contemptible state, for want of establishing a firm
succession in the Eldest. Hence it came to pass, that the Huns, the Saracens,
and the Lombard Dukes, did miserably afflict the Empire, finding no united
strength to oppose them. Moreover France fell quite off from the Empire, being
Governed by its own Kings. Nay when Otho the great, had settled the confusions
brought upon Italy, by Berengarius Guido and Lambert. Yet still did the old
danger hang over the Empire, for want of a firm Succession: For as soon as he
and his Son Otho the second were dead; There grew that quarrel between some of
the Romans and the Germans, about election of a new Empirour, which made way
for the Pope to order all things, according to his own advantage, as appears
by the twelth cause that next follows.

Twelfthly, The formal making of the Empire elective, by the constitution of
Otho the third, and Gregory the fifth; whereby the Romans were excluded from
the choosing of their own Emperor; It being wholly conferred on the Germane
Princes. Otho and Gregory were induced to make this alteration, by some
affronts which they had received from the Roman people. For Otho after the
death of his Father, had like to have missed of the Imperial Crown. The party
of one Crescentius a powerful Roman, publicly giving out, that it was high
time for the Italians, to choose themselves an Emperor, and to bring the seat
of the Empire into Italy again. However Otho at last carried it, and
Crescentius with his party did submit. But when Otho had made, his own
Countryman and kinsman Bruno Pope, by the name of Gregory the fifth, the Romans
brake out into greater discontents than formerly, so that the new made Pope is
feign to fly for it. In his absence the people of Rome make Crescentius their
Consul, and he makes John Bishop of Placenti a Pope. Well, the Emperor Otho
marches into Italy, takes the Castle of St Angelo in which Crescentius had
fortified himself, and puts him to an ignominous death. And having cruelly
tortured John of Placentia, he resettles his Cozen Pope Gregory. Hereupon he
and his Cozen having been equally vexed by the Roman people, did take a sharp
revenge, in transferring from them, upon their own nation, the power of
choosing the Emperor. Otho had no children to care for, and so was the more
desirous to have the Empire settled in an Elective way; after such a manner as
he thought was advantageous to the Germans. The cunning Pope, did not only
gratify his Countrymen, the Germans; and revenge himself upon his enemies the
Italians; but also abundantly provide for the emolument of his successors. It
being provided in this constitution, that he who was Elected by the German
Princes, should be called Caesar or King of the Romans; but not Emperor or
Augustus, till he was crowned and consecrated by the Bishop of Rome. Thus was
the unreasonabl'st thing in the world committed; that a Bishop should take from
a People, over whom he had but the spiritual charge, their temporal birthright
of Electing their own Prince, and conveigh much of it into his own hands. But
when was this done? Even in that barbarous age, which was wrapped up in the very
midnight of ignorance; which brought not forth, so much as one Ecclesiastique
writer either good or bad. And therefore is noted for a miserable age, by
Bellarmine himself in the Column of his Chronology over against those times,
which Column is entitled Varia.

Thirteenthly, The unhappy juncture of a silly, rash, inconsiderate Emperor;
And a cunning, subtle, audacious Pope, at the very same time. I mean Henry the
fourth, and Pope Hildebrand alias Gregory the seventh. Henry led a most
dissolute, extravagant life, in making traffic with the German Bishops selling
their preferments for money. Besides he went about to enslave the Saxons, a
considerable body of his subjects; by building Castles in their Country to keep
them in awe, whilst they were trampled upon by his licentious creatures. This
made the Saxons, take arms in defense of their own liberty, and at first they
forced him to a composition: But afterward he gathering a great army together,
quite routed the Saxons, and within a while got their chief Princes into his
power, having first passed his word for their security by the mouths of his
Ambassadors. Now such was the baseness of his nature, that having once got
them into his power, he brake his word and promise with them all, excepting
Otho Duke of Bavaria, to the great regret of the German Princes. Things stood
in this posture, when Hildebrand or Gregory the seventh took occasion to fish
in troubled waters. For the Pope observing, that the Germans were generally
discontented, with the perfidious cruelty of their Emperor, judged it the most
opportune season, to trample upon Emperial Majesty. Wherefore he summons Henry
to appear at Rome, and give in his answers to those accusations, that were
brought against him for selling the Episcopal preferments. Henry, instead of
appearing, convenes a Council at Worms. Where it is decreed, that the Pope
shall be degraded from his pontificial dignity, because he came to it by
sinister and unlawful means. Hildebrand hearing this, excommunicates the
chief of the Council, and not only them, but the Emperor too; interdicting
him from Government, and disengaging (forsooth) his Subjects from their oath of
obedience. Now one would have thought, that the world should have whooted at
the arrogance of this proud Priest, and have taken him down from that
domineering throne; whence he had taken the boldness to act such a part of
Lordly pride. But alas the Germans were so far from checking the Papal
insolence, as that they were glad of an occasion to oppose the Emperor, for
the relieving their own grievances. Wherefore they combined together, and
raised such a formidable strength, that the Emperor was forced unto base
submissions to the Pope. And though at last Henry did so bestir himself, that
he deposed this pragmatical Gregory the seventh. Yet was not that revenge, no
nor the blood of a thousand Hildebrands, able to wash off that stain, which the
Emperial Majesty had received. For the succeding Popes having once had a
president case, wherein they saw an Emperor was not only excommunicated, and
interdicted from government by a Bishop of Rome, but was forced to stoop, and
submit unto that interdictment, by his own subjects; They never lest afterward,
to thunder out their Bulls of excommunication, against any Prince, that did but
enterfere with their ambition.

Fourteenthly, The selling of the Emperial right to many chief Italian Cities;
such as Florence, Genoa, Lucca, Bologne and others, by the Emperor Rodolph of
Hasburg. Who was of such a careless humor, as that he was wont in sport, to
give the same reason for his not visiting Italy, which the Fox did for his not
Visiting the Lion. To wit he could see the steps of those, that went thither;
but not of those that came back again. The truth is, Rodolph's supine
negligence about the Italian affairs, did so break the neck of the Emperial
interest in Italy, that it could never hold up it is head again to any purpose.
For although the Emperor Henry the seventh, did bestir himself somewhat in
the settling of Lombardy, and appointing a Sherif to govern Milaine: yet not
long after, the Emperor was grown so contemptible, that Charles the fourth was
crowned, by the consent of Pope Innocent the fourth, upon this condition; that
he should pack immediately out of Italy. Charles obeyed his high and mighty
holiness, and passing homeward through Milaine; he did utterly evacuate the
Emperial power in Italy, by making the shreifdome of Milaine Haereditary, for
which he received a good sum of money. A good sum also his Son Wenceslaus did
afterward receive, to make the Sherisdome a Dukedom. Thus the Popes saw at
last, that which their hearts had so long panted after, namely the Emperors
quite stripped of their dominion in Italy, and themselves free from being under
the nose of them, who raised the pontificial greatness, and are by right the
Lords and Masters of their Holinesses. After this the Emperors enjoyed, only
an insignificant titular paramountship over Italy; whereby they did now and
then for money, turn an Earldome into a Marquisate, and a Marquisate into a
Dukedom.

Fifteenthly; The growing in fashion, of a very corrupt ad adulterate kind of
Learning, called School Divinity. A thing compounded of some truths some Papal
inventions, and some Aristotelical shall I say, or rather Arabian Philosophy.
For it is certain, that the Philosophy which then flourisht, was taught and
improved by such men, who understood not Aristotle. Nay which is worse, who
derived their knowledge from the Arabians, that did not understand him
themselves. But that which made this Philosophy the more imperfect was; The men
who professed it were such as sat in their studies, abstracted from the
observation and experience of things; conversing only with notions, and
multiplying one notion after another, till at last they arrived, (pardon an
odd phrase) to the Cobweb subtilty of a wordy nothingnesse. Hence it became a
mere shop of controversial uncertainties, and a storehouse of twofac'd
distinctions, which serve to countenance what side of the question you please.
Since therefore this Philosophy, is of a nature so aequivocal, and juggling; no
man needs to wonder, if the Schoolmen by applying it to Divinity, were able to
fashion religion into what form they pleased. For although the whole Mass of
their distinctions, could never by mincing the matter, turn one falschood into
a truth: yet they might so far pare and slice a falsehood; as to make it show
trim enough, to deceive a praepossessed understanding. I say a praepossessed
understanding; Because the Pontificial Doctrine had in those days, taken
possession of almost all our parts of the Christian world, and had the wealth
of the nations in it is own disposal: Children were brought up in that
persuasion, and when they were grown men, the hopes of all their preferment lay
that way. Now this is palpable enough, that when the bent of our understanding,
is inclined to any party, by the strong biasses of education and interest; We
straightway greedily 'embrace, all shows and appearances of reason, which seem
to make for our side; and with abundance of self applause, improve a mere
sneaking hint of an opinion, into a demonstrative confidence.

Sixteenthly; The thriving of the Canon Law a sister profession with
School Divinity. These two being as it were twins borne of their Mother the
Roman Church much about the same time, by the midwifery of Gratian the Monk,
and Peter Lombard. As for the Canon Law, I suppose it may not unfitly be
called, a mess of Divinity and Civil Law boild together, but burnt too, by
reason that as we say in English, the Bishop's foot have been in it, namely the
foot of the Bishop of Rome. Whosoever looks into it, he may easily perceive,
how Papal politic tenants have been forsted in as laws. But if any one be
loath to take the pains himself, he shall find many places to this purpose,
cited for his hand, in Sleidan's third book de quatuor summis imperiis. Where
that Judicious Author expresses himself, with much indignation, against this
kind of Learning. Nor was he alone moved with a prejudice against it; Many
thousands besides him, having high resentments of those many ills, which spread
abroad the world, by reason of the Canon law. Otherwise the Decretals would
never have been branded with a proverbial ignominy, as they were in France:
witness that notable tetrastique, recorded by Gregory of Toulouse, in his
Commentary on the preface of the Decretals.

Des puis que decret ha prins ales,
Et les Gendarmes portent males,
Et les moines vont a cheval,
En tout le mond n' ha que mal.
The first and last of these verses, which only concern my purpose, may be thus
Englished.

After Decretals followed the decree,
Since that, the world has n'ought but knavery.
Now if Gregory the ninth's decretals, were justly liable to such a censure,
what shall we say of the sixth book put out by Boniface the Eighth, of the
Clementines by Clement the fifth, and the extravagants by John the twenty
second? The latter Pope still exceeding the former in arrogance and insolence.
However let the Canon Law be what it will; This is certain, it has been one of
the notablest engines in the whole world, to raise the Papal See to an adored
height. For by this means the minds of many thousands, were trained up in a
reverence to the Roman Bishops, who seem to emulate Emperial Majesty, by taking
upon them to give laws unto the world. Now the names of Justinian and
Tribonian began to dwindle, and Gregory with his Raymund grew in request, nor
has ever Aristotle, nor Galen, nor Justinian, nor the very Bible it self been
more zealously smothered with commentatours, than the decretals of Gregory have
been. Nay what say ye if the Canonists have been past all shame, in the heat of
contending for their own faculties? Charles du Moulin, in his Treatise of the
French Monarchy says, that some of them carp't at the Civil Laws as impious
and of no worth. And Francis Hottoman in his Tract entitled Fulmen Brutum
testifies, that they look upon the Pope as their Jupiter, giving him halves
with the Emperor in the Government of the world; as appears by this verse
which they commonly applied to the Pope.

Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet. This is high language you ^ say, but
perhaps it may be accounted modest, if we consider how their own law teaches
them, that the Pope is above the Emperor. Wherefore no man needs to doubt,
that the prevailing of such a profession in the world, has been an incredible
advantage to the Roman Bishop, as being the founder and patron thereof: For we
all know, with what eagerness of spirit, the professors of any faculty, do
usually contend for their patrons. Whence I may lawfully conclude, that as long
as this pontificial law, shall be attended with wealthy preferments; So long
the Pope will never want Janisaries, I mean Canonists; Who for the sake of
their own profession, and the bread which they get by it, will allwaies be
sure, to be trusty Myrmidons in the Roman cause.

Thus have I at last traced out the Papal encroachments, through Sixteen
several causes, without mentioning others, which seem not to here so great and
necessary an influence. Such as the title of Universal Bishop, given unto
Boniface the third, by the Tyrant Phocas. The Holy War, trumpeted forth by
Peter the Hermit, at the appointment of Urban the Second. The abrogation of
the Roman Banderensian Magistracy, whereby Clement the Fifth, became absolute
Master of Rome, and the like. Far less was it my intent; to take notice of
Constantine's donation, and such other things; which indeed make much for the
pontificial advancement if true: But their truth is questioned by all
indifferent men. There being as great a certainty, that many false stories have
been coined, as well as true ones suppressed by the Pope's creatures. Amongst
which kind of delinquents, it is probable that Pandulphus, the Librarian of the
Lateran Church, was not the least guilty.

CHAP. IV. A Corollary deduced from the preceding discourse, with a Conclusion
intimating how much the Pope is beholding to the want of able and Faithful
Historians.
ANd now let the Papists object if they please, that we have have forsaken the
paths of our forefathers, with little regard unto ancient times, I pray; What
is the Autiquity they boast of? Or what were those ancestors they upbraid us
with? Can they date their Hierarchichal constitution, under one supreme head,
higher than the barbarous times? And are not we, as also the Nations round
about us, the offspring of Barbarians? As long as the Roman Empire stood
firm, and the stock of primitive Christians did remain, there was no Pope to
be heard of. Nor is it likely, that ever the progeny of those men, who were
converted by the Apostles, and taught by the Fathers, would have given way to
Papal Dominion, any more than the posterity of the Graecians did. But in come
our ancestors, a barbarous generation, half starved with the cold of their own
Climates, and resolved for a warmer habitation. In come they, and like a deluge
carry all before them, implanting their selves in the room of those who were
the race of first borne Christians. Which when they had done, they did with
admiration here from their conquered enemies, the news of an Omnipotent God, a
Crucified Savior, a Heaven and a Hell. Now what could be expected from these
ignorant Barbarians, whose former adoration was of no sublimer strain, than to
worship the Image of a dead man, a piece of wood, or a rotten clout: Nay whose
later discoveries, were made unto them by word of mouth, and taken upon trust;
they themselves being void of all kind of Learning, whereby they might have
been enabled to search the Ancient Writers? I say what could be expected from
such men, but that they should be easily cozened; partly with the specious
pretense, of a derived succession and supremacy from Peter, by the Roman
Bishop; and partly with the collusion between the Bishops of that Emperial
City, and their own commanders.

Well then; if they be deluded must we be so to? Or rather ought we not to
assert our own liberty, and shake off that pontificial yoke, under which the
spirits of our forefathers did groan? The revolutions of eternal providence,
have brought better times upon us their Children; than ever they enjoyed. It
was much about two hundred years ago, that Mahomet the Great Turk did take
Constantinople, to the utter subversion of the Grecian Empire. Whereby
overcasting the Sun of Christianity with a dismal cloud in the Eastern parts,
he was the accidental occasion, that it shone the more bright in the West. For
the poor Greeks, being dispersed all abroad; Their Learned men, to wit
Theodore Gaza, John Lascaris, Manuel Chrysaloras and others, did betake
themselves to the teaching of the Greek tongue. Hereupon that treasury of all
arts and sciences being so happily retrerv'd, the purity of Learning began to
revive again: And those books which ever since the days of the Goths and
Lombards, had lain rotting in the public libraries, were every where pulled
out of heaps of dust, and recovered from the moths and worms. By this means, we
who are the latest nephews of our barbarous ancestors, do yet overlook them,
even in reference to their own days. and plainly perceive, that they were
Heathenish half-witted Christians for a long time, void of all knowledge, and
receiving their instructions, from the contrived policy of corrupted men. We on
the contrary enjoy the Original Scriptures, and the Learned Monuments of the
primitive Christians: by which it is easy to understand; that Christianity is
no Carnal profession, much less that on it is entayl'd the dominion of this
present world. That the Bishops of Rome, as well as other Bishops their
brethren, were for the first three hundred years, persecuted by Heathen
Emperors; And did afterward remain in subjection to them, when turned
Christians. That it was the barbarous ignorance of our Ancestors, which gave
way to the Pope's ecclesiastique supremacy, and consequently to his temporal
encroachments. Wherefore we conceive it rational, to avoid the barbarism of
our forefathers; and to write after the Copy of those men, who were the
founders of our religion, and those who were its first and purest professors:
Humbly craving leave, to be no longer fooled, by offering up the wealth of our
Nation, and the sweat of our Countrymens brows, in sacrifice to a three cround
Idol.

And truly as often as I think, at what vast expense of treasure, our Nation
formerly was, and several others to this day are, upon the account of their
subjection to the Roman See: I cannot choose but admire a certain fatality of
Dominion allwaies attending that proud City founded by Romulus. In the days of
her Senate, and also of her Caesar's, she sat crowned Queen amongst the Cities,
and emperesse over the Nations, from whom she received homage and tribute. When
her enemies came blustering out of the north, more furiously than the winds
come thence; She seemed indeed for a while, to hang down her head, to lean
sadly on her elbow, and to bewail the loss of her former Majesty: That
Majesty, with which she commanded the Northern people, to keep beyond the Rhine
and the Danow, the Parthians not to pass over Euphrates, and the more Southern
African to sculke behind the monntaine Atlas. But it was not long first, ere
she threw off her mourning weeds, and clothed her self again with scarlet.
For by the exaltation of her Bishop, she quickly obtained, and does now enjoy a
far larger Empire, than ever she before had, even in the most August times of
her victorious Caesar's. Do not the French, Germans, and Poles, offer up their
tributary Devotions at her shrine? Not to mention that huge tract of ground,
all along the African shore: Nor the Empire of Precious or Prestor John, or
Prestegan, call him what you will. Not to mention the East Indie Islands, and
the vast continent of China, into all which places the reverence of her name
has been carried; either by the Portingals, or by the missionary Friars. Do
not the Countries under the Castilian King, both in this and the new found
world, alone aggrandize her modern Empire, beyond its greatness in the days
of old? Let no man therefore henceforward, cast it in the Italian's teeth, as
Erasmus did; that he counts all other people barbarous. It Is true, the Italians
are the very dregs and relics, of Goths, Vandals, Huns, Heruls, Alans,
Gepids, and Lombards: yet they impute barbarism to all other Nations, as if
whatsoever was Polite and Civil, lay circumscribed within the narrow bounds, of
the Alps, the Tyrrhene, and the Adriatique Seas; as if nothing forsooth but
barbarity was tramontane. But, would you know the reason? why? it is because
they have outwitted the Nations round about them, as much as ever the old
Romans did the Barbarians. And what they lost by the sword, they have with
advantage regained by their wit. Which he well understood who said, Roma Caput
Mundi, quicquid non possidet armis, Relligione tenet. But God be thanked, our
own Nation with some others, have pretty well quitted themselves of this
barbarism: And O when will the time come, that the rest also will do the like?

When will the world rouse up her self, and be redeemed from a slavish
prostration, to the shallowness of some men's notions: that great and noble
souls may at length have a free intercourse, or traffic for conceptions, to
improve the stock of humane knowledge? As for those men who still call upon us,
to humble our understandings unto their traditions, and to deny our selves in
our own reasons: I wish they would once consider, how small the tradition
concerning Apostolical times was, when Eusebius lived. He complains in the
praeface to his History, of the scarce knowledge which they had in his days,
concerning the primitive Christian affairs. What then must we expect to have,
who receive our information from Authors since him? For my part, when I
reflect on the ages that are gone and past, and the Histories that are recorded
of them, I cannot choose but deplore the partiality and weakness of
Ecclesiastique Historians: who, if we will not dissemble, must needs be
confessed, to have given lame narrations of things, and to abound with an
infinite number, of impertinent, ridiculous, incredible stories. Insomuch that
I am very confident, we have a far more genuine and sincere account of those
times, when Alexander and Julius Caesar lived; than of those, when Constantine
reigned and Charlemaigne. The truth is, after the barbarous inundations,
Learning did so generally decay, that the Christians for a long time, either
had no writers at all; or else such, as it had been as good to have none.
Otherwise, why did they (out of envy or ignorance or both) bury in a profound
silence, the glorious proceedings, of that thrice renowned Saracenical Empire.
An Empire of as wonderful a growth, and as noble actions, as ever any since
the Creation: yer we might have pardoned their foul play with the Saracens,
had they been free and candid, in their relation concerning the Christian
affairs. Shall I tell ye? In those days, the Christian world was overspread,
with an idle and ignorant generation of Moncks: who lay in their cells, and
coined whole legends of miraculous lies, wherewith to cheat the common people.
Or else they were observing the weather, and making pretty little times, upon
the several seasons and tides of the year. But had there been any amongst
them, both able and willing, to leave unto posterity, a full and impartial
account of affairs; the Bishops of Rome would long before this, have been
shamed out of their delusory pranks. Nor should I have needed to write this
treatise, concerning the Papal Usurpations.

FINIS.
The Method and Contents.
The Scope and Design of this Book is to manifest the Papal Usurpation, by
reflecting on Historical passages; and not by Logical Arguments drawn, either
from Texts of Scripture, or Testimonies of other Authors:

This manifestation is endeavored two ways.

First, By showing, that in the primitive times, the Bishop of (...) made no
noise in the world, nor was his supremacy at all d'camt of. In the First
Chapter.

Secondly, And chiefly, by showing: After what manner, the Pope not only
arrived to a Supremacy in the Church; In the Second Chapter:

But also confirmed himself, in His Ecclesiastical Usurpation; and further
encroacht upon the Temporal Magistrate. In the Third Chapter.

Lastly, In the fourth Chapter; A Corollary is deduced from the preceding
discourse, concluding with a reason; Why the Pontificial unjust actions, have
not been justly discovered.

FINIS.

