THE Doctrines OF THE ARMINIANS and PELAGIANS Truly Stated and clearly
Answered: OR, An Examination and Confutation of their ancient ERRORS, which by
the Church of Christ in former ages were justly abhorred, but of late under the
names of Comfortable Truths to be embraced, are newly Published.

CONCERNING I. The Universality of Gods Free Grace in Christ to mankind. II.
Concerning Election. III. Redemption. IV. Conversion. V. Perseverance.

Wherein the Principal Arguments brought to maintain the Orthodox Faith are
propounded, and the Principal Objections against them answered.

By THOMAS WHITFEILD, Minister of the Gospel at Bugbrook in Northamptonshire.

The Tares of Arminian Heresy sowed in former times (and by the help of
Prelatical influence then given to them increasing) and now growing up so much
in these; I conceive this Book wherein the Author does learnedly state and
confute those Opinions, is very worthy the public light.

JOSEPH CARYLL.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamie, and are to be sold at his shop at the three
golden Lions in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange. 1652.

An Examination and Confutation of Tho. More, his treatise of the universality
of Gods freegrace in Christ to mankind.
THat there was value and worth enough in Christ's death, (in regard of that
sufficiency and excellency of the price) for the redeeming of all the men in
the world, is granted on all hands: But whether Christ in Gods intention and
his own performance, so paid a ransom for all and every particular man, as
thereby to make satisfaction, and procure reconciliation with God for them, is
the thing in question. This T. M. undertakes to prove, and for proof of this
makes use of these three things which he makes the principal grounds of his
doctrine.

1. Of a distinction. of that reconciliation which Christ has wrought in his
body with God for men, and that which he makes by his spirit in men. The first
of which he will have to be common to all: the second peculiar only to some.

2. Of a distinction betwixt a common and special salvation, which Christ has
purchased.

3. Of the general expressions which the Scripture uses in setting forth
Christ's death, as that he dyed for all, for every man, for the world, and such
like, let us examine how well these will hold.

That his distinction of a reconciliation which Christ has effected in his
body with God for men, (that is for all men) and which he effects by his
spirit in men to God (that is some men only, as he understands it, page 4.5.
and in his whole discourse) is not agreeable to Scripture, may thus appear.

1. The Apostle says, that if we be reconciled to God by the death of his
son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life, Romans 5.10.
Reconciliation is here made the greatest work, if the greatest work be done,
much more shall the lesser. If God has given his Son, together with him, he
will give all things also. Romans 8.32. But he does not give all things to all,
therefore not his son.

2. Reconciliation with God and forgiveness of sin, are made unseparable
companions. God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, and not
imputing their trespasses. 2 Cor. 5.19. In whom we have redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sin. Ephesians. 1.7. But some men shall have their
trespasses imputed to them, all men shall not have their sins forgiven,
therefore all men are not reconciled, all are not redeemed. Neither can this be
understood of reconciling, in regard of original sin only, for the word
which the Apostle uses is (...) which signifies all kind of trespasses or
offenses.

3. Christ's death and intercession are of equal extent. It is Christ that
dyed, or rather that is risen again, and is at the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us; Romans 8.34. We have an advocate with the father even
Christ the just, who is the propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.1.2. The
latter, as Beza observes, is made the ground of the former, why is Christ our
advocate, because he has made a propitiation or reconciliation for us: but he
makes not intercession for all, he is not an advocate for all, therefore, he
has not dyed for all, he has not reconciled all.

4. If he has dyed for all, then he was made sin for all, then all shall be
made the righteousness of God in him, for the Apostle says, he which knew no
sin was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in
him. 2 Cor. 5.21. But all are not made the righteousness of God in him,
therefore he was not made sin for all, he dyed not for all.

5. If he has reconciled us in his body, then we shall be certainly reconciled
by his spirit: for by his sufferings in the body, he has purchased his spirit
for us, and what he has purchased we shall certainly have; all things that
pertain to life and godliness are given to us in and through him. 2 Pet. 1.3.
Amongst which, his spirit is a principal part.

6. If Christ should purchase reconciliation for us, and not apply this to us,
then he were an imperfect Savior; half a savior (for he knows we are not
able to apply this to our selves, and while it be applied we are never the
better for it,) but he is a whole and perfect Savior, he delivers men from the
power of all their enemies; therefore from the power of unbelief; which cannot
be, but by giving them the spirit of faith. What the better to hold forth never
so sovereign a potion to a dying man, who is so far spent as he is not able
to reach forth the least finger to take it; Christ is both a skillful and
careful Physician; therefore, where he undertakes the cure, will be wanting in
nothing, which may effect it.

7. If Christ intended to reconcile all men to God by the things which he
suffered in his body, or by the reconciliation wrought in his body with God for
men, (which are Tho. More his own words) why does he not also reconcile them by
his Spirit? why does he not send his Spirit to work this reconciliation in
them by application of the other? will not the same love of Christ which moved
him to lay down his life for them, move him also to give his Spirit to them?
were not all things that belong to our salvation and perfect deliverance, a
part of that purchase which Christ has made; does not this purchase depend
upon the perfect price which he has paid? if he has paid the same price
(namely his own precious blood) for all; why do not all receive the thing
which he has purchased? If it be said that some refuse it when it is offered:
It may readily be answered, that so do all; till Christ by his Spirit makes
them willing and able to take it: and if this Spirit be purchased for all, (as
it must be if the same price be paid for all) why does he not give it to all?
The Apostle joins these together as effects depending one on another. God sent
his Son to redeem those that were under the Law that we might receive the
adoption of sons, and because ye are sons, he has sent the spirit of his
Son into your hearts, Gal. 4.5.6. So that both Adoption, and the spirit of
Adoption are made to flow from Redemption as the proper effects of it: and
Redemption is the proper effect of Christ's death. Besides he says, that if any
man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of Christ's, Romans 8.9. If Christ
has bought us with the price of his blood, we are not our own but his, 1 Cor.
6. last, if we be his, he will give us his Spirit, first or last, for if any
man has not the spirit of Christ, he is none of Christ's.

Tho. More brings for stablishing his doctrine of universal grace, is a
distinction betwixt a common salvation which Christ has purchased for all, and
a special salvation which he has purchased for believers. For answer unto
which, it will not be denied that all sorts of men have many common benefits by
Christ's coming into the World, and by the Redemption which he has purchased.
But that he has purchased a common Salvation for all; if Salvation be taken in
a spiritual sense, namely for eternal life, or something which belongs to it;
(in which sense) it is always taken in the New Testament) does no where appear
in Scripture.

Jude writes to the Church of a common Salvation, Jude 3.



For, 1. The Apostle would never have given such diligence, and thought it so
needful to write to them of such a Salvation as was common with them, to
others who were damned; having in the foregoing verse directed his speech to
such as were called and sanctified of God the Father reserved unto Jesus
Christ, and prayed for mercy and peace (which are effects of special love) in
their behalf he would never descend so low in the very next words as to commend
so earnestly to them a salvation which was common to those that were lost.

2. This Salvation mentioned in the beginning of the verse is of no larger
extent then the Faith mentioned in the end. Which whether it be understood of
the grace of Faith, or of the doctrine of Faith, (as it is usually taken by
Interpreters) yet it is a gift or privilege peculiarly belonging to the
Saints, it was once given to the Saints, not to all; so that the common
salvation here spoken of, is the salvation which was common to them, together
with the Apostle, yea, with all believers.

Tim. 4.10. here is a common and special salvation plainly held forth.

Ver. 8. adds Ver. 10. therefore we labor and suffer rebuke, because we trust
in the living God who is the Savior of all men, especially of those that
believe.

2. The word (...) here used signifies no more then a preserver, in which sense
it is said that the Lord preserves both man and beast, Psa. 36.6. and
145.15.16. Neither could this stand with the wisdom of Christ, to shed his
blood (which was far more precious then gold or silver, or any corruptible
thing) to purchase Salvation for thousands who were already damned when Christ
died to save them. That all the wicked who died before Christ's coming were in
Hell, is clear by the parable of the rich man, Luke 16.23. and by many other
Scriptures. Neither could it much better stand with Christ's wisdom to shed his
precious blood to purchase the salvation of those, whom he certainly knew even
at the instant when he died to save them) should be damned afterward: for he
must needs know that for both these his death would be in vain; now it cannot
stand with Christ's wisdom to do any thing (much less the greatest work of
all) in vain.



Ephe. 2.2.

2. How come Infants so soon as they are borne to be subject to death; death
only is the wages of sin, and sin makes us subject to wrath.

3. When Christ takes away the guilt of sin, he takes away also the power of
sin. Our old man was crucified together with him that the body of sin might be
destroyed that we should no longer serve sin, Romans 6.6. Now if the root be
killed, how comes it to be so fruitful in sending forth branches; the flesh
daily lusting against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. yea all men walking after the
flesh, fulfilling the will of the flesh and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.3. being not
only sinful, but the servants of sin; sin reigning in their mortal
bodies, and they obeying it in the lusts thereof. Romans 6.12.17.19.20.

P. 39



1. That the effect of Christ's death was only a possible or potentiall, and not
an actual salvation, which agrees not with the Scripture expression. For it is
said, he came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.16. not to purchase a
possibility of salvation, to redeem those that were under the Law, Gal. 4.5.
not to purchase a possibility of Redemption, to take away the sins of the
World, John 1.29. to save his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. which
implies more then a possibility of these things.

2. How could Christ by his death make them saveable who were already lost,
purchase a possibility of salvation for them who were already damned? (as
millions of men were before his coming) Inferni nulla redemptio: there is no
coming out of Hell. There is a great Gulf set (says Abraham) to the rich
man, Luke 16.26. so that none can come from them to us.

3. This possibility of salvation must have reference to man or to God: If to
man, so that there is now a possibility purchased for man to save himself by
coming to Christ if he will; this cannot hold, for no man can come to Christ
unless the Father draw him. Ioh. 6.44. If it has reference to God, so that
Christ by his death has purchased a possibility for God to save men: this does
much extenuate the infinite excellency and virtue of Christ's death, and make
the work of man's salvation to be thereby very little advanced and set forward:
It being possible for God (even before Christ was given to die) to save men, by
what way and means himself should think best; and Christ by his death has
purchased no actual, but a potentiall salvation, namely apossibility for God
to save whom he pleases.

4. If the effect of Christ's death be only a possible or potentiall salvation,
how comes it to be made actual? If it be said by man's believing and applying
it by faith: it may be replied.

1. That Faith can apply no other salvation then what is purchased, (for our
application changes not the nature of the thing) How then can man be actually
redeemed and saved, by a redemption and salvation that is only potentiall or
possible?

2. If man by his application does make it of potentiall to become actual,
then man's work should be more perfect then Christ's work, (for an actual
redemption or salvation, is a more perfect work then a potentiall only.)

If it be said that Christ works this also by putting a spirit of faith into
men: this confirms what we have said before, namely that Christ has purchased
not only a potentiall, but actual salvation for men, Therefore by his death
has purchased not only salvation, but all that belongs to it, namely that
spirit, which works faith and all other graces needful to salvation, according
to that of the Apostle, he has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. and so is a perfect Redeemer, both by making satisfaction
to God for us, and making application of that satisfaction to us, by his Spirit.



if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. and the
Apostle speaking of such as these, says, they were without hope, Ephe. 2.12.
and that the Scripture has concluded or shut them up under sin.

2. It follows not that the door of Salvation is shut to those unto whom the
Gospel is preached, although Christ both in Gods intention, and his own, died
not for all; because in the Gospel Christ is offered to all: all are commanded
to look out to him for salvation, and promise is made to all, that if they
will believe, they shall be saved: which promise shall certainly be made good.







What art thou O man that disputest with God, Romans 9.20. It may as well be said
how could God in justice send Moses and Aaron to charge Pharaoh that he should
let his people go; when at the same time he said, he had hardened Pharaohs
heart that he should not let them go, Exodus 7.2.3.4.





2. Because the ground of his refusal of Christ when he is offered, is not
because God has not given Christ to die for him, (which is more then he
knows) but something else arising from some corrupt principle in himself: as
that he will not believe what a lost estate he is in; what excellency and worth
is to be found in Christ; or is not willing to subject himself to the rule and
government of Christ, or some other like.



Ephesians. 5.23. there is a mutual relation between the head and members; the
faithful only and such as are saved by him are the members of him, for he is
the Savior of his own.

2. There is a twofold rule and government which Christ exercises over men.

1. General which he exercises over all, all power in heaven and in earth is
given to him, Mat. 28.18. Thus he reigns in the midst of his enemies, Psalm.
110.2. and by him Kings reign, Pro. 8.15.

2. There is a special rule and government which he exercises over his own
People, and thus he is King and Lord of his Church only; for there is a mutual
relation betwixt King and Subject: and thus he is King only over those in whose
hearts he reigns by his Word and Spirit, who willingly subject themselves to
him; and of such as these are those places understood, 2 Cor. 5.15. Romans 14.9.
of such as live unto the Lord, and die unto the Lord.

3. It follows not, that because he is Lord of all, has power and command of
all, that therefore he died for all; he has power and command over the devils,
yet he died not for them; his dying for the elect is a sufficient ground to
entitle him; so that prerogative and making him capable of that privilege to
be Lord of all: because he humbled himself to the death of the Cross; God has
exalted him, and given him a name above every name, Phil. 3.8. not only honor
and dignity, but power and authority; that to the Name of Jesus to his Person
invested with this power and authority, All things in Heaven and Earth, Angels,
Men, and Devils should be subject.

Tho. More brings to prove that Christ died for all, is those general
expressions which the Scripture uses in speaking of Christ's death; as that he
gave himself a ransom for all, tasted of death for every man, was a
propitiation for the sins of the World, yea of the whole World, etc.

1. He cannot be ignorant that the doctrine and truth of holy Scripture lies
not always in the literal signification of the word, but in that sense and
meaning which is agreeable to that place where those words are used, and to
other places of Scripture where the same thing is spoken of. He counts it
blasphemy to deny that those words all every man, world, and the like, when
Christ's death is spoken of, should be taken in any other then a literal sense;
but why may he not as well count it blasphemy, to deny that the bread in the
Sacrament is properly Christ's body, because he says, this is my body, or to
deny that Christ is properly a branch, a corner stone, a morning star, and
such like, because the Scripture expresses him by these names.

2. Himself acknowledges, that although the Scripture in speaking of Christ's
death, sometimes and in some places uses general expressions, yet in other
places it uses expressions wherein that generality is limited, as when it is
said, that he gave his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. this is my blood,
that is shed for the sins of many, Mat. 26.28. he was set, or appointed for
the rising of many, Luke 2.34. the gift by Jesus Christ has abounded to many,
Romans 5.15. he was offered to take away the sins of many, Heb. 9. last he bare
the sins of many, Esaias 53. last, he was plagued for the transgression of his
people, ver. 8.

3. He cannot deny that sometimes these notes of universality, all, every man,
world, and the like, are ofttimes used in a more restrained sense. 1. The word
all, is sometimes taken for a part only, or some of all sorts; so it is said,
that Christ healed (...) all or every kind of disease, Mat. 9.35. that (...)
all Judaea and all the region round about, some of all sorts went out to John
Baptist, and were Baptized of him, Mat. 3.5. Luke 11.42
ye tith mint and rue (...) every herb. Peter saw a vessel let down to the
earth, wherein were (...) all four footed beasts, that is, some of all kinds,
Act. 10.12. All flesh shall see the salvation of God, Luke 3.6. I will power my
spirit upon all flesh. Joel. 2.28. not upon every particular man, but upon some
of all sorts, so, Esaias 40.5. And in this sense it is said, that Christ gave
himself a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2.6. namely for some of all sorts, of all
estates, orders and degrees of men, in which sense the Apostle had ver. 1.
bidden them make prayers, and prayers for all men, for Kings and Princes etc.

2. So the word every, is many times put for some of every sort, The kingdom
of God is preached, and every one presses into it, Luke 16.16. God will make
manifest the counsels of the heart, and then every man shall have praise of
God, 1 Cor. 4.5. not every particular man, but every good man of what estate
and condition soever. Every man says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, cap. 1.12.
Every man takes his own supper, and one is hungry, and another is drunken,
cap. 11.21. Every particular man amongst the Corinthians did not make rents and
schisms in the Church, neither did every man come unworthily to the Sacrament;
but a great many did, and therefore this expression of generality is used: and
so when the Apostle says, that Christ tasted death for every man; it does not
necessarily follow, that he dyed for every particular man, but for many: he
gave himself a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. even for every of the sons of
God, for every heir of salvation, of whose salvation Christ is appointed to be
the head and Captain, for so it follows in the next verse. It became him for
whom and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the
captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings, Heb. 2.10.

3. So the word World, is often taken not for the whole world, but for a part
only, as when it is said, that when Christ came into the World, the world knew
him not. Joh. 1.10. that the world hated him. cap. 15.19. that the World hated
his chosen ones, ver. 20. that the Whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John
5.19. This cannot be understood of the whole world as including every
particular man, but only of the worst part of the Whole wicked world. And as
the word World is ofttimes taken for the worst, so sometimes for the better
part of the world: as when it is said, that God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself and not imputing their sins, 2 Cor. 5.19. There is a great
part of the world who were never reconciled, but always have and always shall
remain in a state of enmity with God and Christ; even all those to whom Christ
shall say at the last day, I never knew you, Mat. 7.25. all those who before
Christ's coming had been strangers from the covenant, and had lived without God
in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. A great part of the world shall have their sins
imputed to them, for Christ shall set them on his left hand, and say unto them,
go ye cursed into hell fire, Mat. 25. so also is the world taken when Christ
says, he came into the World not to condemn the World, but that the World
might be saved by him, Joh. 3.17. This cannot be understood of the whole world,
for Christ shall condemn a great part of the world, even all those that he
shall set on his left hand, and what ever he shall do at last, he intended at
first to do. Neither shall all the world be saved by him, neither did he intend
to save all, for then he should miss of his intention; neither in reason can
we think that he came to save such as were already damned: therefore by world,
must needs be understood the better part, namely, so many as are saved. So
Christ is said to be the bread of God that came down from heaven, and gives
life to the world, Joh. 6.33. There is a world to whom Christ actually gives
life, but he does not this to the whole world, but only to the believing
world; for he that believes not, shall not see life. Joh. 3. last. he is
condemned already.

Yea that place, God so loved the world, Joh. 3.16. which Arminians think
serves so much for their turn, cannot be understood of all men in the world;
for though the world be there taken communiter, for mankind: for men living in
the world, yea for all sorts, all estat^s, orders and degrees of men; yet it
cannot be taken universaliter for every particular man living in the world: for
the love here spoken of, is a special peculiar love, God so loved. In this God
sets out his love toward us, that Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.8. yea, this
is the greatest love, greater love then this has no man, Joh. 15.13. Now the
same persons cannot be the objects of the greatest love and greatest hatred,
for then there should be no difference betwixt the elect and reprobate; by all
which it appears that there is no necessity those general expressions used in
Scripture touching Christ's death should be taken in a general sense.

4. It appears plainly by many other places of Scripture, that these
expressions of Christ dying for all men loving the world, giving himself to be
a propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2.2. If they be truly
understood, must be understood in a restrained sense; namely, for the believing
world, for the world not only of Jews but of Gentiles, that shall be saved (In
which sense this place of John is to be taken) He is a propitiation not only
for our sins (Says saint John, a Jew, writing to the Jews) but for the
sins of the whole world, of the world of believing Gentiles, as well as of
our selves. Now that this and other like places, where generalities in the like
kind are used, must necessarily be taken in a limited and restrained sense
does plainly, as I said, appear by many other places of Scripture, as when it
is said, that Christ laid down his life for his sheep, Joh. 10.15. for his
people, Mat. 1.21. for the sons of God, Joh. 11.52. for the elect of God, Romans
8.33, 34. that the promise of Christ is given to them that believe, Gal. 3.22.
that Christ has loved his Church, and given himself for it, Ephesians. 5.25. Now
all are not the sheep of Christ, the people of God, the sons of God, the
elect, the Church of God, for then there should be no difference betwixt these
and the world, from which the Scripture distinguishes them. Besides, Christ
says, that he prayed not for the world, but for those whom the father had
given him, Joh. 17.9. Those whom Christ dyed for, he would not refuse to pray
for: that for these he sanctified himself, ver. 19. that is, set himself
apart to be made an offering for sin, The Saints sing a new song to the
lamb, because he had redeemed them out of every tongue, kindred, people, And
Rev. 6.9. Therefore he has not redeemed all of every kindred, people and
nation. All those whom Christ dyed for, he loved, and whom he loves, he
washes with his blood, Rev. 1.5. but all are not washed. That blood of Christ,
which through the eternal spirit he offered unto God, purges their
consciences from dead works for whom it is offered, Heb. 9.14. but all have
not their consciences purged, By the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
made, all are sanctified for whom it is offered, cap. 10.10. He has given
himself for his Church to sanctify it, Ephesians. 5.25. but all are not sanctified.
Therefore these general expressions before mentioned, cannot be understood
generally of all and every particular man, but must of necessity be limited and
appropriated to such as these Scriptures speak of.

Tuhs we see, that the chief grounds which T. M. brings for the establishing
his opinion of the universality of Gods free grace will not hold, as not being
bottomed on Scripture rightly understood. He goes on to object against such
answers and arguments as are brought against his opinion, let us go on to
examine the strength of these.

(all, men, world) and the like are not always to be taken properly and strictly
in a literal sense; he objects that although the Scripture sometimes uses
Metaphors and dark mystical expressions (as in the doctrine of the Sacraments)
yet in fundamental points in things necessary to Salvation, (such as the death
of Christ is) it always speaks clearly and plainly, not figuratively and darkly.
p. 73. 74.

but to know or believe that Christ died for every man, is not necessary to
Salvation,

2. True it is, that in points necessary, the Scripture speaks plainly; and in
a way fit to be understood: yet sometimes it speaks figuratively and
improperly, because nothing more plain and easy to be understood then some
figurative speeches. Tho. More himself acknowledges that every Child can
understand such a figure as this, the Pot seeths over; where the subject is put
for the adjunct. There is nothing more frequent in Scripture and in ordinary
speech, then such figures where the subject is put for the adjunct, or the
whole for the part, or part for the whole. So when it is said that Jerusalem
and all Judea went out to John Baptist; here is a double figure, one a
metominy, the place put for the People; another a Synecdoche, the whole put for
the part, all for a great many, or some of all sorts; yet who does not easily
understand this: So when it is said that Christ gave himself for a ransom for
all; may it not be easily understood that he gave himself a ransom for many,
or for some of all sorts, especially when many other Scriptures express it by
many; he gave his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.28. and 26.28. Romans 5.15.
Heb. 9. last. The Article of the Resurrection is necessary to Salvation, and
therefore laid down plainly as the rest; yet when it is said that Christ rose
again the third day, this is a figurative speech, for here is a double
Synecdoche; the day first being for the whole (...) the day and night.

2. A part of the day, the Evening or Morning being put for the whole day; for
Christ lay in the Grave but one whole day, namely, the whole Jewish Sabbath.
Therefore Tho. More need not clamor against us as obscuring and darkning, yea
falsifying the Scripture; when we compare one Scripture with another, and
explicate that which speaks figuratively by another which speaks properly, both
being plain and easy enough to be understood of such who are willing to
understand.

(all, every man, etc.) are sometime taken but for some, as for Christ's sheep,
his Church, and such like; he objects,

1. That this word (all) when it is applied to creation, fall, ransom,
resurrection, is never found to signify less then all and everyman, p. 75

2. That this word, only, is never added, it is never said that Christ died for
his sheep only, or that he loved his Church only. p. 76

that as in Adam all die, so in Christ all shall be made alive, 1 Cor. 15.22.
this cannot be understood of all and every particular man, but only of those
that are Christ's, verse 23. of such to whom he is a quickening Spirit, ver. 45.
such as have born the image of the heavenly Adam, ver. 49. such as are dead in
Christ, 1 These. 4.14. though all shall be made alive by the power of Christ, as
Lord over all; yet not by the virtue and power of his Resurrection as their
Mediator and Redeemer.

2. For the second, that the word, only, is not added: no more it is said in
Scripture that we are justified by Faith only, yet when it is said that we are
justified by Faith without the works of the Law; this is equivolent, and as
much in effect as if it had been said we are justified by Faith only, other
things being excluded. When it is said there is one God, and one Mediator, it
is as much as if it had been said, one God only, one Mediator only; because in
other places, all other are excluded besides this one: So when it is said
Christ laid down his life for his sheep, it is as much as if he had said for
his sheep only; because all are not Christ's sheep, he will not give Eternal
life to all. And by this reason here objected, when the Apostle bids husbands
love their wives, as Christ loves his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. some might except
and say, but he does not bid them love their wives only, therefore they may
love others.

all, must be taken in a general sense, as when it is said that all men have
sinned; and that death is come over all men, why not as well in this, he gave
himself a Ransom for all.



2. Because all shall not be saved, and the end of Redemption is Salvation,
Luke 1.69.70. neither will Christ pray for all, John 17.9.

Tho. More objects,

1. That he loves all with a love of pity, though not with a love of
complacency, or delight.

he means to destroy; it is not that unchangeable everlasting love which
causes him to love to the end, it is such a love as may be turned into hatred;
therefore not the greatest love. The Lord hates all the workers of iniquity.



Esau before he was born, or had done either good or evil, Romans 9.13.

Jacob was loved, as when we are bidden to hate Father and Mother, this cannot
be understood of any positive hatred, but of a less love then wherewith we are
to love Christ.

Esau, with a less love, for hatred (as they make it) signifies less love.

2. Though hatred sometimes signifies less love, yet when God says Esau have
I hated, it cannot be so understood, for here love and hatred are one set in
opposition against another; and therefore cannot be several degrees of the
same thing. They are here made membra dividentia ejusdem generis, such
contraries as can never be conjoined. The purpose of God is here distinguished
into a purpose of love, whereof Jacob was the object, and a purpose of hatred
whereof Esau was the object, and they are the same with election and rejection;
the Apostle makes the love to Jacob, to be the same with election, ver. 11.
therefore hatred (which is contrary to it) is the same with rejection: neither
can we imagine a choosing of some, but there must be a refusing of others.

Esau, and laid his mountains waste, for the Dragons of the wilderness, Mal.
1.3. By this it appears that the hatred wherewith God hated Esau, consisted only
in regard of outward things in denying those privileges to Esau which he
granted to Jacob, as the inheritance of the Land of Canaan; and preservation
from desolation, which is threatened to Esau.

Jacob and Esau in regard of outward things, yet neither the only nor
principal difference did consist in these; so as one is said to be loved, and
another to be hated in regard of a difference in these; for,

1. The Land of Canaan was a type of the heavenly Canaan, therefore Esaus
rejection from the one, was a sign of his rejection from the other. Hence the
selling of his birthright is made a note of his profaneness, Heb. 12.16.
That he slighted this privilege, and for filling his belly, passed away all
his right and title to the heavenly inheritance, whereof the inheritance of
Canaan was a type.

2. Esaus serving of Jacob, and Gods hating of him, could not be fulfilled in
regard of any outward inferiority whereby he was beneath Jacob: for Esau in
outward respects was a greater man then Jacob, so that Jacob bowed to him, and
called him his lord. And he possessed a fairer inheritance in Mount Seir, then
ever Jacob did in the land of Canaan, wherein he lived as a stranger: Neither
was the excellency of the land of Canaan so much in the pleasantness or
fertility of it (in the last of which the land of Egypt and Caldaea did equal,
if not exceed it,) but because it was (symbolum divini favoris) as Calvin calls
it) a pledge of the favor of God, and a place which he had consecrated to
himself, and to his elect people, whom he had set his love upon, Deuteronomy. 7.7.

3. As the mountains of Esau were laid waste, so were the mountains of Iudaea;
yea the whole land: First, by the Assyrians, then by the Caldeans, and at last
by the Romans, and so it continues still; and should ever do so, were it not
for the promise and covenant of mercy which God made wit^ Abram, Isaac, and
Jacob, of which this promise of loving Jacob, when he hated Esau, was a
principal branch.

Adam, therefore he loves all.

Jacob before he had done good or evil: God loves men with this love, not
because they are righteous; but therefore they become righteous, because he
loves them. He has not chosen us because we were holy, but he has chosen us
to be holy, Ephesians. 1.4.

2. He could not execute or actually put forth any effects of this love upon
Adams posterity before his fall, because they had no actual being.

paid for all, and the satisfaction which thereby he has made, the effect of
which is certain redemption and salvation; being justified by his blood we
shall be saved from wrath by him; Romans 5.9. neither can a just God require a
double payment of the same debt. Tho. More objects, that it is a most notorious
untruth to say that all those for whom Christ dyed, and paid their ransom, are
justified by his death. P. 95.

Ephesians. 1.7. what is redemption by his blood, but paying the ransom? what is
forgiveness of sin, but justification? so when he makes Gods justifying of
us, and Christ's dying for us to be unseparable companions. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that is dead, Romans 8.33.34.

2. Unto the other part of the Argument, namely that Justice cannot require a
double payment of the same debt; (to let pass his often begging of the question,
and tedious tautologies) all that he replies to purpose is this,





P. 101.

Tit. 2.14. shall unbelief, shut men out from mercy, and the benefit of
Christ's death? How then has God concluded or shut up all under unbelief, that
he might have mercy on all, both Jew and Gentile, Romans 11.32. Is not unbelief
a fruit of the flesh, a branch of the old man, and a principal member of the
great body of sin? and was not Christ crucified that our old man might be
crucified, and the body of sin might be destroyed? Romans 16.6.

2. If Christ has freed all men from their sins against the Law, how then come
they to be judged by the Law? Romans 2.12. how are they said to be under the Law?
Romans 6.14. why are we bidden so to speak, and so to do as those who shall be
judged by the Law, Iam. 2.12. which can be no other Law then the same which he
spoke of in the verse. before, which says, a man must not commit adultery, must
not kill; neither does that hinder, because he calls it a law of liberty, for so
it is to all that are in Christ, that are led by his free spirit; for so says
the Psalmist, I shall walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts, Psalm. 119.45. I
shall run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart, ver.
32. The Commandments of God are not grievous to those that love him, and obey
out of love, 1 Ioh. 5.3.

Therefore notwithstanding all that Tho. More has said, still the Argument
remains firm; for if Christ has paid the Ransom for all, and thereby made
satisfaction, and perfect satisfaction; then divine justice requires that it
should be accepted. If perfect satisfaction be made and accepted, then perfect
justice cannot require another satisfaction, and so a double payment of the
same debt; namely that a poor sinner should suffer for ever in hell to
satisfy divine justice for those sins which Christ already suffered for upon
the Cross, and by his sufferings has made perfect satisfaction, such as has
been accepted.

If it be said that the sinner suffers himself, because he will not apply
Christ's suffering and satisfaction; to this it may be answered, that if Christ
loved him so far as to suffer and make satisfaction for him; he will take order
that application shall be made, for Christ is a perfect Savior, and will not
suffer the fruit of his suffering to be lost; nor have the effect of them to
man's arbitrament.

John 17.9. Tho. More objects many things, and takes great pains to find out
evasions, whereby he may avoid the force of this Argument; amongst which, three
only are to the purpose.

1. He tells us that by the World here which our Savior would not pray for; is
not meant the wicked ungodly world, but all the Elect in the World, which were
yet uncalled. p. 110.

2. That Christ does not say he will not pray for the World; but only that he
does not pray, speaking of the present time.

3. That the word (not) is not so exclusive as to signify not at all; but not
so much, not in such manner, so privily and chiefly for these as the other. p.
111.

Tho. More grants that the word (World) may sometime be taken for the better
part, namely the Elect; at least for a part of them which elsewhere he seems
not willing to grant; but that the World cannot be so taken here, appears.

1. Because our Savior here opposes the World to those whom the Father had
given him out of the World; now those whom the Father had given, were all
Elect, as appears, ver. 2. all those to whom he should give eternal life:
Therefore he does not oppose the Elect to the Elect, one part of the Elect to
another, but all the Elect to the wicked World, for which he would not pray.

2. The manifestation of his Name, ver. 6. is the same with effectual calling,
and giving of some to him by the Father, is made the ground and cause of this
manifestation, and so in order of nature goes before it. Hence our Savior
says, that he manifests himself to those whom the Father has given him;
when had he given them? namely before he manifested himself to them; (for the
word is in the praeterperfect tense, and speaks of a thing already past and
done) besides, in the words following he shows plainly the same thing; Thine
they were (says he) and thou gave them me. How were they Gods, but by
Election, and by Election he gave them to his Son, appointing them to obtain
salvation by Jesus Christ? 1 These. 5.9. So that giving here, is not effectual
calling, but that which goes before it, as the ground and cause of it, namely
Election; according to that of the Apostle; whom he has predestined, those
also he has called, Romans 8.30.

3. Our Savior mentions this praying as a choice privilege belonging only to
the Elect; and as to the Elect only, so to all the Elect standing in opposition
to the wicked World: from which therefore none of the Elect are to be excluded;
for he prays for all those whom the Father had given him both called and
uncalled. I pray not only for these, but for those who shall believe in me,
John 17.28.

4. Those uncalled ones whom our Savior prays for, ver. 20. he distinguishes
from the World, ver. 21. and 23. and therefore it is not likely he would
express them by the name of the world in ver. 9. And this which has been said
may likewise answer the two last objections; for if the World here cannot
signify the Elect uncalled, but only the wicked World, then Christ does not
pray for them at another time, or in another manner then for his own; for he
does not pray for them at all.

So that the Argument still holds good, if Christ would not pray for wicked
men, such as shall perish in the end; he would not die for them, for to lay
down his life was an action of the greatest love; and for whom he has done
the greater, he will also do the less: His love in dying, and thereby making
satisfaction being the foundation of his intercession, and all other benefits
belonging to our Redemption.

Romans 8.30. Ephesians. 1.13. but all are not Elected; therefore Christ died not for
all. Tho. More replies very little to the purpose.

1. He says, that the proposition is directly contrary to the Scripture. Heb.
2.9. 1 Timothy 2.6. but he should have said, to those Scriptures taken in his
sense, but not taken in the true sense: for is it not agreeable to the
Scripture, to say that those whom God elected or predestined, those he
appointed to obtain salvation by Jesus Christ, for those Christ dyed, those
has he called, justified and to which he adds, that it is so grossly false, as
it deserves rather abhorring then answering, page 114. But it may be better
said, this kind of language deserves rather to be abhorred then answered,
which makes the language of Scripture a thing to be abhorred.

2. He says that it overthrows the distinction which the Gospel makes,
betwixt common and special salvation. Answ. It may well overthrow that which
has no foundation in the Gospel, which his common salvation has not, as
before has been showed.

3. He denies that there is any such connection betwixt these privileges, that
he who partakes of one, must needs partake of all, page 117. All that is in the
common salvation pertains to the special, but not on the contrary.



2. That there is such a necessary connection betwixt election and redemption,
may thus be proved.

All those, and only those who are elected, are likewise redeemed, called,
justified, glorified.

But all are not elected, nor shall be called, justified, glorified, therefore
all are not redeemed.

The proposition is proved by those Scriptures which make the love of election,
to be the ground and cause of redemption and all the rest. God so loved the
world that he gave his only begotten son; which cannot be meant of a common
love, because it tends to everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. to salvation, 1 Timothy
1.16. we love him because he loved us first, and gave himself to be a
propitiation for our sins, 1 John 4.10, God sets out his love in that while
we were sinners, he gave Christ to dye for us, Romans 5.8. so that Gods love is
the cause of giving his son, where that goes before, this must needs follow,
neither is this ever to be found, where that has not gone before. To this
purpose also the Apostle says, we are chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.4. (not as the
foundation of our election which is only from the good pleasure of his will,
ver. 5.) but of our redemption and salvation, in that he has appointed us to
obtain salvation by Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. In both which places Christ is
made the fruit and effect of election, therefore of equal extent with it,
reaching neither shorter nor farther then that does, so that he is given for
all, and only those that are appointed to salvation. For if God therefore
gives Christ for men, because he has appointed them to salvation, it follows
on the other side, that if he has not appointed all men to salvation, he has
not given Christ for all, and how can we in reason think, that God should give
his son to purchase salvation, for those whom he never intended to save; yea,
more, for such whom he intended to destroy. For it cannot be denied that God
will bring destruction upon a great part of men; and what he does in time, he
intended to do before all time.

2. The Apostle says, we are chosen to salvation through the beleese of the
truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Now says is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. and such a gift
as he does not give to all. Now if it should be asked why God does give this
gift to some men rather then to other, it must be answered, because he has
chosen them to salvation? so many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
Act. 13.48. If it should on the other side be asked, why does he not give faith
as well to others, since he is able to do it; the answer must needs be, because
he has not appointed them to salvation. Now if God will not give faith to
those, whom he has not appointed to salvation; shall we think that he has
given Christ for them, which is far the greatest gift of all. For the rest
which follows, it is but a venting of his own private notions about election,
wherein either he affirms that which is not denied, or proves not that which is
denied.

Act. 13.48. that so many as were ordained to eternal life believed. Tho. More
objects that the word ordaining is to be understood of an actual ordaining,
constituting, preparing. furnishing, making meet, and not of Gods eternal
purpose, page 150.151.

Romans 13.1. and it was told Paul all things which were appointed for him to do,
Act. 22.10. In both which places the same word is used.

2. This ordaining to life, is made the cause of believing, which arises not
from any furnishing, or fitness in our selves, but is the free gift of God,
Ephesians. 2.8.

3. How can we be said to be actually constituted, freed and prepared for
eternal life before believing, when as faith is the first thing that fits us
for life.

4. The word here used is in the praeterperfect tense, and does not signify
any present condition or disposition in them, but something which had been
done long before; so many as were ordained to eternal life, long before this
time of their hearing Paul preach.

that to whom Christ is a priest, he is also a prophet to teach them, and a
Prince to rule them; but these offices pertain only to his Church and chosen,
therefore the other also. T. M. replies, that in all Christ's offices, there is
something more general which belongs to all, something more special which
belongs to the elect, page 125.

Tho. More makes common and general page 192. to all) is the foundation of all
the rest, (being not only satisfactory but meritorious, such whereby he has
not only satisfied for sin, but purchased righteousness and life) and
therefore those who have their part in this, shall have their part in all the
rest, as has been already showed. He that spared not to give his own son,
how shall he not together with him, freely give all things also, Romans 8.32.

Tho. More replies that God does use some means toward all to bring them to
knowledge.

Col. 1.26. That the Gentiles before Christ's coming were strangers from the
life of God through ignorance, Ephesians. 4.18. That they were strangers from the
covenant without Christ, without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. that in times
past, he suffered all nations to walk in their own ways, Act. 17.30. this
was a night time, a time of darkness with them, Ephesians. 5.8. Romans 12.12. 2 Cor.
4.6.

If the Reader desires further satisfaction, touching this point of Christ's
dying for all, let him pass on to the next treatise, and look into the
Article of redemption, where he shall find that handled which here is omitted,

An Examination and Confutation of the Arminian erroneous Tenets concerning
ELECTION.
IN the Article of election, the principal question is, whether it be absolute
or conditional (that is, whether it arises merely from Gods free purpose, his
gracious good will and pleasure, or whether it arises both from the foresight
of man's fall, as also of his faith, repentance and the like.

To this the Arminians answer negatively, denying Gods election or decree of
man's salvation to be absolute, and affirming that both the foresight of sin,
as also of faith and perseverance do go before not only man's salvation, but
also Gods purpose and decree, whereby he has appointed him unto salvation. For
in the decree of man's salvation they make God to proceed in this order. 1. That
upon foresight of the fall, God decrees to give Christ. 2. To save believers,
and damn unbeleevers. 3. To give to all men sufficient means of faith. 4. To
save such particular persons as he foresees will believe, and to damn the
other. That such a foresight as this, does not go before election or Gods
decree touching the salvation of particular persons, may appear by these
reasons.



In order of nature, the effect always follows the cause. That we are elected
unto faith, the Apostle shows plainly when he says, that we are chosen before
the foundation of the world, to be holy and without blame. Ephesians. 1.4. Now faith
is a part of sanctification being one of the fruits of the spirit, yea, a
principal one. And Saint Petor says, we are elected unto obedience, and
sprinkling of the blood of Christ. 1 Pet. 1.2, Now Christ's blood is sprinkled
on us by faith; and all true obedience arises out of faith: being therefore
elected to the one, we are elected to the other also: and the Apostle tells the
Thessolonians, that God had chosen them to salvation through the sanctification
of the spirit, and the belief of the truth. 2 These. 2.13. Sanctification and
belief of the truth, are made means whereby they were to come to salvation;
therefore in order of nature the purpose of salvation must go before these,
they being means that tend to it; none can deny that faith is the gift of God,
and a grace which he works, for the Apostle affirms it, Ephesians. 2.8. Now if God
works faith, he must needs do this to some end, and what can this be but that
whereto faith tends, and which at last it effects and brings forth, namely
salvation? receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls, 1
Pet. 1.19.

he has mercy on whom he will have mercy. Romans 9.15. But if election and
rejection be out of the foresight of faith and infidelity and preseverance in
these, then they are acts of justice, not of will and pleasure. For if God
makes a covenant with man, to give him salvation if he believes on Christ, and
perseveres in doing so, and on the other side to condemn him if he rejects
Christ, and persists in unbeleefe: he cannot in truth and justice deny him
salvation if he sees him persevering in the faith, nor purpose to give it him
if he sees him persevering in unbelief. So that this way he should be led to
elect or reject, by a necessity of nature, not a freedom of will. Besides,
they make election to depend upon prescience, and this prescience to be
necessary, and so upon this ground also election to be necessary.

John says, we love him, because he loved us first, 1 John 4.19. the love
whereby we love God immediately flows from faith, for faith works through
love, and by this faith and love, we choose God to be our God, cleaving to him
as our chief Good. Whether therefore upon foresight of our faith, he purposes
to choose us, or upon our actual believing he actually chooses, still our
loving and choosing goes before his.

foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19. for Gods foresight is grounded
on the liberty of man's will, not on the certainty of his own will and decree,
because (as Arminians teach) God has not absolutely decreed to give men faith,
but only conditionally; if they do not resist grace when it is offered:
neither does he work faith in them by any irresistible motion of his grace,
but only he offers Christ to them, and persuades them to believe; leaving it
always to the power and liberty of their own wills, whether they will believe
or not. And when they have believed and received Christ, still it remains in
the liberty of their wills to reject him again; and they may every day fall
from the faith, after they have truly believed: nothing therefore being more
uncertain, more fickle and contingent, then the motions of man's will. How can
that knowledge be certain that is grounded on this foundation; and such as the
knowledge is, such is the decree.





Arminians teach.





2. Actual election is properly election, if therefore men be not actually
elected, till they actually believe; election is not from all eternity.

3. Actual election implies a potentiall; but where does the Scripture
intimate any such kind of election? true it is, that God foresees faith that
shall be in men; but how does he foresee it? namely, by foreseeing himself the
giver of it, and for what end does he intend to give it, namely, for salvation;
so that his foresight of faith presupposes a preceding purpose of salvation.

actus adintra,) because when ever a man comes to be a believer, then he is
actually elected; for this Arminians make to be one of Gods absolute decrees;
namely, that believers shall be saved, when ever therefore a man comes to be a
believer, he is within the decree of salvation, therefore elected; besides, he
must be either an elect or a reprobate: a reprobate he cannot be while he is a
believer, election being fastened to believing. Now this man, by the Arminians
doctrine, may fall away totally from his faith, when he does so; either he
continues still an elect person, and so election is not always fastened to
believing, or of an elect becomes a reprobate at least, for the time else is
under no decree at all: yea, this man may fall away finally and perish for
ever; and then either God must change his purpose and decree, or else still he
continues to be an elect person, when he is damned in hell.

non ens simpliciter quod nullo modo habet invitarem, nec in se nec in causis,
that which has no kind of being, which has neither being in it self nor in
his causes cannot be the object of Gods foreknowledge; of that praescience
whereby he sees that the thing shall certainly be.



will only it is, that causes the difference betwixt things only possible, and
such as shall certainly have being: here things have their first original, and
by this he determines that they shall have being in time: the Scripture does
not any where say that God does whatsoever he knows, but what ever he wills,
and what he pleases, Psalm. 115.3.

But that knowledge whereby God sees such things as have no being (if we would
speak properly) has not so much the things as God himself for the object of
it: God knows his own power that he is able to do all things, and this is the
knowledge of possible things; he knows his own will what he has determined to
do, and this is his knowledge of future things: but he cannot know himself to
have willed any thing before he has willed it.

Romans 9.11. The Apostle speaking of Esau and Jacob, says before the Children
were yet born, or had done good or evil; It was written of them the elder
should serve the younger; and God had said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated: But Jacob and Esau were types of the Elect and Reprobate; therefore God
does not love or hate, elect or reprobate men upon the foresight of works good
or evil.

Arminians answer two ways,

1. That though these had not actually done either good or evil, yet they had
done these in Gods foresight; he foresaw what Jacobs and Esaus future actions
would be.

2. They deny Jacob and Esau to be types of the elect and reprobate, and make
Esan to be a type of such as sought righteousness by the works of the Law; and
Jacob a type of those who sought righteousness by faith in Christ, by
believing; because those who these are types of, are called Children of the
flesh, and Children of the promise.

That these answers cannot stand with the mind of the Apostle, Replication.
nor scope of the place appears,

1. If Election or Reprobation be out of fore seen works, yet they are out of
works which is the thing that the Apostle here denies; giving this as a reason
why it was said of Esau and Jacob, before they were yet born, the one have I
loved, the other have I hated: that Gods purpose according to Election might
stand, Romans 9.11.
not of works, but of him that calls, The purpose of God according to
Election, is the same with Election; for it is all one as if he had said the
purpose of God Electing; and calling here must needs be calling according to
purpose, such a calling as Isaacks was, not Ismaels; because the Apostle makes
it here to answer to the purpose of God Electing, and sets it in opposition
against works; so that foreseen works as well as works already done are here
excluded as such things as cannot stand with Gods free Election: besides
Infants that were to die presently after they were born might be elected or
reprobated, of whom yet there could be no works foreseen.

2. Esau was a type of those who are called Children of the flesh, but Children
of the flesh are not here such as seek righteousness by the Law, but such who
were borne of Abraham according to the course of natural generation, these
being opposed to the children of promise, who in Isaac were called to the
heavenly benediction, ver. 7.8. for the Apostle shows plainly that the promise
made to Abraham did not indifferently belong to all his seed, to all that
should be borne of him according to the course of nature; but only some of
them, namely such as God did choose to himself of his own will and pleasure, as
he did Isaac and Jacob: besides the seed of Abraham without any thing adjoined
is never so taken, namely for children of the flesh that seek righteousness
by the Law, but generally for such as are borne of Abraham according to the
course of nature; and if it had been taken in this sense, the Apostle should
not have answered as he did; all who are of Israel, are not Israel; or all who
are Abraham's seed are not Children; but all who follow the Law are not the true
Israel to whom God tied himself by promise.

3. How can Esau as here he is brought in, considered without works, be a type
of those who should seek righteousness by the Law? or Jacob as he is here
considered without having done either good or evil, be considered as a type of
those who are chosen when God fore-sees them to believe, and to persevere
therein? or how can this agree to Pharaoh whom the Apostle here brings in as one
that was rejected in the same manner that Esau was) how can this I say, agree
to him who neither knew the Law, nor the works of the Law, nor sought after
righteousness by the works of the Law, or any ways else.

4. No godly faithful ones could think the word of God falsified, if such as
sought ^ighteousnesse by the works of the Law were rejected; but this was a
doubt, whereat even the best of them all stumbled; namely how the Israelires,
the ancient people of God, could be rejected, and the Gentiles called: Neither
is there any appearance of injustice, even to man's reason, if God does decree
to reject such as reject Christ when he is offered; and cleave to their own
righteousness: and to save such as receive Christ, and that out of his mere
pleasure, which yet seems to appear by the Apostles doctrine of his loving
Jacob, and hating Esau, as his words show, when he says, Is there any
unrighteousness with God, verse. 14. yea in clearing this doubt, and removing
this objection, the Apostle was bound for preserving of the honor of God, and
clearing of his justice; to have expressed this consideration, and have
answered that God might justly decree to reject those who would refuse Christ,
and stick to their own works; of which yet he mentions not a word, but answers
both this objection of unrighteousness in God; ver. 14. and also that others
of our inability to resist Gods will, ver. 19. by resolving all into his mere
will and pleasure, and there rests, ver. 15.16.21.22. I will have mercy on whom
I will, etc. these words hold forth absolute will; and the form of them
excludes all other things, not causes only, but all occasions of Gods decree.



1. An Antecedent will, and a consequent will, both which they make to agree
properly unto God; and yet by one of these, he wills the salvation of all, by
the other, the damnation of some.

2. Such a decree of salvation as has not for his object, persons, but things.

3. A conditional and an absolute or peremptory decree, touching the same
persons, one succeeding the other; as that Peter shall be saved if he does
believe, and when he does believe, that he shall certainly be saved.

4. And for the order they make the decree of giving Christ, to go before any
decree of man's salvation; and the decree of saving believers, to go before the
saving of any particular persons: that these things cannot stand nor agree with
the Scriptures, nor the excellent nature of God, appears by these reasons.

To begin first with the order. How can God be said to decree the giving of
Christ, before he had any intention or determination of man's salvation; when as
the end why he gave Christ, is this, that he might save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
and this was the reason of the name given him by the Angel, you shall call his
name Jesus, for he shall save my people from their sins, Mat. 1.21. Look for
what end Christ came into the world, for that end God sent him, and for that
end he appointed to send him, but he came to save sinners: how then can the
determination of giving Christ, go before the determination of man's salvation?
besides, our Savior makes the love of God to be the ground of giving his
son: God so loved the world that he gave his son, John 3.16. Now this is
such a love as tends to salvation, therefore the intention of salvation cannot
follow the intention of giving Christ; for though man's salvation be not the
last end of giving Christ, yet it is such as can never be severed from the
last, the greatest glory of God appearing in that salvation of man, which is
purchased by Christ.

2. How can the salvation of believers be decreed, before the salvation of
particular persons? because then the object of Gods decree must be, not persons
but qualities; not the men but their faith, accidents without a subject: but
there is no touch in Scripture tending this way, for the Apostle tells the
Ephesians that God had chosen not their faith but them, Ephesians. 1.4. and the
Thessalonians that he had appointed them to obtain salvation, 1 Thessa. 5.9.
not their faith, and that he loved Jacob and hated Esau before they were borne,
Romans 9. not the ones cleaving to the righteousness of faith, and the others
following the righteousness of the law, but themselves; so every where
persons, not things, are named upon the like occasions. Neither can it stand
with reason, for that cannot be the object of Gods decree, which neither has,
nor never shall have being, qualities never have any being but in their
subjects, faith considered by it self, abstracted from his subject, never had
nor shall have being: neither have believers any being, but in Peter, Paul, and
other particular believing persons. It is a true rule in Logic, that
universalia non existant nisi in singularibus: Humanity has no being but in
Socrates, Plato, and other individual person; so neither believing nor
believers have any existence or being, but in the particular individual
persons of faithful Abraham, Moses, and other the like.

And the decree of saving believers, is nothing else but a decree of bestowing
salvation upon Abraham or other-like faithful person, when he is a believer;
where salvation has reference to the decree and believing to the execution:
and it is no more but this, that God decrees to bring Abraham to Salvation by
faith, and to bestow this Salvation upon him when he is a believer; and in Gods
decree Abraham's person plainly goes before his Faith, going in this order, I
decree to save Abraham, and that he may be saved I decree to give him faith,
without which he can never come to enjoy Salvation.

3. For the decrees themselves, a conditional decree is such as cannot agree
to God, for thus it runs; I decree to save Peter if he will believe; which
either must bear this sense that God will save Peter being a believer, and
then it is all one with the absolute decree whereby he has decreed to bring
Peter to salvation by believing: or else God decrees Peter's salvation upon
condition of his faith, so as if afterward Peter shall come a believer, then
he will absolutely decree to save him; if otherwise he will absolutely decree
to damn him: now in this sense it cannot agree to God.

1. For first, in this conditional decree of Salvation, God puts no difference
betwixt Judas and Peter; betwixt such as come to enjoy Salvation in heaven, and
such as come to be damned in hell; for he decrees likewise to save Judas as
well as Peter, if Judas will believe, and to damn Peter as well as Judas, if
Peter will not: by this decree Esau and Jacob are loved and hated both alike.

And what a decree of Salvation may we think this to be that belongs to the
Reprobate as well as to the Elect; to the damned in hell, as to the Saints in
heaven? by this it is all one to be loved or hated, elected, or rejected. How
then can Election be an act of greatest love?

2. There is no certainty in this decree, for it has no certain object;
damnation being the object of this decree as well as salvation, it respecting
the one equally with the other: now both these cannot be certain, because they
cannot both stand together, the one being contrary to the other; so that if
Salvation be certain, damnation is uncertain, and so on the contrary.

3. It is true, that God decrees conditions, but these conditions belong to the
execution, not to the decree: God decrees to bring men to Salvation by the
conditions of faith, repentance, and the like: these are therefore necessary
for effecting Salvation, but not for establishing the decree to Salvation;
these must go before man's Salvation, but not before Gods decree. All conditions
are as means fitting for the end; and means have the nature of a cause, and are
all one with it: food is the means of nourishment, and so the cause of it; so
Physic is the means and cause of health: thus it is with Faith and Repentance,
they are means, and so causes of Salvation; though not meritorious, yet
preparing and disposing causes, though not causes why God gives it, yet causes
fitting us to receive what he freely gives: if therefore these should
necessarily belong not only to Salvation, but to the decree whereby we are
appointed to Salvation; then the decree should have causes as well as the
execution of it: which were it so, how can Gods will and decree be the first
and highest cause of all other things?

4. God when he decrees life to believers, or to Peter if he will believe,
knows certainly that he will believe: and therefore his decree is not
conditional, but absolute. If a man determines to take a journey to morrow if
it be fair weather, and knows certainly at the same time that it will be
fair weather; this is an absolute determination.







as necessary to man's Salvation; some take occasion to infer a necessity of
these unto Gods decree touching man's Salvation, whereas these belong only to
the execution, not to the decree; and therefore cannot be brought into that: A
man cannot build an house without Timber and Stone, cannot he therefore purpose
the having of a fit habitation for himself; unless the consideration of Timber
and Stone first come into his mind?

4. If God decrees to give men Salvation conditionally, yet how does he decree
to give men faith conditionally? He gives to all men absolutely the power of
believing (as Arminians teach) but upon what condition does he give the act of
believing? if it be said upon this condition, namely, if they do not resist
Gods call; he decrees to give them the act of believing, and so actual faith:
But not to resist, is to obey, and to obey God calling to believe, is to
believe. So then by this doctrine God should decree to give men faith, if they
have faith; and to make them believe, if they do it already: for upon condition
of obeying his call to believe, that is, of their believing, he purposes to
bestow faith upon them: and this is the happy issue of the conditional decree,
he decrees to give men faith if they have it already.

4. Antecedent and consequent wills are such as cannot agree to God as they
understand them. For his antecedent will they make to be such whereby he wills
and earnestly desires the salvation of all men: the consequent will, that
whereby he wills the damnation of some, namely such as persist in unbelief; and
the salvation of others; namely such as persevere in the faith; now these
cannot agree with the nature of God; for,

1. For this antecedent will has sometimes an end, and the consequent will
always a beginning; the absolute or peremptory decree of damnation, never taking
place till the antecedent or conditional will touching salvation be expired:
and so likewise the peremptory decree of salvation, not taking place till the
ceasing of the other. Now the acts of Gods will are immanent acts, therefore
eternal like himself.



that is, will it with his consequent and p^remptory will, till they do
believe; which cannot stand with the Eternity of his will.

2. This antecedent will they make rather to be a velleietas, Si Deus nou
potest, est impotens, si potest sed non efficit quia non licet, tum Deus vellet
aliquid quod non licere^. D. Turss.
then a volitio, rather a wishing and desiring, then a willing, which cannot
agree to God; who is totus actus, all act, yea actus purissimus et
perfectissimus, the most pure and perfect act: therefore no imperfect wishes and
desires belong to him.

3. If God by his antecedent will does seriously and heartily desire the
salvation of all men, when some of these come to be damned, then this desire
either still continues in him or not: If it does not continue, then his will is
changeable, but he says of himself, I am the Lord, I change not, Mal. 3.6.
besides they make this antecedent will whereby he wills the salvation of all to
flow from his nature; and being natural to him, it must be unchangeable as his
nature is: If it does continue, then God continues earnestly to desire the
salvation of wicked men, when they are damned; so never has his desire
accomplished, which cannot stand with perfect felicity: yea if it does
continue, then God does seriously will their salvation and damnation at one
time, and so wills a flat contradiction: or else when he damns men, he does not
will to damn them; and so his actions are not guided by his will.

4. If he does will their Salvation, why does he not work it, for he is in
heaven, and does whatsoever he will? he works all things according to the
pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.11.

convenienti modo, after a fit manner.

convenienti modo; for he can change men's hearts, and heal their rebellions;
and look as he works the Salvation of some, convenienti modo; so he can work
the salvation of others also: he can give effectual grace, as well as
sufficient to all, if he please.





1. In the examples of Jacob and Esau, the Apostle excludes not only good
works, but evil works, and both these upon the same ground, that both showing
mercy, and hardening might be referred to Gods free will and pleasure, as to
their first original: And how ever these two, when they were in their mothers
womb, were stained with original sin; yet here they are brought in by the
Apostle in the same manner that Melchisedec, Heb. 7. is brought in, without
father or mother, though he had both father and mother, yet there he is
considered as being without them: so here Jacob and Esau are considered as
having done neither good nor evil; when the divine Oracle was pronounced of
loving the one, and hating the other: yea the Apostle speaks of these as things
which began not then, but long time before, it being said Jacob have I loved,
and Esau have I hated.

2. Conditions can no more agree with Gods decree of reprobation then of
Election; because necessary conditions have the nature of causes and means of
preparation, and so cannot stand with the decree of God, which is absolute,
independent, and from all Eternity; and therefore can have nothing go before it.

3. God cannot foresee the fall as a thing that certainly shall be, till he
has decreed to permit it: now as the foresight of the fall presupposes a
decree of permitting this fall; so also this decree of permission must
presuppose some end for which the Lord would permit it: and what can this be
but the manifestation of his greatest glory in the free salvation of some, and
just damnation of others? so that in order of nature, the purpose of this must
go before the purpose of permitting the fall, or the foresight of it.

4. The foresight of man's fall, presupposes the decree of man's creation: if
therefore the foresight of the fall goes before the decree of Election and
reprobation; either God should decree to make man to no end, or to some other
end then he at last comes to, and so should fail of his end.







does good to the creature, then the last end of Gods work in creating, should
be the creature, not himself: which is contrary to that which Solomon says,
that the Lord does all things for his own sake, Prove. 16.4. and contrary to the
course of every artificer, who makes not his work, but himself the end of his
action, as the manifestation of his skill, ability, and the like: so as may
tend to his praise and commendation. No man builds a house for the house sake,
but for his own sake. The end of every agent in working is his own good, in
one kind or other; and the desire of this, is the moving cause of his work.

2. The conservation of the creature, (which is a continued creation) has the
same end with creation; but how can this be said to be done, to the praise of
his abundant goodness to some creatures? Are the devils reserved in chains of
darkness, for the praise of his abundant goodness toward them?

3. If the manifestation of his power and goodness, be the last end of
creation, then God has attained his last end, so soon as ever man was created;
for then he had showed forth his abundant power and goodness: and then God had
showed the same goodness both in the elect and reprobate, both equally
partaking of the benefits of Creation.

4. If by goodness be understood the manifestation of his own goodness (as
it must needs be) this is the manifestation of his glorious attributes: so the
Lord tells Moses, that he would cause all his good to go before him, he would
proclaim his name before him, Exodus 33.19. especially the manifestation of
those attributes, whereby he comes at length to have his greatest glory, which
are his justice and mercy.

Lastly, If therefore the foresight of sin must go before the decree of
reprobation, because sin goes before condemnation, (which seems to be the
chief, if not the only ground of the necessity of such foresight) by the same
reason, the foresight of repentance and good works, must go before election,
because these go before Salvation.

Objections of the Arminians, whereby they seek to prove that election is out
of the foresight of sin and faith.

Ephesians. 1.4. none are in Christ but believers, therefore the foresight of
believing goes before election.

God has appointed us not to wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ,
here Christ is made a cause foregoing our salvation, but not our election to
salvation.

2. We were in Christ, when God elected us, but not actually, but only
virtually: because at the same time, when God elected us, he purposed to set us
into Christ; for when he elected us to the end, he elected us also to the means.

3. By this reason, it might be proved, that not only faith, but our
effectual calling, regeneration, sanctification, and all other spiritual
blessings, go before our election; because we are blessed with all spiritual
blessings in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3.





2. This mercy, which at last God shows on the elect, is such a mercy, as
whereby not only original, but also all actual sins are pardoned, therefore
by this reason, the foresight of all actual sin must go before election as
well as the foresight of original sin.

3. Faith, repentance, and good works, go before the executing of mercy, and
bestowing of salvation; therefore by this reason, the foresight of these also
must go before the purpose of showing mercy.





1. Look in what order God does save men, in that order he decreed to save
them; but repentance and good works go before salvation, therefore they go
before the decree to salvation.

2. Or thus, Look in what order a man builds a house for habitatition, in that
order he purposed to build it; but the providing of timber and stone, go before
the building of his house; therefore the cousideration of these went before his
purpose and intent of making a house for his habitation.

Let the argument be put into a right form, and it will conclude nothing
contrary to the question, for then it will run in this manner. Look in what
order God brings men to salvation, in that order he purposed to bring them to
salvation; but in bringing them to salvation, he causes faith to go before
their salvation; therefore in his decree of salvation, he purposed that faith
should go before their salvation: Here all may be granted without prejudice to
the Question.



non entis nulla est confideratio, must be understood of such things, as have
neither actual nor possible being.





1. No man can deny that the death of Christ was decreed of God, for Saint
Peter says, that he was delivered to death, by the determinate counsel of
God, Act. 2.23. yet Christ dyed freely for he says of himself, that he laid
down his life, yea, he laid it down freely, when no man had power to take it
from him, Joh. 10.17, 18. besides, if Christ's death were not voluntary, it
could not be meritorious, not being an act of obedience.

2. Our faith, repentance, obedience, and such good works, as by grace we are
enabled to perform, are voluntary actions, such as we are not carried unto,
either by any natural or violent necessity; yet these are decreed of God, who
has elected us unto faith and sanctification, as well as unto life, 2 Thessalonians.
2.13. as before has been showed.

3. All our natural actions and motions are voluntary, yet to deny that these
are decreed of God, were to deny a special part of his providence; for in him,
we not only live, but moove. Act. 17.28. God directs man's steps, Prove. 16.9.
and look what he does in time, he has determined to do before all time.

4. Man's days are determined, and God has appointed his bounds, that he
cannot pass; yet many men come to their ends, by as contingent means as may
be: as by the iron of the Axe, slipping from the helve, Deuteronomy. 19.8. and many
other the like.

Secondly, Gods decree is, actio ad intra, an action within himself: one of
those immanent actions of which the rule is, that they do nihil ponere in
objecte, they put nothing at all into the object, about which they are
conversant. Gods decree alone, (being an act within himself) works nothing
upon the creature, till it comes to execution, till in some degree or other, he
does put forth his purpose by some outward action. Unless therefore it can be
showed how God in the execution of the decree, by some outward action upon man,
does necessitate man's will, his decree alone will never enforce any necessity
upon it, or on the actions which proceed from it.

Thirdly, The decree of God, is so far from taking away the liberty of the
second causes, as it stablisheth and strengthens them in their liberty: for he
determines not only rem ipsam, sed modum rei, not only the thing or event it
self, but the manner of it; he determines that some things shall come to
pass necessarily, some things freely; and that necessary things shall be
effected by necessary causes, contingent things, by contingent causes: All
entityes and beings, are from God, with all the adjuncts and properties that
belong to them; and he works in all things, according to the nature of the
things: and therefore in natural agents, he causes things to come to pass
necessarily; in contingent and free agents, he causes them to come to pass
contingently: so that though Gods will determines man's will, yet it
derermineth it to work deliberately and freely, according to its own nature;
therefore his will does no way weaken, but strengthen man's will in a free
manner of working.



^^^essario modo et necessariis mediis, in a necessary manner, or by such means
as work necessarily, not freely; as in all man's speeches and actions that
proceed most freely from him: when a thing is once done, it is necessary it
should be done, (because a thing cannot be done and undone both at one time)
yet it follows not, that it was done necessarily, because in the doing, and
afterward, there remains a power, quality, and disposition in the agent, or
second cause, whereby it might have been done otherwise: for instance, God
having decreed, that not a bone of Christ should be broken, it was necessary
that this should come to pass, and that Christ's legs should be preserved from
breaking, when theirs were broken, who were crucified with him; but yet this
came not to pass necessarily, for both Christ's bones were in their own nature
fragilia, talia quae frangi possunt, such as might be broken, as also the
soldiers did abstain freely, not necessarily from breaking of them.



fast linking together of the second causes: but that when they work one way,
there is a power and disposition in them to work another way: and thus there
was a power in the soldiers to have broken Christ's legs, when they let them
alone; yet upon supposition of the divine decree, which cannot be frustrated,
it is necessary that such or such things should be effected as God has
determined. But as the power of God, whereby he is able to change the nature of
the thing, does not take away the necessity, which it receives from the second
causes; so likewise the will of God, whereby he has determined the event one
way, does not take away the contingency, which it receives from the second
causes, nor their liberty in working. But to speak properly, effects have the
denomination of necessity and contingency, not as they have reference to the
first cause, but to the second: for in regard of God, all things that come to
pass, may be said to be both necessary and contingent: necessary upon
supposition of his decree, contingent as his decree was an act of his will, and
therefore free. The creation of the world upon supposition of Gods decree, must
needs be effected: but both the creation it self, as also the decree of the
creation, are no necessary but free acts, arising from the liberty of will, not
necessity of nature.

4. The praescience of God (upon the former ground) does infer a necessity as
well as his decree; for as it is not possible that Gods will should be
frustrated, so neither that his praescience should be deceived; therefore the
thing must necessarily come to pass, according to Gods foreknowledge of it,
else he might be deceived in his knowledge; and so his knowledge were not a
true knowledge. Arminians therefore must either hold that God had no certain
foreknowledge of man's fall, or else that he fell necessarily by this kind of
necessity, namely, the necessity of supposition or of consequence: and so their
argument drawn from necessity, against the liberty of man's will, will have as
much force against themselves, as against their adversaries. This objection
has been the longer insisted upon, because it is one of the Arminians strong
holds.



Adams fall, that he is the author of it, because he has not decreed to work
it, but only to permit it: that God decreed to permit the fall, is plain;
because otherwise, it could not have come to pass, for nothing can come to
pass against Gods will. And none can deny that God could hinder the fall if he
would: If therefore he would not hinder it, he was willing it should be. And
the Arminians themselves grant that God gave to man sufficient grace, but not
effectual, for then he had actually stood: now if he did deny him effectual
grace (without which he saw certainly that he would fall being tempted) to what
end or purpose did he deny him this effectual grace, but that by permitting of
his fall, he might make way for the manifestation of his justice and mercy?

2. In man's first transgression, by eating the forbidden fruit, (as in all
other sinful acts) there was natures work, and so Gods work; for though the
deformity was from man; yet the act it self was from God, in whom we live and
move; and what God does in time, he has determined to do before all time,
therefore the fall must needs be decreed.





modo ipsi velint, so they themselves will do this or that.

upon condition that man did will to eat, yet upon what condition did he decree
to concur with him in this act of his will? if it shall be said on this
condition, if man himself would; it may as well be said, that God did decree
to make man eat, so be it that he hid eat: what need he to concur with him in
the act of his will, when man willed the thing already?

3. It follows no more that God is the author of sin by decreeing this sin,
then by decreeing other sins: now it is plain, that he decreed the death of
Christ; for its said, that Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the people were gathered
to gether, to do whatsoever his hand and counsel had determined, should be
done against Christ, Act, 4.27, 28. therefore the crucifying of Christ was
determined and decreed of God, and what greater wickedness then those things
which Herod, Pilate, and the Jews did against Christ?



he would harden Pharoahs heart, Exodus 7.3. and that he had hardened it, (10.1.)
He threatens to David, that what David had done in secret he would do in the
sight of the sun, speakeing of Absoloms sin with his fathers Concubines, 2 Samuel 12.12. compared with 16.12. and he gave up the Gentiles to vile
affections, Romans 1.28. and many other like expressions, whereby it appears,
that there was more then a bare permission in the committing of these sins;
yet it follows not hence that God is the author of sin.



Because he works in a diverse manner. where there is no law, there is no
transgression, Romans 4.15. and that when the Commandment came sin revived; Romans
7.9. yea the Gospel it self is the savor to death to some, 2 Cor. 2.16. yet
here neither Law nor Gospel are faulty causes of these things; because they
are only causes by accident, and do not (per se) in themselves, and their own
nature tend to these ends but to the contrary; the law tends to keep men from
sin, and the Gospel to bring life, though by accident they work sin and
death: God hardened Pharaohs heart not by instilling any hardness into it, but
by giving Pharaoh a charge and command to let his people go: the command was
good, and in it self tended to a good end, namely to make Pharaoh yield
obedience and do his duty; and it was good in God to propound this command, and
yet by accident it did irritate and stir up the stubbornnes and rebellion of
Pharaohs heart, so as he was hardened more then before. He that stops a running
stream, hereby causes the water to rise higher, not by putting any more water
to it, but by stopping the course of that which runs already: A Physician by
prescribing wholesome Physic to a distempered body, may cause greater sickness,
yea sometimes death; yet here neither physic nor Physician are justly to be
blamed. The Sun by the same beams raises a sweet smell from a Garden, and an
ill smell from a dunghill, yet no fault in the Sun: He that in felling of Wood
by the slipping of the iron from the helve, should slay his Neighbor, Deuteronomy.
19.5. was the cause of his Neighbors death, but not a faulty cause, because
only a cause by accident not intending it: but man is causaper se of the sin he
commits.

2. Because man works to a diverse end. For God wrought with Jacobs sons in
selling their brother into Egypt, for its said that he sent a man before them,
Psalm. 105.17. but he had another end in it then they had, they did it out of
envy, to avenge themselves of their brother: but he out of love for the
advancing of Joseph, and preservation of his father and brethren: Ashur was
Gods Axe and Saw, Esa. 10.5. therefore wrought not alone without a hand guiding
him, yet he aimed at destruction; God at correction: Therefore it is said that
Ashur was Gods rod, yet he thought not so, but imagines to destroy and cut off
Nations, Esa. 10.7. God oftentimes punishes one sin with another, thus
Arminius himself confesses, that God permitted Ahab to murder Naboth that so
he might fulfill the measure of his sins, which is the most grievous punishment:
but to punish, is an act of justice. Therefore here God did so permit, as
withal he did work.

3. There is no Law to tie God from the permitting of sia, and from working
with man in the same action which man does sinfully; for if there were, then no
sin at all should be committed, for man is bound not only not to commit it,
but not to permit it, if it be in his power to hinder it: by which law if God
himself were bound, there should never any sin at all be committed: therefore it
is no good Argument to reason from man to God in those things which man does
sinfully; he not being subject to the same law.



Pharaohs heart, but in another manner then Pharaoh did: he sent Joseph into
Egypt, but to another end then his brethren did: he punished Israel by Ashur,
but to another end then Ashur did it: He delivered his Son to be crucified,
but to another end then the wicked Jews did it.

causa causae est causa causati, the cause of a cause, is the cause of the
effect also which arises from that cause, and removens, prohibens, etc. that
which withholds or takes away a thing which being present would hinder an
event, is the cause of that event; as he that with-draweth a Pillar from a
House that is ready to fall without it, is the cause of the fall of that House:
but the want of supernatural grace, and of that power which being granted
would keep men from falling into sin, is the cause of their falling into sin;
and God is the cause of this want, who denies to reprobates this supernatural
grace, and withholds this power whereby they should be kept from falling into
sin; therefore he is a true and proper cause of their sin.

Adam in the first Creation power whereby he might have stood, he gave him posse
si vellet (as Divines speak) for he created him in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. which habitual righteousness was a power whereby the
faculties of his soul were fitted to work according to the rule of
righteousness, both by abstaining from evil, and doing of good: and in Adam
he gave this to all his posterity who were in the same covenant with him.

2. Man did willingly lose this power and habitual righteousness which God gave
him in the first Creation; God did not so take it away from him, but he himself
also cast it away: yea God withdrew no thing which he had bestowed on him, till
man had merited such withdrawing. Had God taken away original righteousness
from man against his will, or without his desert; then might there have been
some show of injustice, but there was no such matter: for God had made man
righteous, but he found out many inventions, Ecclesiastes 7. last.

Adams sin rests not only on himself, but his posterity also; and why they are
deprived of that original righteousness which was bestowed on him.

Adams will, which willingly yielded to that sin, which was the meritorious
cause of the punishment that came both on himself, and his posterity; which
punishment was justly inflicted not only on himself, but his posterity; because
they being in his loins were to be considered as a part of himself, and he
being the head of mankind, both might and did enter into such a covenant with
God as should bind not only himself, but all those which should arise from him:
Hence it is that the Apostle says, that by one man sin entered into the World,
and death by sin, and so death passed over all men, for that all bad sinned,
Romans 5.12. all men had sinned in that sin of one man; and therefore death came
justly on all men: and further it is said, by the offense of one, judgment came
on all to condemnation.





That the foresight of sin is not the cause of reprobation is thus proved.

1. No temporal thing can be the cause of that which is Eternal, but sin is a
temporal thing, (there being no sin before the world was) and the decree of
God is Eternal.

2. The foresight of sin is no more efficacious to move God to appoint some to
be vessels of wrath, then the foresight of good works is to move him to appoint
others to be vessels of mercy, (God being in his own nature no less prone to
show forth mercy by bestowing reward, then to show his justice by punishing)
but the foresight of good works is not the cause of Election.

3. How can the foresight of sin be the cause of reprobation, when as the
foresight presupposes a decree of permitting sin? (for as sin cannot be
unless God permits it to be, so he cannot foresee it shall be, unless he had
decreed this permission) this decree to permit sin presupposes an end for
which God permits it, (which can be no other then the glorifying of his justice
in the just condemnation of some men) and that being the end, must needs in
order of nature go before the means that tend to it: therefore the decree of
reprobation must needs go before the decree of permitting sin to be, without
which there can be no foresight of it; besides, what is first in Gods intention
(if we speak of the last ends) must be last in execution: therefore if the
decree of permiting sin shall go before Gods decree of glorifying himself in
the just condemnation of some men for sin, then this should be last in
execution; and so God should first bring condemnation upon men for sin, and
afterward permit them to sin; which is so absurd as all will readily reject it.

2. The doctrine, which makes the foresight of the fall, yea of all actual
sins to go before the decree of reprobation will not clear God from all
appearance of cruelty and hard dealing with man, no more then the doctrine of
the absolute decree: for if God did certainly foresee that having created man,
and placed him in such or such a condition that being left to himself without a
new supply of effectual grace, he would certainly fall and commit such sins as
would certainly bring upon him eternal damnation and destruction; if he did
foresee that his Son being offered to him, he would certainly reject and
refuse him, and persist in doing so to the end, why did he not prevent this?
why did he not keep men from falling at all, or not raise them up when they
were fallen by bestowing such effectual grace upon them whereby they should
have laid hold of Christ, and persevered in doing this to the end? since God
could have done this, yea have done it without any wrong to his justice, as
well for all, as for some; if he bears such love to all, as he earnestly,
heartily, and inwardly desires they should be saved; why does he not procure
their salvation, since he is able to do it? if he be so tender hearted that he
cannot endure their destruction, why does he not keep them from it, since he is
able to do it?



convenienti modo, and that in all as well as in some; if therefore he does
alike desire the salvation of all, why does he not deal with all alike, and
bestow the like effectual grace upon all? Here the Arminians can give no
sufficient answer to maintain the equality of Gods love to all; unless that
they say he gives like grace to all, but one man's will makes this effectual,
which another does not.

I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, Ezekiel 33.11. that he would
have none to perish, 2 Peter 3.9.



1. The will of his command may be resisted, the will of ^^^^decree cannot be
resisted, Romans 9.

2. The will of his command is mutable (as were all the commands about the
ceremonial law) the will of his decree is immutable.

3. His commands are given forth in time, whereas his decrees are from all
eternity.

4. His commands may be contrary one to the other (as he gave command to
Abraham first to kill, then not to kill his son) whereas his decrees are never
contrary one to another.

5. The will of his command is an effect that arises from him, it is something
that he puts forth out of himself, but the will of his decree is the same with
himself; for take will properly, and then velle, agere, and esse, are all one
in God.

To apply this to the present purpose; the will of God in these and the like
places is not to be understood of the will of his decree, but of the will of
his command; he may be said not to will, desire, or delight in the death of a
sinner, because he commands and injoyns every man to do that which would keep
him from death, and certainly bring him to life, were it observed, oftimes,
though not always, (as in the example of Abraham's killing his son) the will of
his command is an effect of his internal will; and therefore by a metonimy is
called by the same name.

2. Sometimes will and affections are attributed to God in Scripture per modum
actionis, in regard of his actions, as he is said to repent, not because he
changes his mind, but because he changes his actions, as a repenting man is
wont to do: so he is said to will or desire such or such a thing, because he so
carries himself in his actions as one that desires a thing should be; his
actions are such as are fit to bring forth such an effect.

Thus likewise he may be said not to will the death of a sinner, or the death
of him that dies, because his carriage toward them, and all his actions and
dealings with them are such as are fit to preserve them from death and
destruction, and to bring them to life and safety; his goodness, forbearance,
and long suffering lead to repentance; his judgments are upon the Earth that
the Inhabitants of the World might learn Righteousness, much more do his Word
and Ordinances immediately tend to life.

That in this and the like places the will of God is not to be taken properly,
for the will of his decree or good pleasure, appears; because this is always
fulfilled, what he wills he works: Our God is in heaven, and does whatsoever he
will, Psalm. 115.3. whatsoever pleased the Lord that did he in heaven and in
earth, Psalm. 135.6. where will (properly taken) and power concur, there
effect must needs follow, and so no sinner should die. When the Scripture
mentions two things of God which cannot stand together, as that he does repent,
and that he cannot repent, 1. Sam. 15.11.29. that he wills not the death of a
sinner, Ezekiel. 33.11. and that the Lord hardens whom he will, Romans 9.18. we are
to look which of these agrees with the nature of God, and this is to be taken
properly; the other figuratively: now it well agrees with the nature of God to
effect his own end and purpose; when therefore it is said, that he does not
will or desire the death of him that dies, this is not to be taken properly,
but figuratively; because to will and not to will cannot both agree to God
being taken in the same sense; for no man dies, but God inflicts this death
upon him, and he cannot be said to do this either besides or against his will.



the Lord has made the wicked for the day of evil, Prove. 16.4. and S. Peter
calls wicked men brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed, 2. Pet. 2.12.



Romans 9.19. it will be fittest to answer in his words. What art thou O man that
disputest with God, shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have
thou made me thus? If we should not be able in some things to give a reason of
Gods Justice in doing them; shall we deny that which the whole course of
Scripture, the nature of God, and the things themselves do plainly evince to be
so? namely that nothing comes to pass, especially the greatest things, such as
are the eternal salvation and destruction of men whereby God receives his
greatest glory, but God has a hand in it, and what he does in time, he has
determined and decreed before all times, and that this decree being actio ad
intra, an action within himself, and so not really differing from his Essence,
is so absolute, independent, and eternal, that it can have no causes, motives,
respects, considerations, or any other-like, going before it: that as God
himself is absolute primum, so are all his coun sels and decrees, so that he
cannot take or borrow as it were the idaea and plot of these from any other
thing, but they all arise immediately from himself.

If the doctrine of the absolute decree seems not so plausible to humane sense,
or carnal reason; yet in the deepest mysteries of Religion (as these are) we
are not to measure things by our natural apprehensions, and seek to square
them to our carnal conceits, but to follow only the sacred rule of Truth laid
down in Scripture, which when there is mention of these things cries out, O
altitude, O the depth of wisdom and knowledge of God! his wisdom is
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33. What we cannot
apprehend, we ought with reverence to admire and adore.

An Examination and Confutation of the Arminian erroneous Tenets concerning
REDEMPTION.
IN the Article of Redemption, these two things principally are questioned:

1. Whether the proper effect of Christ's death and passion be man's redemption,
as pardon of sin, reconciliation with God, etc. so that Christ died to purchase
these things actually for those for whom he died; or only to purchase a
possibility or liberty for God to save sinful man.

2. Whether Christ by his death has purchased, or obtained these things for
every particular man or not, or there be some for whom Christ has not died in
this sense.

For the first, it is denied by the Arminians, who affirm that actual
redemption, remission of sin, justification of such or such men, Immediata
mortis Christi effectio non est actualis peccaorum remissio, horum aut illorum
redemptio, sed redemptionis apud Deum impetratio, qua factum est, ut Deusiam
possit, utpote iustitia, cui satisfactum est, non obstante, homnibus
peccatoribus peccata remittere et spititum sanctum largiri. Armin. in Perk.
page 75.76.
was not the proper and immediate effect of Christ's death, but only such an
obtaining of redemption at the hands of God, whereby he may notwithstanding his
justice (which is now satisfied) bestow remission of sin and the spirit of
grace upon sinful men: by which it appears, that they would have the effect
of Christ's death to be, not the actual redemption of any man, but only the
purchase of a liberty or possibility for God to redeem and save whom he
pleased; but how unsound this is, may appear by these things.

1. Hence it follows, that the eternal damnation of all mankind may stand
with the death of Christ, and that though Christ has dyed for man's salvation,
yet it may so fall out, as no man shall be saved; for he has purchased not an
actual, but only a possible redemption, and it is not necessary, that a thing
only possible should ever come to be effected; besides, as some reject Christ,
so may all men do notwithstanding this possible redemption, and so none be
saved: which how injurious it is to the infinite merit and excellency of
Christ's death all may easily see.

2. Hence it follows, that Christ has no more redeemed man in one kind, then
God himself in another: for as he has redeemed man no otherway, then that by
the virtue of his death, he has procured that they may be redeemed; so in like
manner, thus far he may be said to have redeemed God himself, because by the
virtue of his death, he has procured that God may redeem them: which is wholly
contrary to the phrase of Scripture, which every where tells us that we are
redeemed not with corruptible things, but with the precious blood of Christ, 1
Pet. 1.18. that while we were enemies Christ dyed for us, Romans 5.9. that he was
wounded for our iniquities, and broken for our transgressions, Esa. 53.4. but
says no where that God was redeemed, or that Christ dyed for him.

3. If the immediate and proper essect of Christ's death was only a possible
redemption or reconciliation, then Christ did by his death very little advance
and set forward the work of man's redemption and salvation, because he effected
no more then what might have been done without it: for before Christ dyed, it
was possible for God to redeem man, to grant him pardon of sin, and other like
benefits, by what means himself should think fit, and amongst the rest, by
this means, namely, the death of his son: so that if no more be effected
afterward by the death of Christ, then only a possibility to do this, then
this most glorious work should vanish away almost into nothing; there being
nothing more done by it, then was done before, namely, a possibility procured
to do that which before was possible to be done; and thus God can be said no
more to pardon men's sins for Christ's sake, then to make many worlds for his
own sake, for he has power and liberty to do this when he will.

4. Then Christ's merits should be of less value and worth then man's merits,
for when man meriteth any thing for himself, he meriteth that the thing should
be actually bestowed on him, and not that there should be a possibility only
for it to be bestowed.

5. Hence it would follow, that neither God nor man were the immediate objects
of Christ's merits, but rather faith and repentance, that honor might be done
to those graces above others, in that they be made the conditions, whereto not
only salvation, but also redemption, election, and all should be fastened.

Arminians answer affirmatively, Si mors Christi non est (...) oblatum et
solutum pro omnibus, non est (...) nedum sufficiens pro omnibus. Arm. in Perk.
p. 68. Christum omnibus peccatorum remissionem impetrasse, nostra sententia
est. Colla. Hagiens. p. 172.
who hold not only that Christ's death is in it self a price sufficient for
the redemption of all, but also that this was paid and offered for all alike,
without any difference, either of elect or not elect, believers or unbelievers:
And that Christ by his death has impetrated remission of sins, and other
benefits of redemption for all and every one.

That this opinion is not agreeable to truth, appears by these reasons.

If Christ has paid the price of redemption for all, then all men shall be
saved; for the end of redemption is salvation.



Christ by his death has impetrated, is either an actual and effectual
redemption, or a possible and ineffectuall redemption only.

1. If he has obtained only a possible and ineffectuall redemption, this has
been overthrown by the former arguments.

Besides, if the redemption purchased be an ineffectuall redemption, how comes
it to be made effectual? if it shall be said by application, and then it
becomes effectual when it is applied; against this it may further be replied,
how can we apply that which is not? we can apply no other redemption then what
Christ has purchased: if therefore he has purchased only an ineffectuall
redemption, for our application does not change the nature of the thing, or
make it other then it was.

2. How can we be effectualy redeemed, by applying to our selves an
ineffectuall redemption? how can the partaking of an ineffectuall redemption,
effectually bring salvation to us.

Secondly, If Christ has obtained actual redemption for all, then likewise he
has obtained actual remission of sins for all, (for remission of sins,
justification, reconciliation, redemption, are all one, not only in Scripture
phrase, but also by Arminius his own acknowledgement page 76. in Perk.) if he
has obtained remission of sins for all, why are not their sins remitted?
How can it be said, that remission is obtained for that sin that never shall
be remitted? How can Christ be said to obtain those benefits for us, which we
have no benefit by; or that good for us, which we are never the better for? the
nature of the action, and right of relation requires, that those things be made
ours, and that we have the benefit of them, which Christ has obtained for us:
For what ever Christ by his death has purchased for us, that we have a right
unto; and that cannot justly be withheld from us: which may thus be proved in a
right form of argument. Their sins shall not be required of them, for whom
perfect satisfaction is made: But for whom Christ has dyed, he has made
perfect satisfaction, ergo, their sins shall not be required of them, for whom
Christ has dyed.

The second proposition is clear, the first is thus proved.

Their sins shall not be required of them, for whom satisfaction is accepted.

But for whom perfect satisfaction is made, divivine justice requires it should
be accepted.

Ergo, their sins shall not be required of them.

The second proposition cannot be denied, the first is thus proved.

The debt cannot justly be required of them, for whom it is fully paid.

But for whom perfect satisfaction is both made and accepted, the debt is fully
paid.

Ergo, the debt of sin shall not be required of them; or thus.

For whose sins Christ has satisfied, they cannot be punished (and that
everlastingly) for their sins, without injustice: But reprobates suffer
everlasting punishment for their sins, without injustice.

Ergo, Christ has not dyed or satisfied for their sins.

To which of these arguments or parts of them, will that distinction of
impetration and application be fitly applied, to take away the strength and
force of them? God cannot in justice require a double payment of the same debt,
and cause so many men to pay the utmost farthing in their own persons, by
suffering eternally in the place of torment, when Christ has already paid
their debt, and made full satisfaction, by suffering for them on the Cross;
for whether Christ has merited forgiveness of sins for us, by the dignity
of the work and worthiness of his death and passion, or by the constitution
and appointment of God the father, it is certain that God cannot in justice
withhold from us, that which Christ by his death has purchased for us: Besides
all those for whom Christ has dyed, shall receive the adoption of sons, Gal.
4.4. but all do not receive the adoption of sons: ergo, Christ has not paid
the price of redemption for all.

3. Application arises from impetration, as a necessary consequent or effect
of it; therefore for whom ever Christ has obtained redemption, the benefit of
redemption shall in due time be applied unto them; not only because
forgiveness of sin is due where satisfaction is made, but also because the
death of Christ is meritorious as well as satisfactory: Christ by his death and
obedience, has merited salvation, with all that belongs to it; he has merited
both grace and glory for those for whom he died: and among other graces, he
has merited faith, repentance, and what else is needfulll for the application
of Christ.

The Apostle says, that God the father has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in and through Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. and Saint Peter says, that through
the knowledge of Christ all things are given to us, that pertain to life and
godliness, 2 pet. 1.3. now faith, repentance, or any other graces needful for
applying of Christ, are amongst the number of spiritual blessings, and such
things as pertain to life and godliness: and of these graces in particular it
is said, that it is given us for Christ to believe* Phil. 1.29. Unde nobis
fides conting it^ annon dono spiritus quem Christus pro nobis promemeruit Arm.
in Perk p. 188.
Ana that he is a Savior to give repentance to his people, Act. 5.31. Arminius
himself acknowledges that faith comes to us by the gift or working of the
spirit, and that Christ has purchased this spirit for us; whence it follows.

1. That all those for whom Christ has obtained redemption, shall have this
redemption applied to them; because for them he has purchased the Spirit,
which spirit works faith, the work of which faith is to apply Christ.

2. That Christ has not dyed for all, because he has not purchased the spirit
for all; for all are not made partakers of the spirit as they should be, if
Christ had purchased it for them.



he has loved his Church, and given himself for it, to sanctify it, Ephesians.
5.25. and that he is made of God unto us sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. now true sanctification takes away the power and dominion of sin, so as
it shall not reign in our mortal bodies: yea, of all sin, therefore of
those sins which hinder us from receiving of Christ; as infidelity,
impenitence, hardness of heart, or any other the like. It is said, that our
old man was crucified together with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, Romans 6.6. that he has redeemed us from all iniquity, Tit. 2.14.
that he has delivered us from the hands or power of all our enemies, Luke
1.75. not only Satan and the world are our enemies, but most of all, our
sins; and principally those things which most hinder us from partaking of the
benefit of redemption; as our natural infidelity, rebellion of will, hardness
of heart and the like: It cannot stand with the nature and work of a perfect
redeemer, to deliver us from some enemies, to free us from some sins, and
leave us to quit our selves from the rest; therefore these things are among the
number of those things Christ came to deliver us from, being parts of that old
man, and that body of sin which he came to destroy; and we being delivered
from the power of these, and the strength of these, as all other sins being
destroyed in us, they shall not hinder us from receiving the benefits of
redemption, when they are offered to us.

2. Though the proferre of Salvation be conditional, yet the purchase of it is
not conditional, but absolute: for Christ has absolutely purchased salvation
for his sheep, for whom he has laid down his life; unto these he will give
eternal life, Joh. 10.27. This salvation shall be bestowed on them, when they
believe and repent; therefore it is offered to them upon the conditions of
faith and repentance, but both salvation it self, as also faith and repentance
were absolutely purchased for them; and therefore in due time they shall
receive them.

3. Suppose that Christ has purchased salvation upon condition; yet upon what
condition has he purchased sanctification? upon what condition has he
purchased faith and repentance? when these are promised as branches of the new
Covenant, what condition is mentioned? does not the Lord absolutely promise to
his people, that he would sprinkle clean water upon them, and cleanse them
from all their filthiness? that he would put a new heart and a new spirit into
them? that he would take away their stony heart, and put into them a heart of
flesh, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. Is not here a promise of sanctification, with the
graces belonging to it, without any condition?

4. Suppose that we should conceive of some work of preparation, and pravious
disposition, upon condition whereof, promise is made of giving faith and
repentance, and yet he has purchased these conditions likewise, or any other
thing that may go before these, and so if we shall go in infinitum; for through
him are given us all things pertaining to life and godliness.



because in the work of redemption, whereby Christ paid a price for us, he has
also purchased that spirit, and those graces for us, (as has been showed)
whereby we shall certainly make application in due time; for it not being
possible that Christ should die in vain, he must needs take order, that his
death may be applied to those for whom he has suffered death, that so they may
have the benefit of it; for this purpose, as he has purchased his spirit for
them, so he sends it to them in his appointed time, as he has promised; even
that spirit of truth which the world cannot receive, Joh. 14.17. those that
receive not this spirit of Christ first or last, are none of Christ's, Romans 8.9.
If they be none of his, he never dyed for them: for those for whom he dyed, are
his own, both by the gift of his father, Joh. 17.6. as also by his own
purchase, 1 Cor. 6.20. ye are not your own, ye are bought with a price; whence
arises this argument: those who are never made partakers of Christ's spirit,
are none of his; if none of his, he never dyed for them: But all are not made
partakers of Christ's Spirit: Ergo he never dyed for all.

Christ is so skillful and careful a Physician, as he has not only provided
a sovereign medicine for us, but also applies it unto us, (if we be his) else
he should provide it to no purpose; we being not only extreme sick and weak,
but also dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.5. and therefore as unable to
apply it to our selves, as a dead man to take a potion, that is ready tempered
for him, until Christ quickens us, by putting his spirit into us: the Apostle
says, that we are quickened in and by Christ, and that we are saved by grace,
Ephesians. 2.5.8. this must needs be such a grace as Christ has purchased for us,
but the purchase of this grace only, will neither quicken nor save us, unless
it be applied and given to us: therefore for whom he has purchased grace, to
them he applies it.

Joh. 15.13. But he has not showed greatest love to all.

Ergo he has not dyed for all.

If Christ has dyed for all, then has he showed as great love to Pilate and
Judas, as to Peter and John, to Kain and Pharaoh, as to Abraham and David: to
the reprobates in hell, as to the Saints in heaven, which is fearful to
think. The Apostle makes Christ's special and peculiar love, belonging to his
Church only; for he bids husbands love their wives, as Christ loved his
Church, Ephesians. 5.25. but husbands are to love their wives with a peculiar love
above others: for a man must leave father and mother, and cleave to his wife.
If here shall be said, that the greatest love of al is not only to merit
salvation, but to bestow it; for answer of this, it is plain by Christ's words,
that the greatest act of love is to merit salvation: by laying down his life,
and where he has performed this act of love, he will perform the other in
giving salvation. However if they never be saved, it stands firm, that he has
performed an act of greatest love for them. Una est dilectio quae nostram fidem
praecedit: altera quae fidem nostram et dilectionem erga Deum subsequitu^.
Coll. Hagiens. p. 194.
Or if it shall be answered, by distiguishing betwixt the antecedent and
consequent love of Christ, and saying, that the purchase of salvation is an act
of antecedent love, and the giving of salvation an act of consequent love,
which is the greatest, neither will this stand with Christ's speech, for what
ever kind of love it is that caused Christ to give himself to death, it is
the greatest, because greater love then this has no man, to lay down his life
for his friend: besides, the Apostle comparing these two loves together, the
love which goes before justification, and that which follows, makes that which
goes before to be the greater, Romans 5.8, 10. God sets out his love toward
us, that while we were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, much more then being
justified by his blood shall we be saved from wrath: for if when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. That love whereby Christ loves men
before they were believers, and whereby he loves them after, are not two kinds
of loves, but one and the same love, of which the first is the greater, both by
the comparison of the Apostle, as also because in manifestation it is the cause
of the Second.

John 17.9. I pray not for the world, but for those whom thou have given me out
of the world: The World here is opposed to those who are given to Christ of the
Father, and for this World he prays not: now for whom he will make no
intercession, for those he has made no satisfaction; for both of these are
parts of the same perfect Sacrifice of Christ, and therefore unseparably joined
together, John 17.19.20. and how do we think that Christ should refuse to pour
out a prayer for them, for whom he has powered forth his blood; it being an act
of greatest love to lay down his life (as has been showed) and where he has
done the greater, he will do the lesser.

Arminians answer by distinguishing of Christ's intercession, for they make a
double intercession, one common to all, Collat. Hagiens. page 198. Corvin.
contra Molin. cap. 27. part 7.
whereby Christ prays that they may believe, repent, etc. Luke 23.34 the other
proper to the faithful, whereby he prays that they may be saved, that they
may be one, etc. Ioh. 17.20.



2. For that place, Luke 23.34. where Christ prayed for his persecutors, it may
be answered:

1. That he made that prayer as a man subject to the Law, as he yielded
subjection and perfect obedience to the Law in all other things, so in this,
that he would pray for his enemies; and in the act of suffering, seek mercy for
those who were instruments of his suffering, Mark. 5.44. teaching us both by
precept and example what we ought to do.

2. If he made this prayer as a Mediator, yet it will not follow that Christ
made this prayer for all, and every one of those that crucified him: but only
for those who did it of ignorance, and whose sins afterward were remitted, Acts
3.17.2.37. because Christ is always heard in what he prays for, Ioh. 11.42. and
he knowing what is in man, John 2.25. and that some of these had sinned that
sin for which prayer is not to be made, 1 John 5.16. It is not likely he
would pray for these.

3. If Christ desires and prays that all may repent and believe, then he
desires and prays also that all may be saved; for Salvation is the end whereto
faith tends, Ephesians. 2.8. we are saved by faith, 1 Peter 1.19. receiving the end
of your faith, even the salvation of your souls; and to what end should Christ
pray that men might have faith to believe, if he did not desire the salvation
of their souls?

4. If Christ make intercession for all that they may repent and believe, then
all should repent and believe; for he is heard in what he prays for, Ioh.
11.42.



this call, is to obey; and to obey the call or command of believing, what is
it else but to believe?

5. If Christ prays for all that they may believe, then he prays also that
they may have the means of Faith; and then all should enjoy the preaching of
the Gospel which they do not.

6. If Christ prays that all may believe, then he prays that this Faith may
be given for the merits of this passion or not: If not for the merits of his
passion then Faith should be given to men without the merits of Christ: If for
the merits of his passion, then he prays for it absolutely, and without
condition, because he died for all absolutely, and without condition according
to Arminians.

7. If Christ makes his special intercession for believers; it may be asked
when he begins to make this intercession? if so soon as they be believers, then
he makes intercession for some whose faith (according to the Arminians) does
fail, and afterward come to nothing: If for believers persevering in the faith
to the end; then it follows that Christ should not make intercession for the
Salvation of men before their going out of the world.

Romans 8.34. who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea or rather which
is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God and makes request for us.

Hence it follows; (1.) that for whom Christ died, for those also he rose
again, and for those he makes intercession now sitting at the right hand of
God, for the Apostle joins these together.

2. That those for whom he has done these things may truly say, that it is God
who justifies, who shall condemn us? but all cannot truly say thus:

Arminians answer, that men may say that Christ died for them two ways, (1.)
either before they believe, and so they may say that Christ died for them in
regard of impetration: (2.) after believing, and so he died for them, not only
in regard of impetration, but application also; and these only, not the other
can truly say who shall condemn? etc.



2. The scope of the Apostle in this place is to teach Christians to gather an
Argument of consolation to themselves against fear of condemnation, not from
application (which here he mentions not) but from the work of redemption; not
from the work that we have done in taking Christ, but the work which he has
done in giving himself for us: so that if we can truly say that Christ has
died for us, we may truly triumph against fear of condemnation, and say, who
shall condemn?

3. Ver 32. He who has not spared to give his own Son for us, how shall he
not with him give us all things also? this all things, must needs comprehend
all things needful for Salvation; if all things needful for Salvation, then
faith and repentance, for these are things needful for Salvation; and part of
those gifts which Christ has purchased, and when these are given to us we
shall certainly make application of Christ.

for these he sanctifies himself, Ioh. 17.19. (these) has relation to those
whom he had spoken of in the whole course of the Chapter, namely those whom the
Father had given him out of the world. Ver. 6. those for whom he prays, and
not for the world, verse. 9. those whom the world hated because he had chosen
them out of the world, ver. 14. for those Christ sanctifies himself, which
sanctifying himself is nothing else (by consent of best interpreters) but his
fitness and readiness to offer himself as a Sacrifice to make satisfaction
for them; the which thing is expressed in all those places where it is said,
that Christ died for many, Mat. 26.28. Heb. 9. last. Esaias 53.12. for his
sheep, Ioh. 10.13. Heb. 13.20. for his people, Mat. 1.21. Hebr. 2.17. for the
sons of God, Ioh. 11.51.52. for his Church, Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 5.25. for the
elect of God, Romans 8.33.34. what need the Spirit of God in so many places
have set forth the death of Christ with limitation and restraint, if he had
died for all, and every man alike, and without any exception?

Arminians answer, that they may all be understood, not of impetration (which
was made for all) but of real fruition which belongs only to the faithful.

things as Christ has done without us, which things were perfect in that very
moment when Christ had offered himself, though a great part of believers were
as then not yet borne.

[only] is not added, as that he laid down his life for his sheep only, etc.
and therefore he might do this for others also.

Arminius sometimes seems not willing to speak.

2. What needs the word only, be added since the words themselves carry with
them in their signification a sufficient force of restraint and separation, for
all are not the sheep of Christ, the people of God, the sons of God, etc. when
the blessing of Christ is promised to Abraham's seed, it is not said to his
only, Gal. 4.16. yet it is of the same force because it belongs only to the
faithful; when it is said that we are justified by faith, this is truly
understood of Faith alone, or Faith only; though it be no where so expressly
read in Scripture: for when it is not of Works but of Faith, it is all one as
if it had been said of Faith only: and when our Savior says that he prayed
not for the World, but for those whom the Father had given him out of the
world, it is all one as if he had said, that he had prayed for these only; so
when he said that he laid down his life for his sheey, it is as much as if he
had said, for these only. When Paul bids husbands love their wives, as Christ
does his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. some might as well except, that he bids them not
to love their wives only.

Paul says that Christ loved him and gave himself for him,this excludes not
others; so when Christ says, that he laid down his life for his sheep, this
excludes not others.

Paul as a man, but as Paul an elect vessel, as one given to Christ of the
Father; whereas Redemption belongs to the sheep of Christ, as sheep, as such
who are given to Christ of the Father, and therefore to these only: The faculty
of laughter belongs to Socrates, but not to him primarily, but to man;
therefore it belongs to other men as well as Socrates, yet to man only, and no
other creature. To conclude, how could Christ commend the excellency of his
love to his sheep, to his own whom the Father had given him, to his Spouse
the Church, that he gave himself for these, if he dad done the same thing for
others; for goats, for strangers, for those that neither are, nor ever shall be
members of the Church.

Objections of the Arminians whereby they endeavor to maintain that Christ
has obtained salvation for all.
God so loved the World that he gave his Son, John 3.16.Christ says, that he
gave his flesh for the life of the World Joh. 6.

John 3.19. and that the World hated Christ's disciples as they had done him,
Joh. 15.18, 19.



That he was that bread of God which came down from heaven to give life to the
World, John 6.36. Christ gives not life to all, but only to his sheep, Ioh. 10.
to the faithful or elect, the Apostle speaking of the Jews says, that their
fall was the riches of the World, Romans 11.12. he has subjected the World to
come, not to Angels, but to Christ. Heb. 2.5. God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself, not imputing to them their sins, 2 Corinthians. 5.19 now some
men have their sins imputed to them; yea all but true believers, Col. 1.6.



1. Because the World is here distinguished into two parts, namely believers,
ver. 17. and unbelievers, ver. 19. unless we shall say that the elect loved
darkness more then light.

2. Because if it be taken for the elect that God so loved the elect, that
whosoever of them do believe, should have everlasting life: what then shall
become of those of the elect who do not believe.

same word to be taken in diverse senses, and that sometimes in the same place,
1 John 2.7.8. where Saint John says, I write not unto you a new Commandment,
again, I write unto you a new Commandment.

Neither is it here employed, that there are two sorts of elect, some that did
believe and have everlasting life, and others not, for the word (whosoever, is
not here distributive but collective) (...) every believer: So that in the
first word our Savior shows what kind of persons men were when God gave his
Son for them; namely like the rest of the World: in the second, how they must
be qualified when he bestows everlasting life upon them, they must be
believers.

3. The World is here taken neither universally for every man, nor particularly
for some men but in a common sense for men living in the world, (as has been
showed) so that in regard of diverse parts it may be said both to be loved and
hated, saved and condemned; as the same people Israel are said to be enemies
concerning the Gospel, but to be beloved as concerning Election.

Ioh. 2.2.

Heb. 2.9. where it is said that Christ tasted death for all men, it is
understood of all the sons of God that were dispersed throughout all parts of
the world as it appears in the next ver. where it is said God brought many
children to glory. The Jews thought that the Messiah was promised to be a
Savior only to them; for overthrowing of this conceit, the Apostle tells them
that Christ tasted death for all men; for all the sons of God throughout the
world.

2. This is such a propitiation as is joined with intercession, for Saint John
had said before, we have an advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ the
just: and then adds, he is a propitiation for our sins; therefore this belongs
not to all, but only to believers.

Tim. 2.6. Christ gave himself a ransom for all men.

[all] is here to be taken not distributively for every particular man, but
collectively for all sorts, states, and conditions of men, whether high, low,
rich, poor, learned, or unlearned, and the like; for some of whom Christ gave
himself a ransom, as appears by the former words, ver. 1.2. where the Apostle
had exhorted that prayers and supplications should be made for all men, for
Kings, and those who were in authority.

For the word [all] in Scripture is ofttimes put not for every particular
person or thing of which it is spoken, but for some of these: so Matt. 9.35. it
is that Christ healed omnem morbum, all or every disease, that is, every kind
of disease, and Luke 12.42. ye tithe mint and rue, and omne olus, all herbs,
that is, every kind of herb, Acts 10.12. Peter is said to have seen omnia
quadrupedia terrae, all the foure-footed beasts of the earth, that is, some of
all sorts, Luke 3.6. All flesh shall see the salvation of God, Joel 2.28. Zach.
10.11.
I will power my Spirit upon all flesh, that is, upon some of all sorts of men;
so in many other places, as Esaias 40.5. Psalm. 2.8. Prove. 8.31. Esaias 2.2.

Tim. 4.10. Christ is said to be the Savior of all men, especially of those
that believe.

Psalm. 136.6. Psalm. 145.15.16.

Peter 2.1. St. Peter speaks of some who denied the Lord that bought them:
therefore Christ died for wicked men who bring upon themselves swift
destruction.

Mark. 4.25. our Savior says, that from him that has not, shall be taken
away that which he has: St. Luke mentioning the same thing, Chap. 8.18. says,
that from him that has not shall be taken that which it seems that he has,
2 Chronicles. 28.23. Ahaz is said to sacrifice to the gods of Damascus that smote
him, they did not indeed, but they seemed to him to do so, Ioh. 9.39. Christ
came to judgment into this world that they who see might be made blind; these
did not see indeed, but they seemed to do so.

Cor. 5.14.15, if one be dead for all, then were all dead, and he died for all,
that they which live, etc. Hence it follows that as all men were dead in sin,
so Christ died for all; for he died for all that were dead.

If it be understood of such as were dead in sin, yet it will not follow
hence that Christ died for all; for the scope of the Apostle here, is not to
show who they are for whom Christ died, but what the duty of those is, for whom
Christ died; namely not to live any longer to themselves, but to him that has
died for them and rose again: the love of Christ constrains us faith the
Apostle, which he understands of those that are in Christ.

Romans 5.17. as by the offense of one the fault is come on all to condemnation,
so by the justifying of one, the benefit has abounded toward all, to the
justifying of life: Here the benefit of Christ's death is made as large as Adams
sin, which extends it self to all.

Adams together, and the righteousness of the one with the sin of the other;
look therefore as the first Adams sin reached to all his posterity; so the
righteousness of Christ the second Adam reaches to all his posterity, the
faithful, and no further. If there had been another generation not arising
from Adam, but out of another stock; they had not been guilty of the first
Adams sin, so in this case.

2. The benefit which the Apostle here speaks of, reaches to the Justification
of life, but all men receive not the Justification of life.

Arminians use an argument, of all other the strongest (as they think) to
prove that Christ died for all, which is this: That which every man is bound to
believe is true; But every man is bound to believe that Christ died for him:
therefore this is true.



1. To rest on Christ alone, and no other for Salvation.

2. To persuade our selves that the benefit of Christ's death and sufferings
belongs to us, and we shall have our part therein.

In the first sense, all men are bound to believe on Christ, namely to persuade
themselves that there is no other way to Salvation, but by resting on Christ
alone; and this may be true, whether Christ paid the price of Redemption for
all or not.

In the second sense, it may be denied that all men are bound to believe on
Christ, for no man is bound to believe that Christ died for him, and that the
benefit of his death belongs to him till he finds himself to stand in need
of him, till being humbled by feeling the weight and burden of his sins, he
be willing to renounce and forsake them, desires nothing more then Christ, and
his righteousness, being ready to accept him upon any conditions: so long as a
man goes on in the practice of sin, with a love and liking of it, and delight
in it, he is not bound to persuade himself, that the benefits of Christ's death
(namely, remission of sins) belongs to him, but rather it were presumption to
do so; none are bound to believe the promise, but such to whom the promise is
made, but the promise is made only to such as labor and are heavy laden, that
are wearied out with the weight and burden of their sins, only to broken
hearted sinners, sick sinners, and the like; therefore such as these only are
bound to believe the promise.





As first, they are bound to believe that God has given his Son to purchase
redemption for all repenting sinners.

2. That it is their duty to see and feel their sins, and be so humbled for
them, as thereby they may be brought to repentance.

3. That when they are truly humbled and brought to repentance, it is their
duty to renounce their own righteousness, and rest on Christ alone for
salvation.

4. That doing this, they ought to persuade themselves that Christ dyed for
them, and that the benefit of his death belongs to them, so as all their sins
are pardoned in and through him.

Ioh. 3.18.

1. None shall be condemned for not believing in Christ,

Secondly, those to whom Christ has been offered, and they have not received
him; shall not be condemned for a bare non credens, and want of believing (if
we take believing in that sense for persuading themselves that Christ dyed for
them and their salvation) but for resisting the call of God to believe, not for
negative, but positive unbelief, but for hating and opposing that light which
shines forth in the Gospel (which all unbelievers do in some degree) Joh.
3.19. this is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world,
and men love darkness more then light.

An Examination and Confutation of the Arminian erroneous Tenets concerning
CONVERSION.
IN the article of Conversion, the question is not whether it be the work of
grace or not; for Arminians themselves grant, (at least in word) that the
beginnings, progress and perfection of conversion is from grace; but the thing
principally questioned is, the manner of the operation of this grace, whether
it is per modum suasionis vel per phisicam operationem, only by outward
persuasion, or by such an inward supernatural and effectual operation, as
shall certainly take effect: whether by such a grace as is resistable or
irresistible. The first way the Arminians hold, Positis omnibus operationibus
quibus ad conversionem in nobis efficiendam utitur Deus, manet tamen ipsa
conversio ita in nostra potestate, ut possimus non converti, Arnold. contra
Bogerman. p. 263. Possunt institi voluntari^reddi solo illicio Coll. Hag. p.
122.
namely, that God works man's conversion only by moral swasion, and by such a
grace as it is in man's power to resist, yea, so to resist, as to make the
effect of it wholly void. All the operations being granted, which God is wont
to use in converting men, yet conversion it self so remains in man's power,
as he may be converted or not converted (says Arnoldus.) On the other side, we
hold that in man's conversion, God does not only use outward persuasion, but
such an inward and effectual operation, as causes a change in man's mind and
will; making him both able and willing to do what God calls him to: and works by
such a grace, which though a man may, and for a time does resist, yet he shall
not, nor cannot resist so as to overcome it, and wholly hinder the work of his
own conversion when God intends it: So that the sum of the difference is
this. Arminians hold that God gives to man such a grace, whereby he may be
converted of he will; we hold that he gives such a grace, whereby he shall
certainly be converted; such a grace whereby he receives not only power, but
also will for his own conversion: that this is agreeable to truth, appears by
these reasons following.

it is he that works in us both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. and he uses
this as an argument; why we should work out our own salvation, which were of
no force if God did not first move our wills, before we begin to work; so he
says, that it is given to us through Christ to believe on him: Phil. 1.29.
therefore he gives more then power, he gives the will, yea, the act it self of
believing. So the Lord promises this unto his people, as a principal grace
belonging to the new Covenant, namely that he would put his law into their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, Jer. 31.33. and cause them to walk
in his statutes and keep his judgments, Ezekiel. 36.27. what is this putting his
law into their inward parts, but putting it into their minds, by causing them
to know it (as he promises them that he will teach them his statutes) and
putting it into their wills, by causing them to love and like it, yea, by making
this knowledge and love of his law to stick fast, to remain and abide with
them, for he will write it in their hearts: yea, more then so, he will bring it
into their actions, for he will cause them to walk in his statutes and keep his
Commands: Here is more then a general power, whereby they shall believe and
obey if they will: if not, they may let all alone, but a special grace whereby
they shall both will and do the thing which God requires.

2. The work of faith is not said to be a work of persuasion, but of power.
Hence it is called the faith of the operation of God, Col. 2.12. and the work
of faith with power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. yea of a mighty power: the Apostle prays
for the Ephesians, that God would enlighten the eyes of their understanding,
that they might know what was the hope of their calling, Non utitur omnipotens
et irresistibili motione ad fidem in nobis ingenerandam. Arm. in Perk. page 223.
and what is the exceeding greatness of his power in those that believe,
according to the working of his mighty power, Ephesians. 1.18.19. even such a power
as wrought in Christ, when he was raised from the dead. v. 20. col. 2.20. this
mighty power is more then a moral swasion, and here we may take notice that
Arminius even in direct terms contradicts the Apostle when he tells us that God
does not work by any omnipotent and irresistible motion in begetting faith.

3. We are said not only to be sick, but dead, in sins and trespasses,
Ephesians. 2.1. the dead shall he are the voice of the son of God, Joh. 5.25.
this my son that was dead is now alive. Luke 15.24 there is more then
persuasion, yea, no less then an almighty power needful for the quickening of
dead men, and as dead men want power to quicken and raise up themselves;
neither can they hinder their quickening and raising up, when God is pleased to
work it: no more can dead sinners raise or quicken their own souls, or
hinder this work when God comes to do it: to this purpose also this work of
conversion or regeneration, is compared to a new resurrection or creation: if
ye be risen again with Christ, Col. 3.1. create in me a new heart, Psalm.
51.10. and the Lord promises his people, that he would give them a new heart
and a new spirit, and that he would take out of them the heart of stone, and
put into them a heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 36.26. this new creation and
resurrection, this changing of the heart of stone into a heart of flesh,
requires not so much persuasion as power, such a power as makes a man not only
able, but willing; as changes the whole frame of his heart, and makes him of
unwilling to become willing; of stone to become flesh: nothing but an
omnipotent power can change stone into flesh.

4. The Scripture makes that grace, whereby God converts and draws a sinner to
himself to be such a grace as always has a certain effect, and is not left
to the liberty of man's will, to frustrate and make void if he will: turn thou
me and I shall be turned (say the people of God) Jer. 31.18. not turn thou me,
and then I may turn if I will, but turn thou me, bestow on me the grace of
conversion, and then I shall certainly be turned: draw me, we will run aft^r
thee, Cant. 1.4. not we may run after thee if we will, but we will run after
thee. Our Savior says, that none can come to him, except the father draw him,
and he that has heard and learned of the father, he comes, Joh. 6.44, 45.
therefore as no man either can or will come to Christ till the father has
drawn him, so when once God by teaching him and causing him to learn, has
drawn him, then he does certainly come.

The Apostle says, it is not in him that wills, or him that runs, but in
God that shows mercy, Romans 9.16. If God bestows only a general or
sufficient grace, whereby a man may believe and repent if he will: and
accordingly as he sees him to use the liberty of his will, so is ready to
concur or not concurre^ if he sees him to use it well, then to concur with
him, and to cause the act of believing also: if otherwise, then to withhold:
then it is in him that wills and runs, which contradicts the Apostle; for
as God sees man to will, so he is ready to work: If it be said it is not in
him that wills and runs, because it is not the work of man's will alone,
without Gods showing mercy, then the Apostle might as well have said, it is not
of God that shows mercy, but of him that wills, etc. because Gods grace
works not conversion alone without the concurrence of man's free will, yea,
(according to Arminians) is led by it: for as man wills, so God works; if man's
will moves, then God joins his work; if man be unwilling, then Gods work is
stopped.

6. If all the imaginations of man's heart be only evil, and that continually,
Genesis 6.5. if that light that is in him be darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. If the natural
man does not, nor cannot understand the things of God, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. if he has not sufficiency of himself to
think any good, 2 Cor. 5.3. if the wisdom of the flesh be enmity with God,
Romans 8.7. if the wisdom of God seems foolishness to it, 1 Cor. 2.14. then
there needs more then gentle persuading to take away this blindness and
darkness, this impotency and weakness, this enmity and opposition against
God, and the work of his grace; then it is vain to say that God stands ready
to concur with man, when he sees him moving his own will to what is good,
when he knows that he has neither will nor power for any good, till himself
has put it into him by the grace of true conversion.

7. If God gives only power to men to repent and believe if they will, and
leaves the acting of these things to the liberty of their own wills;
dispensing his cooperating grace (as they call it) according as he sees the
will of man carrying it self in receiving or not receiving the preventing
grace, then man separates himself (when he is converted) and makes himself to
differ from another man, contrary to that of the Apostle, who has made thee to
differ from another? and what have thou, that thou have not received? 1 Cor.
3.7. yes, may some man say, I have something which I have not received, namely,
the right motion of mine own will, in not resisting grace offered; for
according to this doctrine, when two men have the same power inwardly, and the
same means outwardly, grace being offered to both, at the same time, by the
same person, and in the same manner; the reason why one receives, and the other
does not; that one repents and believes, and the other does not, is because the
one wills, and the other wills not; the one uses his liberty well, the other
ill: it being equally in the power of both to receive grace offered, or to
refuse it; and so by this reason, not God but man should separate himself.

8. According to this doctrine, man should be the principal agent in the work
of conversion, and bear a better part therein then God and his grace; for act
is more excellent then power, and it is better to will the doing of good, then
only to be able to do it; God gives only power, but man by putting forth his
will, causes this to come into act: man's will first moves, and this motion
leads the way to Gods grace, to move and concur in the act of conversion, and
so is made the more excellent worker.

9. From both these it follows, that man has cause of glorying or boasting in
himself, because he has separated himself, and his will has borne the
better part in the work of conversion; contrary to that of the Apostle, why
do thou glory as if thou had not received, 1 Cor. 3.7. of grace, not of
works, lest any man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8. may not a man justly glory in
himself, when the reason why he is converted and another is not, (both having
the like means and help from God) is because he used his liberty of willing
well, when another used it ill: he applied himself to receive that which
another rejected; the motion of his own will has (as it were) led the way to
Gods will in the work of conversion?

10 If Gods work in conversion should be only by way of swasion and
propounding objects, then he and his grace should be no more powerful and
efficacious in converting men, then the devil is in perverting and seducing,
for he works in propounding objects, and that in the most congruous time and
manner that may be; contrary to that of the Apostle, greater is he that is in
you, then he that is in the world, 1 John 4.4. which he brings as an argument,
to prove that they had and should overcome temptations and seducings, because
the spirit of grace which was in them, was greater in regard of his powerful
manner of working, then he which was in the world, that spirit of Antichrist
which went about to seduce and pervert men, verse. 3. yea, there should be no
difference betwixt God and the Ministers, in the work of conversion, for the
kind and manner of working, though there may be for the measure and degree:
for the Minister works by persuading and propounding objects, and God works
no otherwise, though he may persuade more strongly: yea, upon this ground it
differs not in measure and degree, because in an ordinary course, God persuades
no man by his own voice immediately, but does this by the mouths of his
Messengers and Ministers, who are Gods Ambassadors, beseeching men in Christ's
stead to be reconciled to Christ, 2 Cor. 5.20. and he saves men by the
foolishness of preaching, 1 Cor. 1.21. Can it be fitly said of the Minister,
that he opens men's eyes or hearts, that he takes away the heart of stone, and
gives a heart of flesh; that he creates a new heart in men, that he writes Gods
laws in their hearts, and causes them to walk in his statutes? etc. which
might be both truly and fitly said of him, if he did work after the same
manner that God does.

11. If God works man's conversion only by way of swasion, and by such a grace
as ofttimes is resisted and always may be; then as one man does resist this
grace, and make it ineffectuall, so may another and another, yea, so may all
men do: and so it is possible that all men may partake of the grace of
conversion, and yet never a man in the world be converted: which is contrary to
the excellency and efficacy of the grace of God, and to that of the Prophet,
convert thou me and I shall be converted, Jer. 31.18. If nature does nothing in
vain, much less does grace. How can faith be the gift of God, and those never
receive it to whom it is given? yea, the thing it self which is given, not
have being at all in rerum natura.

12. By this doctrine, that special grace of conversion should be for little
purpose, or rather be of no use at all; for if God stands ready, by his
special grace to concur with man in the act of believing and repenting,
only when he sees man moving and applying his own will to the doing of these
things, what needs there any such special grace at all? for to will to repent
and believe, is all one with repenting and believing: they teach that if man
does not resift God calling him to believe, that God is ready to concur with
him in the act of believing: now not to resist this call, is to obey it, to
obey God calling to believe, what is it but to believe? If man does believe
what needs there any help of special grace to cause him to do that which he
does already? or how can God be said to work that which has been wrought
already, or give being to that which has being already: nothing can be a
condition of it self, and it is absurd to say that God is ready to work faith
in us, and cause us to believe, if we believe already, before he puts forth
this Work of his.

Objections against the former Arguments.


ut author naturae, non ut author gratiae, as a supporter of nature, not an
infuser of grace, whereas in all spiritual actions that man performs, God does
act upon him not only by a natural, but a supernatural power, whereby he
moves his will to do the same thing which he requires, as also to do it in the
same manner, and to the same end which he requires: for which a double grace is
needful, one habitual whereby nature is regenerated, and enabled for
supernatural acts, the other actual whereby the will being regenerate, is
excited and put on to these acts, as to believe, obey, and the like.

2. If God only assists men in the act of believing when he sees that they will
believe, how can he be said to work the will and the deed? if when he sees that
man wills to walk in his statures, and keep his Commands, he only stands
ready to concur with him in this work, how can be he said to cause him to
walk in his statutes? How can Faith be said not to be of our selves, but to be
the gift of God?

3. This new motion of the will whereby it moves and stirs it self to repent
and believe, being a new entity and being; whence can it proceed but from him
in whom we live, move, and have our being? all gracious habits must have a
first efficient that gives being to them, which can be no other then him that
is the author of grace.







Romans 6.13. always lusting against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17. this is no argument to
prove that a man is not wholly void of the life of grace, because he is able to
perform actions belonging to the life of sin, but rather the contrary, for
where sin most prevails, there grace has least power: sin wholly prevails
in an unregenerate man for he is a servant of sin, Romans 6.17.

the like outward means and like inward abilities, yet it is not man but God
that makes the difference, because he dispenses the means to some in such a
congruous manner and time when they are so fitly disposed, as he knows they
will receive grace offered, which he does not to others.



2. What congruity is there betwixt contraries? what agreement is there betwixt
righteousness and unrighteousness, light and darkness, 2 Cor. 6.16. if
whatever is borne of the flesh be flesh; and the flesh always lusts against
the Spirit (they being contraries) Gal. 5.17. yea if there be no greater nor
stronger opposition and contrariety then betwixt flesh and spirit, sin and
grace (as being most active qualities placed in the most active subject the
soul of man; yea in the same faculties of the soul) how can we imagine that
there should be a congruous disposition in man at any time of himself to
entertain the actions and operations of the spirit?

3. If this congruous disposition in man be not always efficacious, how can God
be certain of man's conversion, whose knowledge of it rests upon the foresight
of this condition? How can this congruity be always joined with efficacy in
unregenerate men, when it is not always so in regenerate? in whom there is at
all times a more congruous disposition to receive grace offered (they being
already furnished with the habits of grace) then there is at any time in an
unregenerate man who wants these: no Evangelicall persuasion can be more
congruous at any time to an unregenerate man, then every such persuasion is at
all times agreeable to a regenerate man; yet such persuasions are not always
efficacious in the regenerate; but sometimes they may neglect, if not resist
them.



actiones imperatae and of actiones Elicitae, for if it might be granted that
in these outward actions of speaking, going, and the like, God does concur with
us upon condition that we will do these things; yet he cannot be said to concur
with us in the act of willing, if we our selves will: for when a man applies
himself to obey Gods call in believing, when he wills to believe, then he
does believe; and how can God be said to cause us to do that which we do
already? neither is it true that God does concur with man in natural actions
upon condition that man will do them; for he moves the will in speaking, going,
or the like, as well as he does the members of the body: In him we live, move,
and have a being, holds as well in the actions of the mind as of the body:
neither does God always concur in speaking or doing that which man has a mind
or will to speak or do: for when man has prepared his heart to speak, yet
the answer of the tongue is of the Lord, Prove. 16.1. and man's goings are said
to be ordered of the Lord, so as sometimes he understands not his own way,
Proverbs 20, 24. going whether he intended not to go.

Other Objections answered.
Ephesians. 5.14. make you a new heart and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 18.31. It were in
vain to come to one that lies dead and call on him to rise up, and use many
arguments to persuade him to do this.

1. Though man wants a life of grace, yet he has a reasonable life,

2. Though man be wholly dead in sin, altogether void of spiritual life, yet
the commands whereby God calls him to live are not in vain, because as God
calls him to live, so he can make him to live, and as he can do this, so he
will do it to some; and as he will do it, so he will do it by means, which
means are the instructions, exhortations, and calls of his word: Hearken and
your souls shall live, Esaias 55.2. the dead shall hear the voice of God, and
they shall live, Joh. 2.25. Whiles the Prophet prophesied, life came into the
dead bones, Ezekiel. 37.10. If God uses these outward calls and commands, as
effectual means to convey life into dead souls, then they are not in vain;
for though God does not work man's conversion by persuasion only, yet
ordinarily he does not work it without this as an ordinary means whereby he
makes man know what he ought to do, what is needful for salvation: whereby he
stirs up in his heart a desire to do it, and (finding his own inability) a
care to seek help and strength from him who has promised to give grace to
those that seek it.



Adams fall: If a man willingly puts out his own eyes, he by depriving
himself of the faculty of sight, is disabled not only from seeing those
things which he saw before, but also from seeing all those things which he
might have seen after, had they been showed to him.

2. In infidelity there is a twofold act, a negative, whereby he forbeares
doing of that which God calls him to do, and a positive, whereby he does
something that is contrary: If it be granted, that man is not to be blamed or
condemned, for the negative act, the mere non credens, the not laying hold of
Christ, and resting on him for salvation, yet he may be justly condemned for
the positive, for rejecting grace offered, for resisting Gods call to carry
Christ's yoke, for hating the light, as it is the property of all the children
of darkness to do; there is no disobedience to the Gospel, but also is
accompanied with disobedience to the law in some branch or other (which all
grant man had power to have kept) and for this he may be condemned.

wash his heart from filthiness, Ier. 4.14. and to make himself a new heart.
Ezekiel. 18.31.

potentiam remotam convertendi though not proximam, a remote power of being
converted, though not a next, an immediate power and fitness, both which other
things want.

2. In man's conversion a double act may be considered.

1. An act of preventing Grace, whereby God comes upon man as he finds him dead
in sin, and infuseth new principles of life into his soul, new habits of Grace
whereby he is enabled for spiritual actions, etc. in this, man is a mere
patient, and Conversion is like to Creation, In which man is no agent.

2. There is an act of exciting or assisting Grace, whereby men are stirred up
and moved to work according to these habits of Grace and Principles of life,
which God has put into them: namely actually to repent and turn to God, to
believe and lay hold of Christ, etc. now the work of conversion is not made up
without the concurring of both these, and in this latter man is an agent and
instrument; his Will being moved by GOD, joins it self with Gods will: in
this, (acti agimus) we being acted upon by Grace, do likewise act and work our
selves. In this is that of St. Augustine, true, he that made me without me,
will not save me without me.



his call, and doing what he requires: The Egyptians willingly gave their gold,
and jewels to the Israelites at their departure; but this they were unwilling
to, before their hearts were changed; and God gave the Israelites to find
favor in their eyes, Exodus 12.31.

resisted the Holy Ghost: therefore Grace is resistable, Act. 7.51.

Stephen that spoke, not in themselves that heard: holy men spoke as they were
acted by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.19.

2. Though some Works of Gods Spirit may be resisted by wicked men, yet not
that Work whereby he works Conversion in those that are converted, or works
faith in those that believe; for this is a work of mighty power, Ephesians. 1.18.
as has been showed.

Mat. 23.27. therefore the Work of Conversion is resistable.



2. Christ here speaks as a Minister of the Circumcision, as a servant of God
and ordinary Agent, not as the Son, who is Lord of all; as appears by this
clause (how often) how often have I come among you, and how often have I used means
to gather you by propounding invitations to repentance?



finem operis and operantis, the end of the Work and the Workman: the end of
the Ministers Work, and of the Word preached, is Salvation: yea God wills that
his Word in its own nature should always tend to this end, and be fit to bring
forth this effect; namely to be in it self the favor of life?

But he does not always Will and intend to work Salvation by the Word, and that
the Word shall have that effect whereto it tends per se and in its own nature.
The Lord has not given them a heart to understand, and eyes to see, and ears
to hear unto this day, Deuteronomy. 29.4. But sometimes God intends that it shall
work per accidens, that it shall bring forth an accidental effect: go speak
all that I command thee, but I will harden Pharaohs heart. Exodus 7.2.3. When
the Gospel is the favor of death, yet it is a sweet savor unto God, 2 Cor.
4.15. though the Word in its own nature always tend to life, yet God does not
intend to cause it, to work always according to its own nature: for then how
could the Gospel be a sweet savor unto God, not only in them that are saved,
but in them that perish? yea from this argument a contrary conclusion may be
drawn; the Word is Gods Agent, what that does, God does; but sometimes the Word
(through man's fault) works destruction: therefore sometimes God works
destruction by the Word; and what he does, he wills and intends to do.







no simulation, because he no where tells man that it is his purpose to make all
men believe when he commands them to believe.



Isaac killed, did agree well enough with the command that he gave touching
killing of him.

2. Gods purpose of not giving all men effectual Grace without which he knows
certainly they will not believe, (which themselves grant,) does as much
disagree from his command of believing, as his purpose of not giving sufficient
Grace without which they cannot believe.





2. Of some it may be said that one principal end (not of the means of Grace
which in themselves always tend to life) but of GOD in causing them to be
dispensed to them, was the making of them more inexcusable: for look what is at
last effected by these means, God intended at first should be effected by them;
but the principal effect which these means do at last bring forth in some, is
the making of them more inexcusable; therefore this was at first intended by
God: namely that the having of the means should bereave them of all excuse.

An Examination and Confutation of the Arminian erroneous Tenets concerning
PERSEVERANCE.
IN the article of Perseverance, the principal question is, whether a true
believer, such as by a living justifying faith is united to Christ, and made a
true member of him, may fall away, that is so fall as he wholly loses his
faith, cease to be a member of Christ, and so comes to perish in the end: to
this Arminians answer, that a true believer is so upheld by Christ in all his
temptations, that by no force or fraud of Satan or any outward enemy, he shall
be taken out of Christ's hand: but by his own negligence and abuse of his
freewill, he may wholly make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience, fall
from grace, cease to be a member of Christ etc. because all promises touching
support are conditional, and the fullfilling of these promises, depends upon
our performance of the condition, and doing the duty that God requires of us.

To this we answer on the other side, that howsoever such a one, by reason of
the remainders of corruption within, and enemies without, be subject to fall,
yea, may fall both frequently and dangerously, yet he is so upheld, partly by a
principle of grace within, partly by divine assistance and support from
without, that he shall never fall totally and finally, it not being possible
that the elect should be deceived, or a member of Christ should perish; the
truth of this appears.

I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee, Jer. 31.3. those whom he loves, he loves to the end, Joh.
13.1. therefore all that are loved with this, can never wholly f^ll away and
perish; otherwise the same persons might be the objects of everlasting love,
and everlasting hatred: hence it is said, that the gifts and calling of God are
without repentance, Romans 11.29. what calling and gifts these are, appears in
the former verse, namely, such as flow from election. If man by his abuse of
these gifts should cause God to take them away, then there should be no
difference betwixt these and common gifts, which may be lost. Then as God is
said to repent of making Saul King, when he took his Kingdom from him; so he
might be said to repent of giving these gifts which the Apostle here denies:
then it had been needful he should have put in some limitation to this
proposition, telling us that the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, unless man makes him to repent (which he does not); whatever cause
makes God to repent, if he does repent of giving these kind of gifts, still
this contradicts the Apostle, who says, that these are without repentance.

Jer. 32.40. by this Covenant God has bound himself to put away their
iniquities, and to remember their sins no more, Jer. 31.34. and this being a
branch of the everlasting Covenant, all true believers to whom it belongs,
shall ever enjoy the benefit of it; therefore they shall never perish, never
have their sins so laid to their charge, as they shall all ways ly under the
guilt and punishment of them: yea, this is one branch of this everlasting
Covenant, that God will write his laws in the hearts of his people, (therefore
they shall remain and abide there) and that he will put his fear into their
hearts, so as they shall never depart from him, Jer. 32.40. which wholly
excludes all total and final defection.

the Church upon the rock (that is himself) and being thus built, the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. all true believers are built
upon this rock, 1 Pet. 2.6. therefore the gates of hell (that is the power of
hell) shall not prevail against them, therefore they shall never perish: for
when men are cast into hell, the power of hell prevails over them: all true
believers are the sheep of Christ, they hear his voice and follow it; and to
these he has promised, that he will give them eternal life, Joh. 10.27. and
that none shall take them out of his hands; if these miscarry, by what means
soever it be, whether by Satan's malice, or their own corruptions, so as in the
end they miss of eternal life, how is Christ's promise fulfilled? If any of
Christ's sheep, such whom the Father has given him, and for whom he has laid
down his life, should perish; it would argue that either Christ were not
willing and careful to keep them, or not able to keep them; either of which is
blasphemy to speak or think of him that is so great and faithful a sheepherd:
If because they grow careless, he grows careless likewise, and will not
keep them; how is he a faithful Sheepherd? If he wants not will and care, who
dares say that he wants power to keep them?

he is the head of the Church, which is his body, Ephesians. 1.23. Every true
believer is a living member of this body, 1 Cor. 6.15. now Christ is a Savior
of his own body, Ephesians. 5.23. the body of Christ is not subject to corruption
either in whole or in part: as it was not possible that the natural body of
Christ should wholly perish or decay; so it is not possible that the mystical
body of Christ, or any part of it should wholly perish: every member of this
being animated and quickened by the same spirit wherewith the head is quickened;
as Christ being raised up from the dead, dies no more, Romans 6.9. so it is with
those who are quickened together with him, ver. 11.

Peter that his faith might not fail; so he does for all those that are
builded on the same rock as Peter was: He prays not for the World, but for
those whom the Father had given him out of the world, Joh. 17.9. and one thing
which he prays for (among others) is that while they are in the world they
might be kept from evil, ver. 15. that they may be one with him and his
Father, ver. 21. that they may be with him where he is, and see his glory, ver.
24. now Christ is heard in what he prays for, John 11.42.43. therefore none
that are given to him, no true believer, shall wholly fall away and perish.

God dwells in true believers, 1 Cor. 3.16. now one principal work of this
Spirit is to guide and lead; all the sons of God are led by the Spirit of God,
Romans 8.14. this spirit leads into all truth, John 14.16. all truth needful to
salvation, whether of faith or practice: yea this spirit shall dwell and abide
with them for ever, Ioh. 14.16. therefore ever guide and lead them in the right
way: therefore they shall not totally and finally miscarry.

2. He is called a seal and an earnest, Ephesians. 1.13.14. because he makes
things sure to the faithful, as seals make the writing firm and sure: all
true believers are sealed by the spirit of promise; an earnest makes the
bargain sure, these have the spirit given to be the earnest of their
inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13.14. therefore they shall never fall so far as to lose
their inheritance: so that there is no place for that usual shift, that it is
a seal and an earnest so long as men keep it; for (as was showed) it shall
abide with them for ever; and it seals men (that is, gives assurance) not for a
day, or a week, or some short time, but to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.
it is a seal of our inheritance till the redemption of the purchased
possession, Ephesians 1.14. that is till we be put in possession of that
inheritance whereunto we are redeemed.

John 1.12. by receiving him we come to partake of that life which is in him,
he that has the Son has life, 1 John 5.12. even that life which is in the
Son, namely eternal life, ver. 11. Hence it is said, that he who believes in
the Son has everlasting life, Ioh. 3. last, he has it already begun in him;
for he partakes of the same life which is in Christ, therefore he shall never
die, he shall never be wholly deprived of this life, for then this should not
be everlasting life, because it does not last ever, but comes to an end: what
is the difference betwixt our mortal and this immortal life, if they both
alike come to an end? the life of Grace is an inchoation of the life of glory;
therefore shall never be wholly interrupted and broken off. If a true believer
should wholly fall away, what should become of this life of Grace wherewith he
was quickened (which is called everlasting life)? it cannot be moved into
another subject, no more then the same soul can be removed into another man;
therefore when a man wholly falls away, this wholly cease to be, and so is
not everlasting life: when our Savior had said that he who believes has
everlasting life, lest any should except that this life might fall from him,
and so he might perish; he adds further, that he shall not come into
condemnation, and gives this as a reason, because he is passed from death to
life, John 5.24. which reason were of no force if he might pass back again
from life to death, if everlasting life being begun in us should fall from us,
or we from it, as we perish, so the life perishes: besides, by believing we
eat of that living bread which came down from heaven, and whoever cateth of
this bread shall not dye, Joh. 6.50. our Savior makes this the difference
betwixt the Manna whereon the Israelites fed in the wilderness, and the
Spiritual Manna: those who had eaten of that dyed after they had eaten, but
whoever did eat of this should not dye, ver. 49, 50. by believing we drink of
the well of the water of life, and he that drinks of this should never thirst
any more, but it shall be a well of water springing up in him to everlasting
life, Joh 4.14. our Savior likewise makes this to be the difference betwixt
the living water that he would give them to drink, and common water, that he
who drinks of this may thirst again, he may be as empty as ever, but he that
drinks of that shall never thirst; he shall never be so wholly empty of the
grace of Christ as he was before he believed: but as he is always desiring and
thirsting, so he shall be always filling; he shall have a well of water spring
up in him, a new supply of grace daily conveyed from Christ by the spirit, Ioh.
7.37.

incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.21. therefore breeds an incorruptible life in
those that are begotten, and borne of it, therefore such an one shall never
dye. Hence Saint John says, that he who is borne of God sins not, 1 John
3.9. this must needs be understood of a total falling into sin, and coming
under the power of it, in such sort as he was before he was borne of God, (for
he had said before, that who says he has no sin deceives himself.) This he
proves by two reasons: first, from his spiritual birth and nativity, he is
borne of God, and he that is once borne, cannot be unborne again. Secondly,
from the principal of life of which he was bred and borne, the seed remains
in him; this seed is nothing else but the word of life, made good to the soul
by the spirit: when the spirit puts a quickening power and virtue into the word,
then it comes to be that immortal seed, which is the cause of new birth: and
he that is thus borne, has the seed remaining in him; this principle of life
in such sort, as he shall never wholly fall into sin again; so fall as to
become dead in sins and trespasses; he can never be wholly dead, that has a
principle of life always remaining in him. Hence it is called an engrafted
word, Jam. 1.21. because he that is begotten and borne anew, has this word so
engrafted in him, as it shall never wholly fall from him: and so long as this
remains, life remains.

Joh. 5.14. but Perseverance is a principal grace they pray for; therefore
this shall be granted unto them, so as they shall never wholly fall.

Objections against the former Arguments.


be kept by the mighty power of God unto salvation, that they shall never fall,
that none shall take them out of Christ's hands, etc. when as they know that
they have a root of deficiency in themselves; that they have that which will
cause them to depart from the living God, if they be not continually upheld? If
the promise of preservation depend upon our selves, and the right ordering of
our own wills, so that God will not fail to support us, so long as we stand
fast and cleave close to him; but if we fail and let go our hold, he will
likewise fail and let go his hold, suffering us to fall: what true comfort (I
say) can this yield us in the time of temptation, that he has promised to keep
us? what comfort had it been to Peter, when Christ promised that he would pray
for him, that his faith might not fail, if it had been with this condition,
namely, if Peter did not let go his hold of Christ, then Christ would not let
go his hold of him; but if he did, if he should forsake or deny him (as
afterward it fell out) then he must shift for himself, for he would take no
further care of him?

2. If man continues to do his duty, what need is there of any such promises
of supports? for what is his duty, but to watch and walk in fear, to hold
fast to Christ, to keep himself in the ways of obedience, yea, to continue
and be constant in doing of these things? now what is this, but to persevere?
and what need God give man a promise that he will make him persevere, when he
does this already? that he will make him stand fast, when he sees him stand
fast? for by this doctrine, Gods promise reaches no farther, but to make a man
stand while he continues to stand, and no longer.

3. What privileges by these conditional promises belong to true believers,
that are within the Covenant of grace, more then to Pagans or Infidells, and
all that are without the Covenant? for even these, if they will turn to God,
lay fast hold on him, cleave constantly to him, may assure themselves that he
will receive them graciously, and for ever hold them fast, while they continue
to do this.

4 One grace which God has promised believers, and which is concluded in the
new Covenant as a special branch of it, is Perseverance it self, namely, that
he will put his fear into their hearts, so as they shall never depart from
him, Jer. 32.40. now how can any thing be a condition of it self? how can it
stand with good sense, that God should promise his people, that upon condition
they preserve his fear in their hearts. so as they do not depart from him, he
will put his fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from him.





2. When ever Satan prevails against a man by his temptations, he does it not
by force and violence, but by such enticements and allurements, as wherein man's
free will does always concur and bear a part; thus he says, that he would
persuade or entice Ahab to go up to Ramoth Gilead, that he might fall, 1 Kin.
22.21. the Apostle says, that our first Parents were beguiled by the serpent,
2 Cor. 11.3. this was such a persuasion, whereunto they willingly yielded; had
they not been willing to be deceived, Satan could not have deceived them: when
Satan prevailed with Judas to betray his master, Mat. 26. with Ananias and
Saphira to lie to the Holy Ghost, Acts 5.3. they were not led to do these
things by force and constraint, but willingly and freely: when he works
effectually in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. their own wills do
concur with him in this work: therefore there is no opposition betwixt man's
liberty and Satan's working, but a mutual harmony; there is not only an error
in the judgment, but an evil motion in the will also, when ever Satan by his
temptation prevails with men: and Satan and man's will are concauses in
bringing forth the same evil effect: and in the greatest sins of all (as in
that of Apostasy) man's will seldom works alone, but so as it is irritated and
assisted by Satan.

3. If such as are built on the rock may fall away, and the sheep of Christ
may perish; this would argue a defect not only in man's free will, but in the
rock it self; not only in the sheep, but in the shepherd; for if he be
both careful and able to keep them, what should hinder that they are not kept?
If it be said that their own wills hinder, because they either neglect or reject
their own conservation; this cannot be, for when Christ made them his sheep,
of unwilling, he made them willing to come to him, to hear his voice and
follow him: when he takes them into his custody, he causes them to be both
willing and careful to remain and abide with him: If at any time they grow
careless and backward, they become cross and perverse, he causes them to see
this and repent of it: otherwise how were he a faithful shepherd, if he did
not preserve those that are committed to his custody, from all such dangers and
defections as will bring destruction, when he is able to do it, and when he
has promised that they shall never perish? John 10.2. how was Christ a perfect
Savior (as before was showed) if he should preserve and deliver his sheep, for
whom he has laid down his life, and whom he has taken into his custody, from
some dangers and some enemies only, and not from all? if he should deliver them
from external enemies only, and not from internal, from fathan and this evil
World, but not from the power of that corruption that cleaves to their natures?
from the old man and body of sin, from that law of their members which rebels
against the law of their mind, and leads them captive to sin and death? from
that flesh which alalway lusts against the Spirit, as being always contrary to
it? especially since this of all other enemies is the most dangerous as being
within us, and therefore nearest to us; as being that without which all outward
enemies could do us no harm; outward enticings not being able to prevail if
we were not drawn away and enticed by our own concupiscence.

How can Christ be said to save us out of the hands of our enemies and all
that hate us, if he does still leave us in the hand of our nearest and worst
enemy? saving us only from the power of Satan and wicked men; but leaving us
to the power of sin and corruption, and to the sway of our own evil hearts,
which are desperately wicked and deceitful above all things, Jer. 17.9. and
which will certainly lead us to destruction, if we be left to the evil bent
and inclination of them; To conclude, how can the faithful be said to have
strong consolations? Heb. 6.9. either from the promises of God, or merits and
mediation of Christ, if the utmost extent of these, be to give them assurance
that they shall be kept free only from force and violence; so as they shall
never be drawn from Christ against their wills, and made to fall away whether
they will or no: but otherwise, if at any time their wills fail, then shall
Christ's help be ready to fail; and he will no longer undertake the keeping
of them, then he sees them careful to keep themselves? Is it not Christ's
keeping that makes them watchful and careful to keep themselves? Is it not his
care and good will that makes them both willing and able to resist temptation,
and to do all things needful for their own safety and preservation? certainly
if it were not, they could take small comfort in all the promises that are made
to them.



The Word of God has not this denomination of seed as it is considered in it
self, but as it has relation to those that are borne of it, and called
immortal or incorruptible, because it is the principle of an incorruptible and
never dying life; which denomination it could not have, if the life that
arises from it were subject to decay as that life is which arises from
corruptible seed.

John 3.9. it is objected that the regenerate man cannot commit a sin unto
death, so long as the seed remains in him; but through his own fauit, through
his negligence or wilfulness that seed may by little and little fall from him,
and then he may wholly fall.



Other Objections answered.
Ezekiel. 18.24.

Ezekiel. 33.13. he expresses what kind of righteousness here he means, saying,
that if the righteous man trust to his own righteousness, and commit
iniquity, he shall die for the same: he that is truly righteous, does not
trust to his own righteousness.



Ezekiel. 18.5.) though these things proceed not from right principles within,
being ready to rest in the outward actions, when the inward affections are
wanting: neither does every one feign and dissemble who performs outward
actions of obedience, though not moved to do these by the strength of Gods
commands, and looking at Gods glory as his chief end.



the way of righteousness leads to life, Prove. 12. last, though all that walk
in this way do it not with a right heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. and so miss of the
end whereto the way leads: the outward actions of righteous men are the way to
bliss, though they may be done by such as are not truly righteous.

2. Some understand this death which may befall a righteous man not of eternal
death, but temporal death, or other temporal punishments: but because this
death stands in opposition against the life which a righteous man attains by
persevering in the ways of righteousness, the former answer seems best to
agree with the place, and to satisfy the doubt.

Every branch in me that brings not forth fruit he takes away, John 15.2.
therefore there are some that are in Christ who may fall away.

flesh, but not of the heart, Romans 2.28.29. that are Israelites only according
to the flesh; not truly Israelites, Romans 9.6.

2. (...) in me, may as well be referred to the words following as those that
went before; and then the sense will be that every branch that brings not
forth fruit in Christ, implying, that some branches (namely seeming branches)
bring forth fruit by the strength of their own root, and these cannot
continue: others (namely true branches) by virtue of the grace they suck and
draw from Christ by faith; and these shall be purged that they may bring forth
more fruit. So likewise is that to be understood which our Savior speaks of
the going out of the unclean spirit, who returned again, Mat. 12.43.44. namely
such a going forth as was in appearance only, there being an outward
reformation, but no inward sanctification; for when he returned, he found the
room empty, ver. 44. And so is that of the Apostle to be understood when he
says that some made shipwraeke of faith, and put away a good conscience; they
forsake their profession of their faith, and ceased to do those things that
were agreeable to a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.19.20. and which St. Peter says
of some that had escaped the filthiness of the World, and yet afterward
returned with the dog to their vomit. 2 Peter 2.19.20. they seemed to have been
purged from that filthiness which overspreads the impure World: because for a
time they did forbear the practice of some foul gross sins wherewith before
they had been defiled: but not doing this upon right grounds (their hearts
being never truly purged) ere long they returned to their old vomit again.

been enlightened, and made partakers of the Holy Ghost, that tasted the good
Word of God, and felt the powers of the life to come, yet afterward fell away,
Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.

Bezaleel and Aholiah were filled with the spirit of God, Exodus 31.3. much more
such as have gifts of illumination (and the like) or in regard of saving
graces, as that faith which is called a precious faith, 1 Pet. 1.5. that love
whereby they love the Lord Jesus in sincerity, Ephe. 6. last, that repentance
which is a repentance unto salvation, arising from Godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10.
this is to be understood of the former only, not of the latter: for the Apostle
speaks here only of an enlightening, and of a tasting he says they were
enlightened to see the truth, he does not say they loved the truth: he says
they tasted the good Word of God, he does not say they digested it, that they
tasted of the power of the life to come: they had some sense of the power of
the promises and threatenings of the joys of Heaven, and pains of hell, but
they were not deeply and thoroughly affected with these things: a man may taste
of that which he puts out again; these are such things as may befall
hypocrites and wicked men: our Savior speaks of some that received the Word
with joy (here was a taste) and for a while believed, Luke 8.13. whom yet he
makes no part of the good ground; and the Scripture every where puts a
difference betwixt common gifts and saving graces, betwixt that which is called
a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. a knowledge that puffs up, 1 Cor. 3.13.1. and
that knowledge which is the beginning of eternal life, Ioh. 17.3. betwixt that
faith which is called a dead faith, that profits nothing, Iam. 2.17. such a
faith as Simon Magus had, Act. 8.24. and that which is called an unfeigned
faith, 1 Timothy 1.5. the faith of Gods Elect, Tit. 1.1. betwixt the hope of
hypocrites which shall perish, Ioh 8.13. and the hope that makes not ashamed,
Romans 5.3.

continue in that goodness which God had showed to them, they likewise should
be broken off, Romans 11.20.22.



2. Or of such persons as were branches only by outward profession, not by
inward insition and union.

Cor. 10.12. not to be high minded, but fear, Romans 11.20. to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.13. what need such fear and taking
heed of falling in them that cannot fall?

breaking of their bones, Psalm. 51.8. therefore they had need fear and take
heed, for if they forsake Gods laws, and break his statutes, he will visit
their transgression with rods, and their iniquities with strokes; though he
will not wholly take away his mercy and loving kindness from them, nor
falsify his truth, or break his Covenant (namely his promise of conservation)
Psalm. 89.31, 32, 33, 34.

2. These caveats of fearing and taking heed are to very good purpose, because
as God will in his mercy preserve and uphold true believers from total
defection, so he will do this by means: the inward means are, holy fear,
watchfulness, and the like: the outward means are exhortations, admonitions,
and warnings of his Word, which serve to beget, and stir up the inward; the
more outward means (assisted with blessing from God) the more inward fear and
watchfulness; the more of these, the more assurance of safety and fast
standing.

Hence the Apostle having bidden the Phillippians to work out their salvation
with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. tells them that it is God who works in
them both to will and to do, Verse 13. so that Gods work and man's may very
well stand together: Gods promise, and man's duty stablish each other.



this hope purges himself, 1 John 3.3. the more feeling we have of the free
love of God, the more it causes us to love him again: we love him because he
loved us first, 1 John 4.19. the more we love, the more fearful we are to
offend, and careful to please, and to perform duty; a principal part whereof
is to humble and watchful.

cannot be a member of Christ, and a member of an harlot; a true believer may
commit fornication, and so make himself a member of an harlot; and therefore he
may cease to be a member of Christ.

members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot, 1 Cor. 6.11. our
bodies are appointed to be members of Christ, by committing fornication we
employ them to such actions as are proper to those who are members of an
harlot: now this is altogether unreasonable, and intolerable, that any should
employ to vile and base uses, those things which are appointed for excellent
and honorable purposes: and this is all can be urged from this place.





FINIS.

