Sr. Tho. VViddringtons SPEECH At a Conference between Both Houses, on Tuesday
the 20. of July, 1641.

At the transmission of the impeachment against Matthew Wren Doctor in
Divinity, late Bishop of Norwich, and now Bishop of Ely.

printer's device, consisting of a factotum block of a rose used with a
fleur-de-lis inserted as an ornament, belonging to E. Griffin (McKerrow No.
422)

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for R. Best at Grayes Inn gate in Holborne, 1641.

Sr. Thomas Widdringtons SPEECH The 20. of July 1641.
My Lords, I am Commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled
for the Commons in parliament, to deliver to your Lordships these Articles,
against the Bishop of Ely.
MY Lords,
These Articles are dipped in those Colors, in which this Bishop rendered
himself to the Diocese of Norwich, they need no Gloss, nor Varnish. In them
you may behold the spirit and disposition of this Bishop, hear the groans and
cries of the people, see a shepherd scattering, (I had almost said) devouring
his own flock; He that was desired to paint Hercules, thought he had done
enough, when he had made a resemblance of the Lions skin, which he was wont to
carry about him as a Trophee of his honor.

I will not say that in these you will find a resemblance of the Lions skin, I
am sure you will find the resemblance of the skins (that is to say,) the
tattered and ruind fortunes, of poor innocent lambs, who have extremely
suffered by the violence of this Bishop.

In the year 1635. this man was created Bishop of Norwich, he is no sooner
there, but he marches furiously.

In the creation of the world light was one of the first productions, the first
visible action of this Bishop after his creation into this See was to put out
many burning and shining lights, to suspend diverse able learned and
conscientious ministers, he that should have been the Golden snuffer of these
lights, became the extinguisher, and when these are taken away, where shall
poor men light their Candles?

My Lords, this was not all.

He put out lights, and sets up fire brands in their places, suspends painful
Ministers, and sets up idle factious and superstitious Priests, (to use their
own language) in their places, yet it is the fortune of these men at this
time, like Rivers in the Ocean co be buried in the extreme activity of their
Diocesan.

He made a scourge, not of small cords, but of new Injunctions and numerous
Articles tied about with a strong twist of a most dangerous oath; and with this
he whips not out buyers and sellers, but the faithful dispensers of the word
out of their Churches, out of their estates, out of their dear Country.

This Noah (if I may so call him without offense) as soon as he entered into
the arc of this Diocese, he sends, nay forces Doves to fly out of this Arc,
and when they return unto him, with Olive branches in their mouths of
peaceable and humble submissions, he will not receive them into this arc
again, unless like Ravens they would feed upon the Carrion of his new
Inventions, they must not have any footing there; he stands as a flaming sword
to keep such out of his Diocese.

My Lords, unless he had done this, he could never have hoped to have brought
that great work he undoubtedly aimed at to any perfection.

Whilst the Palladium of Troy stood, that City was impregnable, The Greeks
had no sooner stolen that away but they instantly won the City; So then he
first put out the Candles, then was the opportunity, to shuffle in his works
of darkness: he first beats off the Watchmen and seers, then was likely to
follow that which the impiety of some was pleased to style, the piety of the
times.

This being done, he then begins to dress out Gods Worship, according to his
own fancy, this he expresses in Injunctions and directions the Minerva's of
his own brain; we find them styled Regales Injunctiones Domini Episcopi^ a
style too sacred, to Baptize his brats withal; I shall be bold to call them
Tyrannicus injunctiones Do. Episcopi; stories afford not a more barbarous
cruelty then to join a dead and a living body together, the one is miserably
killed with the stinch of the other.

This Bishop, who like Aaron should have stood between the living and the
dead, has joined to lively ordinances many dead and venomous ceremonies, which
have no other life, then what they received from the breath of his Injunctions,
and these are pressed upon the Gonsciences, even these must be observed, as
moral laws.

An arbitrary government in the Church is more dangerous, more grievous, then
that in the state; this is exercised upon men's consciences, the most tender
parts, and is the very penacle of tyranny, and of all other most intolerable;
that blow which will hardly be felt by the arm, will put out the eye.

(My Lords) in the time of King Rich. 1. one of this man's predec^ssors a
valiant Bishop went into the holy war, this Bishop has raised a war at
home in his own Dioces; a war not against Sarazens, Barbarians, Turks or
Infidels, but against good and well disposed people, I know not what style to
give this war: without doubt (my Lords) this was no holy war.

The weapons of this warfare were 28 Injunctions, 139 Articles containing 879
questions.

The soldiers were Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, Commissioners, Rural
Deanes, etc.

Himself commanded in chief.

The ways of assault and killing were by excommunications, suspensions,
deprivations, -- I stay here: mill modis morimur mortales.

The Magazin wherein all these were originally hatched and lodged, was the
superstitious and malicious breast of this Bishop.

This Dioces was the stage where the direful tragedies of this war were
acted by the space of two years and upwards.

Thus did he trouble Israel in the time of peace, nay by these he put some of
the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel to flight, out of these he raises a farm
of 500 pounds for his primary visitation, if it be considered cum pertinentiis,
it was not dear, yet well improved, for formerly but 40 pound in the time of
some of his predecessors.

Will it please your Lordships with patience to cast your eyes upon the model
of this Bishops zeal, piety, and Religion: Let his affection to prayer and
preaching speak for all the rest.

First for prayer. It was his hap to find a prayer which is no prayer
pretended to be prescribed by a Canon which is no Canon, I mean the 55 Canon
set forth in the year 1603, and no other prayer must be used in his Dioces
before Sermons. That monster of conceived prayer (pardon the expression, its
not my own) seemed as bad to him as a spell or charm. It must not be used
upon any occasion, without doubt he would never have been so strait laced and
severe in this particular, if he had but dreamed of that strait which a
minister a friend of his was put unto by this means; the story is short. A
Butcher was gored in the belly by an Ox, the wound was cured, the party
desired public thanksgiving in the Congregation, the Minister finding no
form for that purpose reads the Collects for Churching of women:

Next for preaching. That he is most able in this kind is agreed by all. But
that he ever preached himself in this Dioces saving once, I never heard
affirmed by any.

His next care was that others should not preach too often: if they did, they
must be put into his black bill: He changed that golden sentence of ( vae mihi
si non praedicavero) into vae aliis si praedicaverint; he was so far from the
practice of Saint Paul the great Preacher of the Gentiles, who we read
preached till midnight, that there must be no Sermons in the afternoon, there
may be, nay there must be sports and pastimes then. And as if he had stood in
fear of the inarticulate language of bells which might foretell a Sermon, he
cannot endure to hear the noise of a Sermon in the toll of a Bell.

In a word; he adorned Churches at the charge of other men, and spoiled
Pulpits, which ought to have been the greatest part of his own charge.

(My Lords) you have now presented to your Lordships a brother, nay one whose
place engaged him to be a father of the Clergy, yet one who like Joseph's
brethren has taken the coats from Joseph nay they were forced to fly from him
as Joseph from his Mistress, or else they must taste of his forbidden waters,
but in their going away he rents their skirts, nay their whole garments and
lively hoods from them, he has taken the locks from many Sampsons, and done
what he could to put out their eyes, and to make them grind in the mill of his
pernicious and dangerous innovations.

He should like Moses have led his flock. Moses led the children of Israel
through the red Sea; this man drives part of his flock over the Sea, but went
not himself.

Like Nimrod he has invaded the laws and liberties of the subject, he has
been as great a robber as ever was presented to your Lordships: He has robbed
the King of his Subjects, the greatest glory of Kings; the Kingdom of trade,
of tradesmen, the supporters of it.

He that deprives the King of one subject, you know his punishment, and what
shall be the punishment of him who has robbed the King of so many subjects?

In the time of King Henry the third, we find a tenant in Dower punished 16.
H. 3. F. wast. 128.
in action of waste, because she had destroyed two rich villeynes, and made
them beggars.

I appeal to your Lordships, what is his offense who has committed so much
wilful wast and spoil, beggered hundreds, not villains, but free borne
subjects.

He robbed the souls of that sweet Manna which is pabulum animarum, the Word
of God.

(My Lords) I have not yet recounted all his robberies; he has robbed God of
part of his day, makes part of that a day of sports; he has robbed the
subjects of their indubitable birthright, the Laws of the Kingdom.

The Citizens of Norwich must pay tithes for the rents of houses; there is no
Law in England, nor custom in Norwich for it: Nay and that they may be sure to
be robbed of justice too, the suit for these tithes must be in his own
Consistory, from whence there must be no appeal, no prohibition.

The true Patrons of Churches they are robbed of their presentations, others
who had none or small pretense of right are admitted upon this unhallowed
maxim, That if he should institute those who had right, the pretendor was
without remedy; by this he inverted a fundamental Law of this Nation, to
invest remediless rights with unjust possessions.

(My Lords) I cannot tell you all, but you can measure a Lion by the paw.

I am commanded to lay this great malefactor at your doors, one who has
been a great oppugner of the life and liberty of Religion, and who set a brand
of infamy (to use his own words) upon Ipswich education.

In sum, one who is a complete mirror of innovation, superstition, and
oppression, he is now in the snare of those articles, which were the works of
his own hands.

The rod of Moses at a distance was a serpent, it was a rod again when it was
taken into his hands: this Bishop was a serpent, a devouring serpent in the
Dioces of Norwich; your Lordships peradventure will by handling of him make him
a rod again; or if not, I doubt ^^t but your Lordships will chastise him with
such rods as his cri^es (...) deserve.

(My Lords) I am commanded by the House of Commons to des^^ your Lordships that
this Bishop may be required to make answer (...) these Articles, and that there
may be such proceedings against him (...) the course and justice of parliament
does admit:

FINIS.

