THE NEVVEST AND TRVEST, AND MOST IMPARTIAL RELATION OF ALL THE LATE
Occurrence which has happened at SHERBOURNE-CASTLE, and thereabouts.

Being the Extract of diverse several Letters, sent from worthy Persons of good
credit and quality, to a special friend in LONDON.

Printed September 14. 1642.

THE LATEST RELATION from SHERBURN-CASTLE.
SIR,
I Know how dangerous it is to write in this time, if my letter be intercepted,
and kept close, yet Truth will break out; and indeed I challenge and defy any,
which dare lay an untruth to the charge of this Relation, appealing to the
conscience of all that know the passage thereof.

On this day sennight being Saturday, the Earl of Bedford appeared before
Sherborn Castle, His Forces consisted partly of Devonshire men (whereof some
400. came to D^rchester on Tuesday last as I take it, but sure I am, a Minister
rode very demurely before them with a Bible in his hand, and many of them by
their habit were judged men of good quality) as also men of Dorset and
Sommersetshire. Many of them advanced slowly and sadly, and you know the Nature
of Westcountrey men, who most of them holding their means for their lives, were
loath to hazard their lives and lifely hood at one adventure.

The men of the Town of Sherborn (presumed to be of the Earl of Bedfords side)
declared themselves otherwise, and with their shot did much annoyance to his
men* There h^^h passed many skirm^shes* betwixt the M(...)sse of Hartford's men
and the Earl of Bedfords, with the chance of war; sometimes the one and
sometimes the other had the better.

At last the Country men began to think that Featherbeds were better lodging
then the hard earth, which made many of them (if you will have it in the best
phrase) withdraw themselves away, which I doubt not but will willingly come
back again to see an happy agreement betwixt the King and Parliament. The Earl
of Bedford with those that were left, discamped; and retreated to Yevell, (4
little miles from Sherborn) where the Lord Marquess and the Lord Paulet Bid
him Battle, and there followed an hard and hot Encounter, wherein the
Marquess had the best of it.

Sir, I am sorry to report that an hundred men were slain on the Earls side,
which I am afraid will prove too true, and the adjacent Towns will dolefully
witness that I am no liar* many of them were men of quality, as appeared by
their burial in the Church of Yevel.

If M. Trenchard; Sir Thomas Trenchards elder son, be sl^in (as it is
credibly reported) I shall be an he^vie mourner at his funeral. But should be
a hear^^er rejoycer if he be preserved alive, to do good service for God, his
King and Country.

On the Marquesses side were slain ten Musketeers, none men of any quality.
And he has taken Captain Hungerford, and eight others, prisoners.

On the other side in the time of their Bickering, the Earl of Bedford took
prisoner Captain Bamfeild, and five other of the Marquesses men. And thus we
see if these woeful times continue, Parties may mutually get the Conquest; but
the whole English Nation, with the Protestant Religion, Church and State, must
be a looser.

The Earl of Bedford with his Troops fairly retreated to Dorchester, It is our
hopes and our prayers that King and Parliament may so agree, that we may
effectually stop the Bleeding Estate of Ireland. And now Sir know I have played
with you the fore-game in friendship, and expect (how dangerous soever the
times be) some requital of London news from you, which I fear will be as sad
and sorrowful as what we have here written.

Yours, A. W.

Another Letter from Sherborn-Castle.
SIR,
THose mistakings and omissions which have made in my last Intelligence, I pray
correct and supply by these presents.

On Friday last the 2. of this Month, the Earl of Bedford pitched his Siege
before Sherbourne, with eight hundred Horse, five thousand Foot, with twelve
pieces of Ordnance. Those in the Castle were not above six hundred horse and
foot, and two small field Pieces.

On Saturday, the Earl began his Battery, and approached the Town, wherein
many of the Townsmen shooting out of their Windows, killed some few, and wounded
more of the Earls men.

On Sunday, those in the Castle hung out the White Flag, desiring rest that
day, which the others little regarding continued their Battery; and this
occasioned some shot from the Castle, which took no effect, but the hindrance
of their work.

On Monday, many Cannon-shot were made at the Castle, Town, and
Church-Steeple, but with little harm.

Tuesday Morning, the Earl proclaimed a sessation of Arms, and commanded them
all to remove their Ammunition and Artillery to Yevell, which that night was
done accordingly.

Wednesday betwixt four and five of the clock in the afternoon, some of the
Castle-Troopes went out, only to take the Air, and see what was become of the
Earls Army, wearing no Arms but Swords and Gunnes, and many having but two
shots a piece. The Earls men having notice thereof set upon them. Here was hot
service, and the Castle-men twice charging so repelled those that assaulted
them, that they began to retreat.

But the rest of the Earls Army endeavored (whilst their fellows fought) to
get behind the Castle-Troops, and so to cut them off in their retreat.
Whereupon the Castle men desisted from any further charge, and forced their
passage through such as lay behind them home to the Castle, whither they all
came safe, saving nine men who were killed upon the place, and five taken
prisoners, whereof Sergeant Major Bamfeild was one.

One of the nine slain was a Dorset shire Gentleman Captain H: Hussy, whilst
they had him at their mercy, they most barbarously cut off his members, and
then did him the favor to kill him.

Of the Earls side the loss was great, but uncertain, the River hard by
buried many of them, as appears by diverse Horses since found floating in it,
and seven men of that Company were openly buried in Yevell-Church the next
morning; and they say many buried privately in a Hill there by, which how true
it is, God knows: Thirty of their Horses were taken and carried to the
Castle; and with them seven taken prisoners, whereof Captain Hungerford was
chief.

Thursday, the Earls Forces were dismissed by his Command, and dispersed
themselves, whilst he himself retreated to Dortchester.

I had almost forgotten a sad Accident. Whilst the Devonshire-men were
distributing their Powder, and ready to besiege the Castle, two Barrells taking
fire, killed some men, scald and maimd many, to the number of sixteen.

God turn our swords into sythes, that leaving all acts of Hostility, we may
peaceably receive the fruits of the Earth. Help us with your Prayers to GOD,
that by the agreement of King and Parliament, we may enjoy a happy peace.

FINIS.

