PRIMA PARS. DE COMPARATIS Comparandis: Seu Iustificationis Regis Caroli,
comparate, contra Parliamentum.

Or the first part of things compared: or of the justification of King Charles
comparatively against the Parliament.

Wherein is manifested, that by the cunning contrivance of a wicked party in
the House of Commons, who by their fraud, and subtilty, deceive and seduce the
major part of the House for their own ambitious ends, our oppressions have been
made far more grievous, then they were in the Kings days, the course of
justice, and relief of grievances, is obstructed, and our troubles and
pressures are still continued.

With a relation of certain acts of injustice, deceit and treason, committed by
some of them against the Kingdom, and certain persons and particular
observations of the treasonable purpose, and designs of the same evil, and
treacherous party to secure themselves from justice, and to get the Sovereign
power into their own hands.

With the names of the heads, of the usurping faction, and advice to all the
free men of England, to beware of them, and to take a speedy course to remove
and expel them, together with an intimation of a way to effect the same.

Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou that
teach a man should not steal, do thou steal, thou that say a man
should not commit adultery, committest thou adultery? thou that abhorrest
Idols, committest thou Sacrilege? thou that make the boast of the Law
through breaking of the Law, dishonourest thou God?

Romans 2.21, 22, 23. Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
Parve nec invidio, sine me liber ibis in urbem,
Hei mihi quod Domino, non licet ire tuo.
OXFORD, Printed in the Year, 1647.

To the Reader. Vouchsafe to read, and then judge.
TO avoid all misunderstanding: and lest I may seem in some weak men's
apprehensions, by this unexpected Comparison, or Comparitive justification of
the King, absolutely to justify the King, and condemn the whole Parliament. I
conceive it expedient to prefix this Epistle for the information of all men,
concerning my self, and my meaning in this matter. As I never hated my King,
(which God forbids) So I always honored, and adhered to the Parliament, as
the supreme judicatorie, and chief, conservatorie of the laws, rights, and
liberties of the land. I am neither Priest, or Jesuit. Malignant, Delinquent or
Papist: but one who have ever loved the truth, and the republique: and have
exposed my self (as can be testified) as freely and as far as any
whatsoever, for the preservation and promotion of both under the Parliament.
And this my Comparison does no more justify the King de facto or condemn the
Parliament, in toto; then Christ's upbraiding of Chorazin and Bethzaida, with
Tire and Zidon, and Capernaum, with Sodom and the Scribes, and Pharisees, with
common Harlots, Publicans and Sinners, does justify Tire and Zidon, Sodom,
and Common Harlots, Publicans and Sinners, and condemn Chorazin, and Bethzaida,
Capernaum, the Scribes and Pharisees. For I am not ignorant, that there are a
company (the which the Lord preserve and multiply) of faithful and upright men
in the Parliament, (who ever shall have my heart and hand) whose ends and
endeavors, are wholly to set up the Gospel in the power of it, to do right to
their King, and to discharge their trust to the Kingdom, in seeing justice
impartially executed, and our laws and liberties established according to
their Oath taken at their entrance, the duty of their place, and the
Protestation. But there is a party or faction in the House of Commons, (the
heads of which I have named) of false, ambitious, deceitful, coveteous, heady,
high minded-men, whose ends are their own opulency and greatness, and our
indigency, and vassalage, who like the sons of Zerviah are too hard for them:
for these ill kind of men, by their cunning craftiness, do deceive and seduce
the Mayor part of the House of Commons, to assist in their destructive
counsels and votes, and by this means overpower the honest and upright in the
discharge of their duties: but the Lord has said, that he will reward the
evil doer according to his wickedness, 2 Samuel 3.39. And the discovery of these
men's (the causers and contrivers of all our troubles) deep Hypocrisy and
hateful treachery, to the too long oppressed and abused free people of England
is all my scope and purpose, having principally therein, no other end of
advantage then Gods glory, the good of his people, and the preservation and
freedom of my native Country, which at present is over whelmed in confusion
and misery, that the secret and inward enemies thereof (as well as the open and
public) which do now only impede the accomplishment of our settlement and
tranquillity, may be detected, depressed and taken out of the way: that so the
parliament may be rectified, and preserved entire and upright, in its Power the
good therein strengthened and encouraged, and our laws and liberties
established, and kept inviolate. So shall justice run down in our streets as
streams, and righteousness as great waters. Read therefore considerately,
consider seriously, judge impartially, and improve all thy power, interest and
parts accordingly, for the suppressing the wickedness of the wicked, and
advancing of righteousness and truth within this our land. In which I shall be
ever willing and ready, who acknowledge my self Gods, and my Countries, and
thine if thou art theirs.

Amon Willbee.

Prima Pars. De Comparatis Comparandis. Seu Iustificationis Regis Caroli,
compara^e, contra Parliamentum.
Or the first part of things compared.
Hear Oye Country men, and harken all ye free borne Commons of England, mark
and mind seriously what I shall say: Do not read only, and so lay it by, but
weight it also well in your minds, and fix it in your memories, let it affect
your spirits, and work upon your judgments, least ye suddenly perish. For I
will relate no fictions but real truths: nor are my desires and intentions any
other, then to discover unto you your dangers that ye may speedily apply your
selves, unto such means as God has given and left you, to save and secure
your selves, and your posterities, your Estates, Laws, and Liberties, which are
at this present in extreme hazard, and that ye your selves may (by way of
Comparison) discern and be Judges, whether the evils of government which we
underwent in the days of the King, by his evil instruments, or these we now
suffer under the Parliament, (which ought to be our sovereign help) be most
grievous and in excusable, and whether our present condition be not much (...)
more perilous and intolerable, then it was in those times. And I will declare
unto you, the chief Authors and promoters of these our evils, and of the
obstructions of Justice and redress: Or who by their power and cunning crafty
working, impose upon, and deceive the Mayor part of the House of Commons,
whereby all acts for the good of the public are diverted, all settlement is
protracted, the whole Kingdom and frame of government is endangered, and the
power and authority of parliament is dishonored, blemished and made
contemptible.

J do remember that after the Kings return in 1641. from the Parliament in
Scotland, diverse jealousies did arise in the apprehention of this present
Parliament in England, concerning a strong design by a Malignant Jesuited
party, to devide the King and Parliament, and to deprive the people of the
fruit of all the Parliaments earnest and faithful labors and endeavors (as
they then affirmed, for the establishing the people in safety, peace and
happiness. Whereupon they fall on declaring, and in December. 1642. they publish
a large Remonstrance to the whole kingdom, containing the roots, growth,
means, oblique and direct, together with the actors and promotors of this
design for the subverting the fundamental laws and principles of this
government, wherein after some matter of introduction) among other things as
misprisions in the Kings government, They complain of, charging the Kingdom
with ^^^^^ting ^ ldiers, and of a concomitant design of Germain Horse, that the
land might either submit with fear, or be enforced with rigor to such
arbitrary contributions as should be required of them. And I pray you fellow
Commoners, stands not the Parliament guilty of this accusation, of billerting
Soldiers on the Kingdom, even ever since they raised arms, and that in a more
intolerable manner then that was in those times? For the Parliament by
themselves and their distr ying Committees, and Commissions, have levied great
taxes* and raised large sums of money in all parts (the which the King did not)
with a pretense to pay the Soldiers, that they might in all places pay their
quarters, yet was the Soldier never paid, but the Country were both assessed
and exhausted, and also burdened with free quarterings, and nevertheless, if
the people refused to pay their taxes, the Committees sent a party of horse,
and either took the persons prisoners (as well friends as adversaries) or
plunder them, the which I am sure was fully answerable to that Concommitant
design, (which was then as themselves do say but intended) of German Horse:
And I do wish there were not now in hard a design (by an ambitious party in
the Parliament) for the establishment and making perpetual of this same
inssaving practice of billitting Solders and German horse (as they call it)
throughout the Kingdom, that thereby the people may either submit with fear,
or be enforced with rigor to pay such arbitrary contributions as shall be
exacted of them: But alas it is too manifest a man half blind may see it. But
it will be said, the Parliament have been necessitated to this, there has been
I conteste a necessity of raising Soldiers, but not of billitting them without
paying their quarters. For the Parliament and their Committees, have raised
unspeakable sums to pa^^th. Soldiers, to the end they might pay their quarters
the which they or their Committees (as is suspected) have put into their own
purses, and never paid them but burdened the Country, notwithstanding with
free quarters. They complain also of the Kings raising great sums by way of
Privy Seals, proportionable to subsidies.

And have not the Parliament done the self same thing, by way of public
faith, and that much more abundant, Ask London, and a numberless multitude of
all sorts of persons, and they will with no less then heavy sighs, testify
this truth. And whether had ye rather a Privy Seal, or the public says?
Verum horum mavis accipe, many fear the last will prove the worst securities.
They complain also, of an unjust and pernicious attempt to extort great
payments from the Subject by way of Excise. This it seems was then but an
Attempt, but the Parliament, have notwithstanding the injustice and
perniciousnesse of it, really acted it, and so by their own terms they have
herein exceeded the King, for iniust and pernicious dealing. They complain
also, that the Petition of Right, which was granted in full Parliament, was
blasted by an illegal Declaration, and of the presumptuous injustice of such
Ministers as durst break the laws, and suppress the liberties of the
Kingdom. The Petition of Right was then (as themselves say) only blasted by an
illegal Declaration: But have not they since blasted it, and made it also
fruitless, by a multiude of illegal actions, as false imprisonments, and
examining of men (after the manner of the Courts of Star Chamber, and High
Commission) upon Interrogatories against themselves, and with many other like
unjust practices, as herein after more plainly appears. And I appeal to all, if
ever any manifested more presumption, in daring to break the laws, and
suppress the liberties of this Kingdom, then many of themselves? They also
complain of the illegal imprisonment (by the King) of some Members of the
House of Commons at the breaking up of the Parliament 40. Car. deteining them
close prisoners, etc. not permitting their wives to come unto them. etc. and so
keeping them in this oppressed condition, by reason of which their cruel and
harsh imprisonment some have dyed, whose blood (as they say) cries for
vengeance or repentance of the Ministers, of State, who at once obstructed both
the course of his Majesty's justice and mercy. I will not here discuss the
imprisonning of Sir Ra. Hopton* and Mr. Martin, two of their own Members, for
speaking their minds freein in the House of Commons, albeit without question,
one if not both the commitments (for the causes were contrary) were illegal,
and contrary to the law and custom of Parliament: but it is certain they have
in all respects justified this act of the Kings, by inflicting the same measure
of injustice and cruelty upon diverse of their fellow Members of the body
politic (as on L. C. John Lilburn, Mr. Musgrave, Mr. Rich. Overton, and his
wife, both Mr. Larners servants and others) which they so much condemn in his
Majesty and his Ministers. But the house of Commons will happily say, that
they were committed and thus used by the House of Lords. Not all, and besides,
there is an old rule, qui non vetat peccare, cum potest jubet. He who hinders
not an evil when it is in his power, commands it. And moreover this is
certain, that many poor prisoners for debt, and others their fellow Subjects
(as I shall herein plainly demonstrate) who have petitioned them more then
these 5. years for redress, have through their neglect, by the cruelty and
inhumain usage of Gaolers (Sir I. L. of the Kings Bench Henry Wollaston of
Newgate, such monsters and others,) been miserably destroyed, and perished in
prison: whose blood without doubt cries loud in the ears of the Lord of Hosts,
for vengeance (without repentance) upon tha heads and hearts of them the
ministers of State, who have been entrusted for the preservation of the Nation,
and notwithstanding all petitioning, have neither done justice nor showed
mercy. No, nor cannot, either by preaching, praying, petitioning, speaking, or
any peaceable means, be induced unto it. They are not so just as the unjust
Judge, for he relieved the poor widow because he was importuned, On ye
unrighteous men, whereunto do ye trust, and what will ye do in the end?

Then they complain, that upon the dissolution of the Parliaments untrue and
scandalous Declarations were published, to asperse their proceedings, and some
of their members uniustly to make them odious, and color the violence which
was used against them. Proclamations set out to the same purpose, to the great
deiecting of the hearts of the people, forbiding them even to speak of
Parliaments. Even as their our enemies then in those days served them, so have
a wicked party among them most uniustly and maliciously now served their best
friends and favorers, for on the 30. of March last, they hearing of a Petition
intended to be presented to them by the Army under his Excellency Sir T.
Fairfax, for certain just and reasonable things, as appears by the Petition
published in print, viz. For an Ordinance to save them harmless, that they
might have their accounts audited, etc. an unjust party in the house (having
not so much as seen the petition) caused them most falsely to be declared
against as mutinous enemies to the State, and disturbers of the public peace
and that in as stately terms of royalty, to wit, their high dislike, as if
they were already set in their throne) as ever the King used: Thus endeavoring
to asperse that Army, which has done them all the work and gained them all
the honor, and to render them and their friends odious, by ill
representations, whose fidelity, obedience, good order, and unity, has been
always admired, even by the public adversary: Besides their daily making of
destructive Ordinances, and Orders to persecure and oppress them and all the
Commons of England, and their continual projects and plottings to destroy them
and all those, who are contrary to their tyrannical counsels and courses, to
the deiecting and discomforting generally of all sorts of people: and as the
King and his instruments to color their violence, did set our Declarations. So
has this evil party by the published Protestation, Vow, Solemn league and
Covenant, and manifold falsified Declarations, Hypocritical Fasts and
Humiliations, colored and countenanced their abominable irreligion, injustice,
oppression, violence, deceit, rapine, cruelty, ambition and treason: in so
much, that the name of Parliament, which throughout past generations, has been
so joyous and delectable, so respected and honorable within this Kingdom, is
now become an odium, detestable and contemptible, and it is to be feated will
for time to come, not be accounted a thing so much desirable.

After the breaking up of which Parliament, (say they) injustice, oppression
and violence, broke in upon us without any restraint or moderation. And truly
we may say, that since the Kings departure from us, injustice, oppression and
violence and all manner of mischief, has by the means of a company of
faithless perfidious men in Parliament been let in, like a sudden inundation
of mighty waters, upon us, without any true care of restraint, or sincere
endeavor to prevent.

Then they complain of exacting great sums through the whole kingdom, for
defauls of Knighthood, that tunnage and poundage was received without any
color or pretense of Law, many other heavy impositions continued against law,
that such as would not submit to their illegal and unreasonable payments, were
vexed and oppressed above measure: and the ordinary course of justice, the
common birthright of every Subject in England wholly obstructed unto them, and
that although all this was taken upon pretense of guarding the Seas, yet a new
tax of Ship Money was charged upon the Subject of near 70000. l. some years,
and yet the seas were left so naked to the violence of turkish Pirates, that
many ships and Subjects were taken by them, and do still remain in miserable
slaverie. And has the Parliament exacted no sums of money of the Kingdom? Yes
more, and far greater then ever was paid for Knight hood, yet then in leiu
thereof there was an offer of honor, but lo here there has not been so much
as thanks: and to what better use do the parliament put the tunnage and
poundage, which they now receive by pretense of Law, then the King did when he
received it without pretense of Law, and what more benefit has the Kingdom
had by it, where, and who is he that can tell? but by what pretense or color
of law (friends and fellow Commoners) do these men (who were so zealous for
Law) receive the mighty sums imposed upon us by way of Excise, and weekly
assessement, and still continue them upon us per force? and such as will not
submit to their illegal, unreasonable payments are (as themselves heretofore
complained) vexed and oppressed above measure. And I appeal to the whole
Kingdom, whether the ordinary course of i^stice, the Common Birthright (as
themselves by chance, are so just to confess) of every Subject of England, was
ever more generally and totally obstructed, then now? For the Parliament the
Fountain, and supreme Court of Justice, being so gr^sly corrupted, how can the
streams, the subordinate and infe^iour Courts be clear? and woe unto us for
if the eye be dark, how great then is that darkness? but there must be some
timely means used to purge them, lest the humors prove pestilentiall and so
endanger the whole Nation. And as for the Ship Money, it was indeed illegal;
nor could the King justify it: yet it was but light in comparison of the vast
sums, and never ceasing impositions the Parliament have laid and do still lay
upon us contribution, twentieth and fifth parts, Excise, weekly assessements,
(penance pence) allowance (I mean) for our fastings, Sequestrations of Houses,
lands, goods, moneys, jewels, cattle, cloths, and what not, unless wives and
children, the which (like the greedy tyth taking Priests) they will neither
pity nor take care for, and notwithstanding all this, and all the customs
the which they receive pur^osely to guard the Seas, and all the Kings revenues.
The Navy has been worse maintained and ordered, and the Seas have been worse
guarded then in the worst of the Kings days, and many taken Captives, yea, the
other day a ship which was bound with provisions for distressed Ireland, was t
ken upon our own coasts (as I may say) from under our own walls and carried
pr^z^ i^to France, well looked to Green Bence, Vassal, and the rest of the
Committee, ye have more care to rake money then to look to the Sea, or care
for the Navy. And I much marvel (fellow Commoners) that the Parliament which
as ye read seemed when they did remonstrate to be so sensible of their fellow
Subjects, being taken Captives being made slaves by the Turks and Moors,
should notwithstanding an act passed by the King this present Parliament for
their release, and relief, never take any course unto this day for to redeem
those poor souls out of slavery. Where and what is become of all those moneys,
which (as I remember) were raised and collected for that good Christian work;
received and disposed, (as the most of the rest as is supposed) into private
pockets, and to particular uses?

Then they complain of the enlargement of Forests, contrary to Charta
Foresta, this was not so bad in the King as the i^la^gement of p^iviledges is
in the Parliament: that was injurious but to some persons in special this is
to all in general. For the privileges of Parliament, are grown like the
rules of Kings Bench prison, without limits, for if ye do but present, nay
only prepare a petition contrary to the humors of the prev^lent malevolent
party; be it never so legal and necessary, demand justice, or tell any of them
of their shameless injustice, it is presently voted a breach of their
privilege, but they themselves may threaten, and revile persons, check and
reproach, yea imprison wi nesses, and affront and assault men contrary to the
law, and the nature of their places, take them by the collar and pull them by
the throat, (and that only because they are advertised of their evil (as
haughty Mr. Hollis did lately Major Tulidah, in a word, according to the
expression of some of them, they may do what they list, and some of them do
accordingly act all manner of violence and injustice by virtue of their
privileges. O admirable privileges, whose uncircumcised bounds are so
absolutely destructive to our laws, rights and liberties. Then they tell you
of exacting Coat and Conduct money, and diverse other military charge,; and of a
desperate design of engrossing all the Gunpowder into one hand, and keeping
it in the Tower of London, and of the taking away the Arms of the Trained
bands of diverse Counties, etc. Though the Parliament have not exacted money
under the notion of Coat and Conduct, yet they have exacted (and still do
exact of you) large sums of money to pay their Armies, and for other military
charges, and though they have not taken away the Arms of your Trained bands,
yet they have taken away your servants, and caused you to find both men and
Arms, to do them service, yea and they have contrary to law sent forth your
Trained bands and their Arms, to the hazard of the places from whence they
went, (especially of London City, but the disceived fools did not see (the
which the King never did, as for the design of engrossing all the Gun powder
into one hand, it was not so bad as is the design of some men in the
Parliament, of engrossing the stock of all the moneys, power, and privileges
of the whole land into their hands, by which means the people shall be utterly
impoverished and made slaves.

Then they complain of selling the Kings timber, the taking away of men's right
under color of the Kings title to land, between high and low water marks. Of
the Monopolies of Soap, Salt, etc. the restraint of the liberties of the
Subjects in their habitation, trades, and other interest. And who had more
right to sell the Kings timber then himself, they cannot say he sold any but
his own, and what he had a lawful right and interest in: but many of the
Parliament have destroyed other men's timber, and sold abundance both of woods
and goods, since these fatal wars and put the moneys (I believe into their
own purses, whereunto they had neither title or intrest, and (to omit those who
have indeed been Delinquents) how many men's rights, even whole estates, have
these wicked men of the Parliament taken away, under color of Delinquency (the
(right) between high and low water mark^) the owners whereof have been no
Delinquents. I need not instance examples, too many of their own friends can
testify against them. Only one or two for a proof, as Mr. Antrobus an honest
pious Minister of the Gospel in Cumberland, one who has both paid to them and
suffered for them, and for his fidelity is entrusted as a Commissioner with
Mr. Musgrave by his country, to solicit the House for redress of their
grievances, had his benefice to the value of a 100. l. yearly, and his estate
the other day adjudgd to be sequestered and taken away for Delinquencie, to no
disadvantage I hope, of the Earl of Northumb. and Mr. Barwis, a Member of the
House of Commons (of whom more hereafter) one of the Common wealths deceitful
servants and false friends. In like manner (as I have heard) was the Vicar of
the rich Viccarage of Wiggen in Lancashire served, who afterward dyed in the
Parliament service and quarrel, yet this was done that one Mr. Case a coveteous
Priest, might be put in. I have indeed observed that since the Parliament got
the power into their own hands, there has not been a more sure token of
Delinquency in the eyes of some Parliament men, and coveteous Priests, then a
fair house richly furnished, a pleasant seat well wooded, a good office, and a
fat benefice, or a flock well woolled, (and sometime a desire of revenge) might
witness Sir Garret kemp of Slindon, near Chichester in Sussex, a man of
peaceable demeanor and conversation, and aged near 80. years having many
children and grand children, and an estate upwards, of 2000. l. per annum well
wooded and a great personal estate was totally sequestered to his damage of
near 20000. l. for denying to send his horses to Chichester to assist Sheriff
Foord against the Parliament, and afterward upon a second warrant sent from
them by Foord upon pain of death, he being told by his servants the said
Sheriff had declared he must have them, Sir Garret replied, if they must have
them let them have them, upon proof of which words learned Mr. Sam. Brown, and
the rest of the reverend Committee of Lords and Commons for sequestration, did
adiudge and declare the confirmation of the Sequestration of his estate, and
10000. l. worth of Beech, (some of 500. years growth) because beech cannot be
supposed by them to be timber, has felled and disposed of although he hewed
within 4. mile of the enemies Garrison, and 20. mile distant of the Parliament
fo^ces. As for the restraint of the liberties of the Subject in their
habitations. I say restraint in a man's habitation, is far better, more
comfortable and tolerable, then to be restrained in a noisome Jail or prison,
where he can have no free communion with his wife, children, family or friends,
and is exposed to the ty^anny of Gaolers, and all manner of oppressive charges.
But why talk these men of restraint of the liberties of the Subjects in their
habitations, when as they restrain the King (their sovesaign Lord and ours, of
liberty in his own house, and that in such a manner as is worse then a prison?
for commonly and legally, men in prison may receive and right letters touching
their own affairs, and commune, discourse, walk and talk, with any
visitant, friend or stranger, without prohibition, inspection, incivill
question, or restriction: but so cannot Charles our King. A sad and strange
condition. We say that by law a man ought not to be kept close prisoner, and by
the Petition of Right: it is declared, to be contrary to law, to imprison a man
without cause showed or expressed. Yet is our King, and if they date deal so
presumptuously with the King (their Sovereign Lord) contrary to law: do you
think (country men) they will if they can choose allow you law? no, no, be not
deceived. But ye shall find more concerning this man our King, and this matter,
and this treacherous parties (as they conceive) their undiscerned abuses of
him, and of the whole Kingdom through him, and their designs upon him and us
by him, elsewhere following, as for Monopolies, though they have taken away some
yet they continue others, witness among diverse the Monopoly of And a n^^^
Monopoli^ lately gra^^^^ by them t^ (...) Crew, an^ others of t^^^ Norway t^^
Merchant adventurers, to the spoiling and destroying of the trade and lively
hood of thousands, who subsist by that stable trade of Clothing And for the
restraint of the liberty of the Subject in other interest. I can tell you how
they have by an illegal Ordinance, restrained on Mr. Markham a Citizen of good
repute in London, the true and lawful Executer of one Mr. Gamble deceased*
from receiving or meddling with the estate and debts of the said Gamble, and
have appointed and authorized, Mr. Maud, and Mr. Bettison two other Citizens,
who were but Overseers, to receive and dispose of the same, and nevertheless
they leave Mr. Markam the Executer open and liable to pay all the testatours
debts, Legacies, and duties, and to be accountable for the Estate. Is this an
Act (my friends) befitting a Parliament, that would be accounted the preserver
of the Laws, proprieties, and liberties of the free men of England? If this be
that law, liberty, interest and propriety, they seem so zealous and swear so
hard for, and declate so vehemently to mainetaine, I had rather be one of the
Turks Vassells, then one of Englands free Commons. They proceed and tell you
of vexation and oppression by Purveyours, Clerks of the Market, and Saltpeter
men, the sale of pretended nuzances, as buildings, in and about London,
depopulation etc. all which drew many Millions out of the Subjects purses,
without any considerable profit to his Majesty. Does not the vexation and
oppression of the Parliament by their conscience less Committee men and their
Clerks, their sequestrators and their substitutes, Collectors, Receivers,
Porsevants, Messengers and their deputies and assistants, Informers, and a
multitude of Excise Cater pillars, (Publicans and Sinners) a rabble indeed of I
know not what destroying officers, wholike the locusts of Egypt, overspread
the whole Kingdom, trancendantly exceed these other businesses of Purveyors,
Clerks of the market, etc. and what benefit profit or advantage at all have we
had of all those many millions of moneys the Parliament has dreigned and
scrued from us, and how have they disposed of it? for they are but our
Stewards, and it is very meet and just, that we should have an account, but I
fear they intend no such matter if they can prevent it. And for the
depopulation, which is the turning of ^rrable land, that is common fields, into
pasture. J would this had been the worst that had been done, for have not there
bin diverse acts of Parliament provided against it, and did not they justly
deserve to be deeply fined, who for their own pride and unreasonable lucre
that (as the Scripture speaks) they might live Lord like alo^e in the midst of
the Earth, would destroy whole towns of tillage, where time out of mind there
had been, many good houses kept by the plough, for the entertainment of the
stranger, and relief of the poor, where there had been so many Farms
occupied by husbandry, to the sustaining of many poor samilies by days
labor, and many able farmers had lived, that had yielded aid and subsidies, to
his Majesty for the service of the Kingdom, whereas now in most of these
places, the towns being depopulated and destroyed, and the people that be left
beggered, and all the common fields and plough-land enclosed and turned into
pasture ye shall find nothing for comfort or entertainment, but a poote
Shepherd living (happily) in the midst of a multitude of grounds, in a poor
sheep-Cote* standing as a Cottage in the midst of a Vineyard. But let such men
be assured that Lordlikenesse contracted by such accursed means, will never
continue, and he that thinks the poor and mean man, unworthy to live in the
earth by him, may in due time either him or his posterity be to seek a
habitation, if not beg their bread. And for certain some of our Parliament
men, were and are guilty of this impoverishing destroying practice, and because
they were deservedly punished for it, did therefore complain, though more of
malice, then just cause.

Then they complain, that large quantityes of common and several grounds have
been taken from the subject by color of the statute of improvement etc and are
not the sam^ Commons and grounds detained still unto this day, and no redress
or remedy ministered, and who is in fault but Parliament? and that not only
private interest but also public faith had been broken and is not the like
daily done, and shamefully continued by the Parliament, (the complainers of
these abuses) themselves? and they say that the whole Kingdom was like to have
been robbed by an abominable project of Brafle money. It seems it was but a
like, I will not say a -- yet had they never lied, we had never been deceived.
But ye may be sure (friends) and ye will find it certain, if ye be not
watchful, and do not take courage; and prevent them, that some of them have
an abominable, treasonable project to rob the whole Kingdom (if they can) not
only of their moneys, but of that also which is more precious, their
birthrights, and their liberties, and that at once suddenly. Then they tell
you, that a great number of his Majesty's Subjects, for refusing those
unlawful charges, have been vexed by long and expensive suits, some fined, some
censured, imprisoned, etc that others have had their houses broke up, their
goods seized, and been restrained from their callings, with many other
assertions, not answetable to those grievous pressures we now feel. And have
not great numbers not only of Delinquents, but also of their own friends, for
refusing (because perhaps not able) to pay their unlawful and unreasonable
taxes and charges, been vexed with long tedious and expensive, attendances, on
themselves, and their shameless Committees, every way equivolent to long
suits? have not some had their Horses and Cartell taken and driven away, some
been imprisoned and plundered, and others had their houses broken up; or
forceably entered, and their goods seized, and made a pray on to their utter
undoing? And whereas they say, that the Star Chamber did abound in
extravagent censures, not only for the maintenance, and improvement of
Monopolies and other unlawful taxes, but for diverse other causes where there
has been no offense or very small, etc. Whether any Court or Counse^ that
ever was within the memory of man, in this Kingdom, did ever more abound (I
Will not only say) with extravagent, but with wild, wicked* contradictory,
distracted, unjust, illegal, unreasonable and uncolourable Votes, Sentences,
sayings, Ordinances, Orders and Censutes, then this present Parliament, and
their Committees, (and all through the subtil^y of the same evil party.) I
appeal not only to the whole land, but all the world, and those not only for
the maintenance and improvement of their unjust, unreasonable, and merciless
sequestrations, and others their like insupportable taxes, and charges, things
more grievous, then precedent Monopolies, but for other causes, worse and more
unrighteous; and that generally where the offense has been very small or none
at all. As the Committing of Major Tulidah, and Mr. Tew, do verify whereby his
Majesty's Subjects, they say have been oppressed, not more then at this present
I am certain, by grievous Fines, imprisonments, Stigmatizings, mutilation, etc.
these acts were then grievous to them it seems. yet now their fingers itch to
be exercising them upon others, if they had but oppertunity, what means else
that Declaration of the 31. of December. last, but I hope that as God did then,
so he will now, by his overruling providence, give an interruption to the
prevailing power and counsel of those who are the Authors and Promoters of
such peremptory and heady courses.

There they complain also, that Judges have been put out of their places for
refusing to do against their oaths, etc. men they were it seeme^ more
conscionable then themselves, and now by their usurped authority Judges are
made and put into places. who are glad to observe and serv^ their wills. For it
is not meet nor good manners for these Judges to oppose or contradict, Glyn,
Maynard, Prideaux, Brown, Wild, or any other of their masters, in any thing
they plead or move before them, and so ye plainly see, that our grave Judges
are still in effect but Durante been placit^ Lawyers, they say, have been
checked for being faithful to their Clyents Solicitovrs and Atturneys, have
been threatened and some punished so following law suits, and that by this
means all the approaches of iustic^ were forecluded. If Lawyers, Solicitours
and Atturneys be not now(...)


