THe Lord, who is wonderful in Council, and excellent in working, has so
wrought, that the scorching of some of his people with the Sun of persecution,
has been the enlightening of those who were not his people, with the Sun of
righteousness. This present Narrative gives testimony, That our dear Brethren
who withdraw from the heat of trouble in Old England, have been used as
Instruments in the Lords hand to draw some (I might say many) of the poor
Heathens to behold and rejoice in the light of the everlasting Gospel in
New England. Surely it is cause of greater glorying that any of those Heathens
have found the way of life and salvation among our brethren, then that our
brethren have found place and safety (yea, then though they should find the
richest merchandise of gold and silver) among those Heathens. And how much does
it become Christians to let Heathens see that they seek them more then theirs;
That the gaining of them to Christ is more in their eye, then any worldly gain.

Joseph Caryl.

The Light appearing more and more toward the perfect Day. OR, A farther
Discovery of the present state of the INDIANS IN New England, Concerning the
Progress of the Gospel amongst them. Manifested by Letters from such as
preached to them there.

Published by Henry Whitfeld, late Pastor to the Chuch of Christ at Gilford in
New England, who came late thence.

Zeph. 2. 11. The Lord will famish all the gods of the earth, and men shall
worship him, every one from his place, even all the Isles of the Heathen.

London, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the
Gilt Cup, near St. Austins gate in Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

To the Right Honorable THE PARLIAMENT OF England And the COUNCIL of STATE.
Right Honorable,
HOw abundantly the Lord has enlarged the hearts, and raised the resolutions
of this present Parliament to serve him, the many good things, and great things
done by you, sufficiently witness, and will be acknowledged, at least in
another generation. It is not the smallest in the eyes of those that look up to
God for you, both in Old England and New, that you have so readily contributed
your power, upon the first notice of the manifestation of Gods gracious work
upon the Indians, by an Act published by you, for promoving the same.

In order whereunto I crave leave in all humility to represent (having lived
some years in the Country, and lately came thence) how happily the Lord
carries on his work there, which I have done in this small Treatise following.

And for your more full satisfaction, give leave to remove such false surmises
and aspersions, suggested on purpose to retaed the work. Some are heard to
question the affections of New England toward the Parliaament, and present
state; To which I must answer, that the Magistrates, Ministers, and generally
the people of New England, so far as I know or have observed, or can learn,
have been faithful and cordial to the Parliament from the first, and do own
this present Government, and Commonwealth, giving in this as a real argument,
in being your Honors Remembrancers at the throne of grace, both praying to God
for you in your straits, and praising God for the enlargment of his good hand
upon you. Others endeavor more directly to prejudice the work, by suggesting
that the charity of the well-affected has been abused, in that there is no such
work, or that there is a greater noise made of it in the world then there is
cause; To this I can safely answer, that there has been, I believe in no man's
observation, greater faithfulness found in any business, both for truth of
relation in what has passed, or disposing what has been contributed; the
persons that are concerned in it, whether they be the Corporation established
by you, or that have the managing of it in New England, being persons of known
integrity, and much honored of all that know them, in this very respect; Most
of these accounts I have seen, both what moneys have been received and
disbursed, both what, how, and to whom. These also are ready to give your
Honors satisfaction about this, if need require, and it will be an ease, and
an honor to them to be called to such an account.

And now the way being thus cleared, I proceed to make it my humble request to
your Honors, that you would be pleased to accept of this my humble
acknowledgment, and thankful remembrance of what you have already done; and
that it would not be troublesome to you to be entreated, and stirred up by my
meannesse, to proceed in the continuance of your favor, as to the whole
Country, so especially toward this work, that your hands may be still held up
to the farther advance, and perfecting these happy beginnings. And as you have
given it feet, so you would give it wings, that it may get above al
difficulties, which may be cast in the way. Truly the work is honorable, and
worthy your care, and inmost affections, and to be laid in your bosoms, that
it may feel the warmth and influence of your favor, and best respects, it
tending so much to the good of the souls of these poor wild creatures,
multitudes of them being under the power of Satan, and going up and down with
the chains of darkness rattling at their heels. This I may also say for your
Honors encouragement, there is far greater cause of promoting this work then
formerly, there being more persons, and places which have received the Gospel
amonst them. Our Lord Christ and his truth gets ground, and the Devil Ioseth,
they daily break from him, and renounce him, and all his cursed works of
darkness, as you will find in this following Narrative. And lastly, let me
add but this, The Lord has given the uttermost ends of the earth to Jesus
Christ for his inheritance, let therefore your hands go on (Noble Worthies) to
help him in taking the possession of his own, who has kept you in yours with
an outstretched arm. But I shall be no farther troublesome to your Honors;
The most wise and strong God, for Christ's sake, strengthen your hearts and
hands, sit amongst you in your daily assemblings, and help you to guide the
Ship of this Commonwealth, under your care, in these tossing and troublesome
times, that there may be peace and safety found for such as are quiet in the
Land* and let me have the favor to be looked upon by you, as

Your Honors to serve you in the things of Jesus Christ, Henry Whitfeld.

Christian Reader.
I Have adventured to put this small Treatise in thy hand, and to give some
account of the publishing of it, conceiving it a means to advance that common
comfort, which all good Christians do share in with the Angels of heaven, about
the conversion of sinners to God. This will appear by showing there is a door
of hope opened for the poor Indians, of whom it may be thou have not yet
heard; I thought also by relating the truth of things, as they stand at
present, concerning the Indians you have heard of, and Gods dealing with them,
I might undeceive such as are either apt, or do believe, that things reported
of them are but a fable, and a device or engine used by some to cheat good
people of their money, and so discourage them from yielding any help toward
this great work. The Lord forgive them this great sin, that have raised these
evil reports.

Understand therefore (good Reader) that my self intending (by Gods help) my
return into my native Country; It pleased the Lord by his providence, before
we could come to the place where we were to take ship for England, that, by
reason of contrary winds, we were feign to put in at an Island called Martins
Vineyard, Some call it Marthaes Vineyard.
which is the most Southerly Island that lies in that tract of Land called New
England, where there is a small Plantation, and a Church gathered, where we
stayed about ten days, in which time I had the more leisure and opportunity to
inform my self of the state of the Indians there; having heard formerly that
diverse of them began to taste the knowledge of Christ: For this end I had
recourse to Mr. Mahu, who is the Pastor of the Church, and having attained a
good understanding in the Indian tongue, and can speak it well, has laid the
first foundation of the knowledge of Christ amongst the Indians there by
preaching unto them; who gave me full information of what I desired* I had also
speech with some of the Indians (Mr. Mahu being my Interpreter.) Above the rest
my desire was to speak with the Indian who now preaches unto them every Lords
day twice, whose name is Hiacoomes, who seemed to me to be a man of a prompt
understanding, of a sober and moderate spirit, and a man well reported of for
his conversation both by the English and Indians. I thought him to be about 30
years of age; with this man I had often speech, and I asked him diverse
questions about Christian Religion, and about his own estate before God. I
remember once I asked him these questions. 1. Whether he had found sorrow for
sin, as sin. 2. Whether he had sorrowed for his sins as they had pierced
Christ. 3. Whether he had found the Spirit of God as an inward comforter to
him; Unto all which he gave me a very good satisfactory and Christian answer.
After this I had the opportunity to go to a private meeting of the Indians (of
which you shall understand more in the Letter following) with Mr. Mahu, where
having spent three or four hours in Questions and Answers, which passed too
and fro between the Indians and my self; at our parting I desired that one of
them would desire a blessing upon what they had heard for their edification,
which was accordingly done; for they chose out a young man who prayed a quarter
of an hour, and somewhat more, with great reverence and affection, as far as
I could judge by his voice and outward deportment: Master Mahu also told me
that he had many pertinent and significant expressions in his prayer; so that
God has poured on some of them the gift, and I hope the spirit of prayer.

The next day we rode to the Indian Lecture, where Mr. Mahu preached and
catechized their children, who answered readily and modestly in the Principles
of Religion; some of them answered in the English some in the Indian tongue.
Thus having seen a short model of his way, and of the pains he took, I made
some enquiry about Mr. Mahu himself, and about his subsistence, because I saw
but small and slender appearance of outward conveniences of life, in any
comfortable way; the man himself was modest, and I could get but little from
him; but after, I understood from others how short things went with him, and
how he was many times forced to labor with his own hands, having a wife and
three small children which depended upon him, to provide necessaries for them;
having not half so much yearly coming in, in a settled way, as an ordinary
labourer gets there amongst them. Yet he is cheerful amidst these straits, and
none hear him to complain. The truth is, he will not leave the work, in which
his heart is engaged; for upon my knowledge, if he would have left the work,
and employed himself otherwhere, he might have had a more competent and
comfortable maintenance. I mention this the rather, because I have some hope,
that some pious mind, that reads this, might be inwardly moved to consider his
condition, and come to his succor for his encouragement in this great work.

At my parting from this Island I desired Mr. Mahu that he would take the pains
to write me the Story of Gods dealing with the Indians, from the first time of
their coming thither, to this present time; which he accordingly did, and I
received before my going out of the Country; which Letter of his to me,
finding many remarkable passages in it, I thought fit to publish it, that the
Lord might have the glory of his free grace, in regard of these poor Heathens
who seem to be the dregs and refuse of Adams lost posterity; and to put an
edge upon the prayers and praises of Gods people, the fruit of which will
return into their own bosoms. And if there be a right set of spirit in you,
you will bless God for such as present such kind of matter to you, and do put
an opportunity into your hands, whereby you may any way be instrumental to
promote the Kingdom of our Lord Christ.

The Letter written with his own hand follows.
SIR,
YOu being by especial providence of God, brought amongst us, and while you
were here looking into the present mercy of God that these Indians were blessed
with, you found an occasion farther to enquire what the former dispensations of
God have been to bring them hitherto. Now assuring my self that it is from
your desire that the Lord may be glorified in the salvation of these poor
Indian souls, I shall, by the assistance of God, declare the truth, and that
which shall, by his grace, administer also a ground of prayer to be put unto
the God of all blessings in Jesus Christ for us; and I hope, unto any, whom the
Lord shall call to the like service, a blessed experience of the Lords
workings, turning all things, yea seeming hindrances, to the furtherance of
the work of grace amongst them.

Now for your satisfaction you may please to know that this work amongst the
Indians had its first rise and beginning in the year 1643. When the Lord
stirred up the heart of an Indian, who then lived near to the English
Plantation, whose name is Hiacoomes, a man of a sad and a sober spirit, unto
whose Wi^wam or house some of the English repairing, and speaking to him about
the way of the English, he came to visit our habitations and public meetings,
thinking that there might be better ways and means amongst the English, for
the attaining of the blessings of health and life, then could be found amongst
themselves: Yet not without some thoughts and hopes of a higher good he might
possibly gain thereby, at which time I took notice of him, and had often
discourse with him, inviting him to my house every Lords day at night. About
this time it so fell out, that this Indian went with some English men to a
little Island, where meeting a surly Sagamore whose name was Pake Ponesso, By
this name they call their Kings and Governors.
who reproached him for his fellowship with the English, both in their civil
and religious ways, railing at him for his being obedient to them: Hiacoomes
replied that he was gladly obedient to the English, neither was it for the
Indians hurt he did so; Upon which the Sagamore gave him a great blow on the
face with his hand; but there being some English men present, they would not
suffer the Sagamore to strike him again. The poor Indian thus wronged, made
this use of it, and said, I had one hand for injures, and the other for God,
while I did receive wrong with the one, the other laid the greater hold on God.

There was a very strange disease this year amongst the Indians, they did run
up and down till they could run no longer, they made their faces as black as a
coal, snatched up any weapon, spoke great words, but did no hurt; I have seen
many of them in this case. The Indians having many calamities fallen upon them,
they laid the cause of all their wants, sicknesses, and death, upon their
departing from their old heathenish ways, only this man held out, and continued
his care about the things of God: and being desirous to read, the English gave
him a Primer, which he still carries about with him.

Hiacoomes was feeling after God, he met with another trial; for going into an
Indian house where there were many Indians, they scoffed at him with great
laughter, saying, Here comes the English man, who by their noise awaked his old
enemy Pakeponesso, who was asleep, who joining with the other Indians, told
him, I wonder (said he) that you that are a young man, having a wife and two
children, should love the English and their ways, and forsake the Pawwawes;
what would you do if any of you should be sick? whither would you go for help?
I say, if I were in your case there should nothing draw me from our gods and
Pawwawes. At this time he replied nothing, but told a friend of his that he
then thought in his heart that the God in heaven did know and hear all the
evil words that Pakeponesso spoke. Thus the changing of his way caused much
hatred to him, neither was there so much as the least appearance of any outward
argument amongst us, that might weigh against it.

After this there fell a great judgment of God on this Sagamore; for in the
night when he and his company were in the An Indian house or Wigwam is made
with small poles like an arbor covered with mats, and their fire is in the
midst, over which they leave a place for the smoke to go out at.
Wigwam, it beginning to rain, he and a young man stood up upon the floor of
planks which lay about two foot from the ground, to put a Matt over the
Chimnie, there came a great flash of lightning, and after it thunder not very
loud, yet full of the vengeance of God, which killed the young man outright,
and struck Pakeponesso down dead for a long time, and he fell off from the
floor of planks along upon the ground with one leg in the fire, and being
much burned, it was took out by some that lay in the other side of the Indian
house. Now Hiacoomes as himself says) did remember his former thoughts of God,
and then thought God did answer him, and that he was brought more to rejoice in
God, and rest more upon him.

Hiacoomes, who did communicate that knowledge he had amongst those he could;
for some of them could not endure the light he brought; some were more
attentive to hear, and more ready to follow the truth, yet they did not well
behold the Majesty of the Lord by these personal particular works; at last the
Lord sent an universal sickness, and it was observed by the Indians, that they
that did but give the hearing of good counsel, did not taste so deeply of it,
but Hiacoomes and his family in a manner not at all. Hiacoomes, who was with
him about the break of day, and delivering his message, told him that he was
come to pray him to go presently to Myoxeo the chief man of that place, and he
should have a reward for his labor; for the Indians were very desirous to know
from him all things that he knew, and did, in the ways of God; so he being
glad of the opportunity, went with the messenger, and when he came, there were
many Indians gathered together, amongst which was Towanquatick the Sagamore*
then after many requests (the general whereof was this, that he would show his
heart unto them, how it stood toward God, and what they must do) he showed
unto them all things he knew concerning God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
Myoxeo asking him how many Gods the English did worship, he answered one God,
whereupon Myoxeo reckoned up about 37. principal gods he had, and shall I (said
he) throw away these 37. gods for one? Hiacoomes replied, what do you think of
your self? I have thrown away all these, and a great many more some years ago,
yet am preserved as you see this day; you speak true said Myoxeo; therefore I
will throw away all my gods too, and serve that one God with you. Hiacoomes
told them all, he did fear this great God only, and also in a special manner
that the Son of God did suffer death to satisfy the wrath of God his Father,
for all those that did trust in him, and forsake their sins, and that the
spirit of God did work these things in the hearts of men, and that himself did
fear this great God only, was sorry for his sins, desiring to be redeemed by
Jesus Christ, and to walk in Gods commandments; this, with many truths more he
showed unto them, As Adams transgression, and the misery of the world by it,
and did conclude, that if they had such hearts as he, they should have the same
mercies. He reckoned up to them many of their sins, as having many gods, going
to Pawwawes; and Hiacoomes told me himself, that this was the first time that
ever he saw the Indians sensible of their sins; formerly they did but hear it
as a new thing, but not so nearly concerning them, for they were exceeding
thankful, saying, also now we have seen our sins. Thus it pleased the Lord to
give both light and courage to this poor Indian; for although formerly he had
been a harmless man amongst them, yet, as themselves say, not at all accounted
of, and therefore they often wondered that he which had nothing to say in all
their meetings formerly, is now become the Teacher of them all; I must needs
give him this testimony, after some years experience of him, that he is a man
of a sober spirit, and good conversation, and as he has, as I hope, received
the Lord Jesus Christ in truth, so also I look upon him to be faithful,
diligent, and constant in the work of the Lord, for the good of his own soul
and his neighbors with him.

Now, Though I have written this passage to Mr. Winslow in my Letter to him,
which is printed, yet it is not so full a story as here, and therefore I have
added it.
after these things it pleased God to move the heart of Towanquatick,
encouraged by some others amongst them, to desire me to preach unto them. At my
coming, this man spoke thus unto me; That a long time agon they had wise men,
which in a grave manner taught the people knowledge; but they are dead, and
their wisdom is buried with them, and now men live a giddy life, in ignorance,
till they are white headed, and though ripe in years, yet then they go without
wisdom to their graves. He told me that he wondered the English should be
almost thirty years in the Country and the Indians fools still; but he hoped
the time of knowledge was now come; wherefore himself with others desired me to
give them an Indian meeting, to make known the word of God to them in their own
tongue; and when he came to me to accomplish his desire thereabout, he told me
That I should be to them as one that stands by a running river filling many
vessels, even so should I fill them with everlasting knowledge; So I undertook
to give them a meeting once a month; but as soon as the first Exercise was
ended, they desired it oftener then I could well attend it, but once in a
fortnight in our settled course. He has also since told me the reason why he
desired me to preach to them, as that he was greatly desirous to have the
Indians grow more in goodness, to have their posterity inherit blessings when
he was dead; and himself was desirous to put the Word of God to his heart, to
repent, and throw away his sins, and to be better, and after he was dead, to
inherit a life in heaven.

Now there be three things in this beginning that were greatly inquired into.
1. Earthly riches, what they should get. 2. What approbation they should get
from other Sagamores and Governors. 3. How they should come off from the
Pawwawes; but in neither of these could they find that which might give motion
to a carnal mind; for the first kept off many, I have had much discourse with
several of them about it, wherein they have strongly stood for their own
meetings, ways and customs, being in their account more profitable then ours,
wherein they meet with nothing but talking and praying. The second also
remains an obstacle, the Sagamores generally are against the way. The third is
the strongest cord that binds them to their own way, for the Pawwawes by their
witchcraft keep them in fear, many of the Indians got over the two first
difficulties, and in some measure the third; now there were about twelve which
came to the meeting as it were halting between two opinions, others came to
hear and see what was done, for although they had heard and seen something of
the one God of heaven, yet such was their unspeakable darkness, their
captivity in sin, and bondage to the Pawwawes, that they hardly durst for fear
take the best way, for though a few of them were better enlightened, yet the
Heathen round about stuck fast in their old brutishness.

Towanquatick met with a sad trial, for he being at a Wear where some Indians
were a fishing, where also was an English man, as he lay along upon a matt on
the ground asleep, by a little light fire, the night being very dark, an Indian
came down, as being ready fitted for the purpose, and being about six or eight
paces from him, let fly a broad headed arrow, purposing by all probability to
drench the deadly arrow in his heart blood, but the Lord prevented it; This man
when I was in the Island I often saw and spoke with, seeing also the skar upon
his eye-brow and nose.
for notwithstanding all the advantages he had, instead of the heart he hit the
eye-brow, which like a brow of steel turned the point of the arrow, which*
glancing away, slit the top of his nose to the bottom. A great stir there
was presently, the Sagamore sat up, and bled much, but was not much hurt
through the mercy of God; the darkness of the night hid the murderer, and he
is not discovered to this day. The next morning I went to see the Sagamore, and
I found him praising God for his great deliverance, both himself and all the
Indians, wondering that he was yet alive. The cause of his being shot, as the
Indians said, was for his walking with the English; and it is also conceived,
both by them and us, that his forwardness for the meeting was one thing, which
(with the experience I have had of him since) gives me matter of strong
persuasion that he bears in his brow the marks of the Lord Jesus.

After this, through the mercy of God, we proceeded on with the meeting, to the
rejoicing of some Indians, and the envy of the rest, who derided and scoffed
at those that did follow the Lecture, and in their way of wickedness
blaspheming the Name of God, which damped the spirits of some of them for a
time in the ways of God, and hindering others from looking thitherward, but
the Lord gave courage and constancy to some of them, especially to Hiacoomes
and Towanquatick who was hurt with the arrow, who were not ashamed of the way
of God.

Although I was present at this meeting from the beginning to the end, yet it
was done without my privity or putting them on upon it, but it came merely from
themselves.
they appointed a meeting, and there came some younger men, and brought with
them the ancient men of their kindred and acquaintance to speak for them,
whereof the very old man that your self saw and heard at the meeting, was one,
who began the meeting with a relation of the old customs of the ancient
Heathen, preferring them before those ways of their own they were now in, yet
acknowledging they were far inferior to those ways of God they had now
begun: Then twelve of the young men went and took Sacochanimo by the hand one
by one and told him that they did love him, and would go with him in Gods way,
and some of them made a long speech to him to this purpose; This was
Towanqueticks eldest son.
and the old men encouraged them in their way, and desired them never to forget
those promises they had now made; then one of the young men told me the ground
of their meeting, viz. They were sorry to see that the meeting did go on no
more strongly, and that there were no more at it, and that they were desirous
to strengthen themselves in the way of God, to have good hearts, and one heart,
and to walk together in love in the ways of God. So after they had eaten
together the victuals of their own providing, and we had sung part of a Psalm
in their own language, and I had prayed with them, they returned with the
manifestation of much joy and thankfulness; and this I can say, they are
generally constant in the way of God, and I have great hopes of some of them,
blessed be his name.

Hiacoomes, who was one that protested most against them, told him that the
Pawwawes could kill him; he answered they could not; they asked him again,
why? he told them, because he did believe in God and trust in him, and that
therefore all the Pawwaws could not do him any hurt; Then they all wondered
exceedingly when he spoke thus so openly. Then diverse of them said one by one,
though before I was afraid of the Pawwawes, yet now, because I hear Hiacoomes
his words, I do not fear them, but believe in God too. Then the meeting at this
time was carried on, and Hiacoomes is desired by the Indians to reckon up their
sins unto them; he presently found 45. or 50. and as many good duties; his work
was very well liked, and in the conclusion twenty two Indians were found to
resolve against those evils, and to walk with God, and attend the word of God.
Hummanequem, who exceeded all the rest, to the wonderment of the Indians; he
with much sorrow, hatred, and courage, related about twenty of his own sins,
and professed to follow the one God against all opposition; He told them he was
brought into this condition by Hiacoomes his counsel from the Word of God,
which at first he said he liked not, afterwayes laid it by him as a thing to be
considered, not knowing well what to do; at last, looking over things again, he
came to this resolution which you have now heard; I confess this action makes
me think he spoke more then from a natural principle, considering that the man
has been since an earnest seeker of more light both public and private; as
also for refusing the help of a Pawwaw which lives within a bow shoot of his
door, when his wife was three days in travel, and waited patiently upon God,
till they obtained a merciful deliverance by prayer.

And whilst we were making progress in the work of the Lord on a Lecture day,
an Indian stood up, and said he had been a sinner, and committed many evil
things, but now was sorry for them, and did repent, desired to forsake his
sins, and to walk in Gods way. Then he went to the Sagamore Towanquetick, and
took him by the hand, saying, I do love you, and do greatly desire to go along
with you for Gods sake; the like also he said to some others, and then came to
me in like manner, saying, I pray love me, and I do love you, and am desirous
to go with you for Gods sake; so he was received with many thanks, and since I
know him to be diligent and laborious. I confess I marvelled to see them act
with such a spirit, but I considered, it was suitable to their own meeting in 48.

Now the Indian accompanied his friend that suddenly lost his two sons; he I
say remaining still in his obstinacy, is also found out, and feels the wrath
of God, being stricken with a dead Palsy, all one side of him, but his eye and
ear; The dead Palsy is a strange and unwonted disease amongst the Indians; I
have been sometimes with him; when I spoke to him, he fetched many sighs; he
is at this day a living and a dead monument of the Lords displeasure, having
hurt himself most, and done them most good he hated.

Another thing is a remarkable combat between two Indians and a Pawwaw, who,
on the Lords day after meeting, came in very angry, saying, I know the meeting
Indians are liars; you say you care not for the Pawwawes; then calling two or
three of them by name, and railing at them, told them that they were deceived,
for the Pawwawes could kill all the meeting Indians if they did set about it;
with that one of the young men replied with much courage, saying, it is true, I
do not fear the Pawwawes, neither do I desire any favor at their hands, pray
kill me if you can. And Hiacoomes told him also that he would be in the midst
of all the Pawwawes of the Island that they could procure, and they should do
their utmost they could against him, and when they did their worst by their
witchcrafts to kill him, he would without fear set himself against them, by
remembering Jehovah; he told him also that he did put all the Pawwawes under his
heel, pointing unto it; which answers did presently silence the Pawwawes
devilish spirit, and had he nothing to say, but that none but Hi^^oomes was
able so to do.

I have observed the wise disposing hand of God in another Providence of his;
there have not as I know, any man, woman or child died of the meeting Indians
since the meeting began, until now of late the Lord took away Hiacoomes his
child which was about five days old; he was best able to make a good use of
it, and to carry himself well in it, and so was his wife also; and truly they
gave an excellent example in this also, as they have in other things; here were
no black faces for it as the manner of the Indians is, nor goods buried with
it, nor hellish howlings over the dead, but a patient resigning of it to him
that gave it; There were some English at the burial, and many Indians to whom I
spoke something of the Resurrection, and as we were going away, one of the
Indians told me he was much refreshed in being freed from their old customs,
as also to hear of the Resurrection of good men and their children to be with
God.

There are now by the grace of God thirty nine Indian men of this meeting,
besides women that are looking this way, which we suppose to exceed the number
of the men, though not known by open entrance into Covenant as the men, but are
now near it. These in general have the knowledge of the fundamental points of
Religion; your self when you were with us, had some trial of it; it was a great
while my maine work to administer light in general to them; and there now,
through mercy, appears some life, hoping that some of them have received this
great mercy of God in Christ. This is a great encouragement to me, as also that
their hearts are engaged in the way of the Lord for the salvation of their own
souls upon Gods ends. One of these meeting Indians said (and I hope feelingly)
that if all the world, the riches, plenty, and pleasures of it were presented
without God, or God without all these, I would take God. And another said, that
if the greatest Sagamore in the Land should take him in his arms, and proffer
him his love, and riches and gifts to turn from his way, he would not go with
him from this way of God. I heard one of them of his own accord (and to the
same purpose) in complaining against head knowledge and lip prayers, without
heart holiness, loathing the condition of such a man, saying, I desire my
heart may taste the word of God, repent of my sins, and lean upon the
Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of them having a discourse with
Vzzamequin a great Sachem or Governor on the maine Land (coming amongst them)
about the ways of God, he enquired what earthly good things came along with
them, and demanding of them what they had gotten by all they had done this way?
one of them replied, we serve not God for clothing, nor for any outward thing.
I have observed many such like passages; but my occasions at present will not
permit me to set them down, I only bring you those things which are most ready
in my mind.

The last thing that I took special notice of, is, the receiving of the five
men when your self was present, into the meeting Indian number, one of them
(the young man you saw) was sent at first about two or three months before by
one of the greatest Pawwawes upon the Island to learn and spy what was done at
the meeting, and carry him word, but at the last he learned so much as he then
openly professed to hate the Pawwawes and their witchcrafts, and that he did
repent of his sins, and desired to go with the meeting Indians in Gods ways;
another said he desired to join with the meeting Indians that he might have a
renewed good heart, the other were much like affected, only one of them
reckoned up the commandments, and as he proceeded he protested against the sins
forbidden, and professed obedience to the duties commanded; the last answered
the question put to him by your self, viz. by what power they did think to do
this? who answered, First, by his good desire; and secondly, by the help and
blessing of Jesus Christ.

Just now whilst I am a writing, there comes an Indian unto me, and tells me his
mind in these words, I shall long for your return back again out of the Bay,
that we may hear the good word of God; the former sins of my heart in the time
of my youth I now remember; when I hear the word of God, and when I walk in the
woods alone, I have much talk with God, and great repentance for my sins, and
now I throw behind me all my strange gods, and my heart goes right to God in
prayer.

The way that I am now in (through the grace of God) for the carrying on of
this great work, is by a Lecture every fortnight, whereunto both men women and
children do come; and first I pray with them, teach them, chatechise their
children, sing a Psalm, and all in their own language. I confer every last
day of the week with Hiacoomes about his subject matter of preaching to the
Indians the next day, where I furnish him with what spiritual food the Lord is
pleased to afford me for them, wherein God has much assisted him for his own
and their spiritual good and advantage, who is diligent and conscionable to
hold forth the grace of Christ to the Indians. For this purpose your servent
and frequent prayers together with all those who rejoice in advancing the
Scepter of Christ, are by me earnestly desired, and for me that I may preach
him amongst the Heathen, to the praise of the excellency of his own power, and
not mine; and that the Indians in this small beginning, being Gods husbandry,
and Gods building, may be a fruitful glorious spreading Vine, and builded
together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, unto whom I commend you
in Jesus, and in him rest

From Great Harbor in Martins Vineyard Sept. 7. 1650 Yours in the Lord to be
commanded, THOMAS MAYHOW.


NOw to speak somewhat farther of the proceeding of the things of Christ
amongst the Indians of Mattacusets and thereabouts since the last books came
forth; Somewhat I saw and understood concerning those Indians which are under
the care of Mr. Eliot, unto whom I repaired at my coming from Martins Vineyard,
who acquainted me with the state of things amongst the Indians as they were at
present; at which time I rode with him to the Water-town Indians, and heard him
preach to them, and catechize their children in the Indian tongue; who wrote
also by me to Mr. Winslow, the Agent of the Country; which Letter, together
with some other sent since the last publication by the Press, the Corporation
of New England desired me that they might be joined and printed with this
written by Master Mahu; which letters here follow.

Much honored Sir,
YOur very loving acceptance of my Letters does engage me very much unto you,
but especially your cordial rejoicing in the progress of this work of the Lord
among these poor Indians. Sir, I shall first answer some material things in
your Letter. First, for that opinion of Rabbi-ben-Israel which you mention, I
would entreat you to request the same godly Minister (nay I hope he has
already done it) to send to him to know his grounds, and how he came to that
Intelligence, when was it done, which way were they transported into America,
by whom, and what occasion, how many, and to what Parts first, or what steps of
intimation of such a thing may there be. I had some thoughts in my heart to
search the Original of this People, that I might find under what Covenant and
Promise their forefathers have been, for the help of my faith; for Jehovah
remembers and gives being to ancient Promises. What had become of us sons of
Japhet, if the Lord had not remembered that (and such like ancient Promises) God
shall persuade Japhet to dwell in the Tents of Shem. If these people be under a
Covenant and Promise as ancient as Shem and Eber, it is a ground of faith to
expect mercy for them.

Now this I have thought, that it seems to me as clear in the Scripture, Genesis
10.
that these are the children of Shem as we of Japhet, and Shem was a great man
in the Church, and to whom Abraham paid Tithes; for I believe he was
Melchisedceck; yea it seems to me probable that these people are Hebrews, of
Eber, whose sons the Scripture sends farthest East (as it seems to me) and
learned Broughton put some of them over into America, and certainly this
Country was peopled Eastward from the place of the Arks resting, seeing the
finding of them by the West is but of yesterday: Now Eber was also a great man
in the Church; Abraham the Hebrew, says the text; and how often in the
Scriptures does the Lord use that blessed word of Grace and Covenant, I am the
God of the Hebrews? besides there be sundry Prophesies in Scripture, unto the
goings down of the Sun; and let it be considered whether America be not to be
accounted among the places that are the goings down of the Sun unto those
places where those Promises were promulgated; And when the Lord enlarged the
Promise to Jacob (as the light and extent of grace has ever been increasing
and enlarging) he promised to make him a Nation and a multitude of Nations,
which so far as we regard a litteral accomplishment, is in part accomplished
in the Nation of the Jews, and the other part remains (as it may seem) to be
accomplished in the lost Israelites scattered in the world, principally, if not
wholly, amongst the sons of Japhet and Shem; and our God who can and will
gather the scattered and lost dust of our bodies at the Resurrection, can and
will find out these lost and scattered Israelites, and in finding up them,
bring in with them the Nations among whom they were scattered, and so shall
Jacobs Promise extend to a multitude of Nations indeed; and this is a great
ground of faith for the conversion of the Eastern Nations, and may be of help
to our faith for these Indians; especially if Rabbi Ben-Israel can make it
appear that some of the Israelites were brought into America, and scattered
here, or if the Lord shall by any means give us to understand the same.

These meditations upon Scripture grounds do minister comfort and encouragement
to my heart with others also, as, That all Languages shall see his Glory, and
that all Nations and Kingdoms shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord Jesus; and
this I desire to do, to look unto Scripture grounds only; Oh this precious this
perfect Word of God! You intimate also how zealously worthy Mr. Owen did
prosecute this work; the Lord reward him, and the Lord accept him in all his
holy labors. Likewise you intimate how acceptable this work is to the
Parliament, that blessed Assembly, whom the Lord Christ has delighted to make
instrumental to begin to set up the longed for, prayed for, and desired
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus; for we may see in some measure the accomplishment
of that Prophecy of Christ, Luke 21. 25. The peaceable summer beginning to
arise out of these distressed times of perplexity, all those signs preceding
the glorious coming of Christ are accomplishing, and a thick black cloud is
gathered, a cloud of blood, confusion, Heresies and Errors, and the thickest
and most portentous black part of that cloud is the Toleration of the most
gross and convicted impieties under the pretense of conscience, which
misapplication of the Sword of Authority (if it should awhile prevail) cannot
be innocent, and will undoubtedly prolong the storm and delay of the reign of
Christ; But notwithstanding all this black cloud, who sees not the glorious
coming of the Lord Jesus breaking through this cloud, and coming with power and
great glory? He is King of Kings and reigns over Kings; for where Justice
reigns, Christ does reign; and that Antichristian principle for man to be
above God, whether the Pope in the Church, or Monarchs in the Commonwealth,
is thrown to the ground. He that is above the Law, is above the Word; and he
that is above the Word, is above Christ; Christ reigns not over such as be
above his Law: But behold, now Christ reigns, and gloriously breaks forth in
the brightness of his coming, and will in his time scatter all this thick
black cloud, yea the thickest of it. Now this glorious work of bringing in and
setting up the glorious kingdom of Christ, has the Lord of his free grace and
mercy put into the hands of this renowned Parliament and Army; Lord put it into
all their hearts to make this design of Christ their main first and chiefest
endeavor, according to the Word, Seek first the Kingdom of heaven and the
righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be added. And when the Lord
Jesus is about to set up his blessed Kingdom among these poor Indians also,
how well does it become the spirit of such instruments in the hand of Christ to
promote that work also, being the same business in some respect which
themselves are about by the good hand of the Lord.

Surely Sir, your chief work of this nature now is to follow this Indian work
which sticks in the birth for want of means. You would marvel if I should tell
you how they long to come into a way of civility by co-habitation, and by
forming government among themselves, that so they being in such order might
have a Church and the Ordinances of Christ among them; but want of a Magazine
of all sorts of tools and materials for such a work, is the present impediment.

The Lord is wiser then man, and his time is best; I will not say any thing now
for farther direction about what is requisite for the work which the Lord is
preparing their hearts unto; my former Letters have said enough that way,
partly to you, and partly to Mr. Pelham, whose Letters I hope you have seen as
containing sundry things necessary for your view; and I doubt not but your
wisdom will readily add what is lacking in what I have projected; only let me
say this, that I daily still see more evidence that that is the very way which
the Lord would have us take at present.

Let me, I beseech you, trouble you a little farther with some considerations
about this great Indian work which lies upon me, as my continual care, prayer,
desire and endeavor to carry on, namely for their schooling and education of
youth in learing, which is a principal means for promoting of it for future
times; If the Lord bring us to live in a Town and Society, we must have
speiial care to have Schools for the instruction of the youth in reading, that
they may be able to read the Scriptures at least. And therefore there must be
some Annual revenew for the maintaining of such Schoolmasters and Dames;
Besides, I do very much desire to translate some parts of the Scriptures into
their language, and to print some Primer in their language wherein to initiate
and teach them to read, which some of the men do much also desire, and printing
such a thing will be troublesome and chargable, and I having yet but little
skill in their language (having little leisure to attend it by reason of my
continual attendance on my Ministry in our own Church) I must have some
Indians, and it may be other help continually about me to try and examine
Translations, which I look at as a sacred and holy work, and to be regarded
with much fear, care, and reverence; and all this is chargable; therefore I
look at that as a special matter on which cost is to be bestowed, if the Lord
provide means, for I have not means of my own for it. I have a family of many
children to educate, and therefore I cannot give over my Ministry in our Church
whereby my family is sustained to attend the Indians to whom I give, and of
whom I receive nothing, nor have they any thing to give: so that want of money
is the only thing in view that does retard a more full prosecution of this work
unto which the Lord does ripen them apace.

Moreover, there be sundry prompt, pregnant witted youths, not vitiously
inclined, but well disposed, which I desire may be wholly sequestered to
learning, and put to School for that purpose, had we means; and I suppose ten
pounds per Annum to be paid in England, will maintain one Indian youth at
School, and half ascore such Gifts or Annuities would by the blessing of God
greatly further this work so far as concerns that particular.

I had thought to have set down some of their Questions, whereby you might
perceive how these dry bones begin to gather flesh and sinnews; but partly I
have them not ready, for I have not leisure to set them down at present, and
they soon slip my memory, and I did it in all my last Letters, and may do it
again, if the Lord will, hereafter. And therefore thus much at present, being
called off to hasten to seal up my Letters, the Lord Jesus bless you, sanctify
and keep you in all your labors and travels, and accept you, and all your
works, and return you again unto us in due season here to see Gods blessing
with your eyes upon those poor souls, for whose sakes you have labored, and
the Lord supply your absence to all yours; and so commending you to the Lord
and to the word of his grace which is able to sanctify and save you, I rest

Boxburg, this 8. of the 5. 49. Your (...) Brother and fellow labourer for the
good of the poor Indians: JOHN ELIOT.


Worthy and much esteemed in the Lord.
IT is no small encouragement unto my spirit, not only to go on unweariably in
this enterprise which the Lord has set my heart upon, but also to expect a
great blessing therein; only I must intimate two Redundances, one is page 8.
where there is a great (I) redundant which makes the sense untrue; but if left
out, the sense is both good and true; for ( I) was not the Nominative case or
efficient of that Verb, or Act of entreating Mr. Mahu to teach them, but it was
the Indians Act, and so I said, and so is the sense if that (great I) be left
out. A second Redundancie is page 17. (though misfigured and no matter) where
you put the title of Evangelist upon me, which all men take, and you seem so
to put it for that extraordinary office mentioned in the New Testament; I do
beseech you to suppress all such things, if ever you should have occasion of
doing the like; let us speak and do, and carry all things with all humility; it
is the Lord who has done what is done, and it is most becoming the spirit of
Jesus Christ to lift up Christ, and our selves lie low; I wish that that word
could be obliterated if any of the books remain.

Now seeing it is so great a comfort to you to hear how the Lord is pleased to
carry on this work, I shall relate unto you some passages, whereby you may see
in what frame they be; I had, and still have, a great desire to go to a great
fishing place, Namaske upon Merimak; and because the Indians way lies beyond
the great River which we cannot pass with our horses, nor can we well go to it
on this side the river, unless we go by Nashaway, which is about, and bad way,
unbeaten, the Indians not using that way; I therefore hired a hardy man of
Nashaway to beat out a way and to mark trees, so that he may Pilot me thither
in the spring, and he hired Indians with him and did it; and in the way passed
through a great people called Sowahagen Indians, some of which had heard me at
Pautuket and at Nashaway, and had carried home such tidings, that they were
generally stirred with a desire that I would come and teach them; and when they
saw a man come to cut out a way for me that way, they were very glad; and when
he told them I intended to come that way the next spring, they seemed to him
full of joy, and made him very welcome. But in the Spring, when I should have
gone, I was not well, it being a very sickly time, so that I saw the Lord
prevented me of that journey; yet when I went to Pautuket another fiishing
place, where from all parts about they met together, thither came diverse of
these Sowahegen Indians, and heard me teach, and I had conference with them;
and among other things, I asked whether Sowahegen Indians were desirous to pray
to God; they answered; yea, I asked how many desired it; they answered wamu,
that is, All, and with such affection as did much affect those Christian men
that I had with me in company.

The chief Sachim of this place Pautuket, and of all Mermak in Papassaconnoway,
whom I mentioned unto you the last year, who gave up himself and his sons to
pray unto God, this man did this year show very great affection to me, and to
the Word of God; he did exceeding earnestly, importunately invite me to come
and live there and teach them; he used many arguments, many whereof I have
forgotten: but this was one, that my coming thither but once in a year, did
them but little good, because they soon had forgotten what I taught, it being
so seldom, and so long betwixt the times; further he said, That he had many
men, and of them many naught, and would not believe him that praying to God was
so good, but if I would come and teach them, he hoped they would believe me; He
farther added, that I did, as if one should come and throw a fine thing among
them, and they earnestly catch at it, and like it well, because it looks
finely, but they cannot look into it to see what is within it, and what it is
within, they cannot tell whether something or nothing, it may be a stock or a
stone is within it, or it may be a precious thing; but if it be opened, and
they see what is within it, and see it precious, then they should believe it
(so said he) you tell us of praying to God, (for so they call all Religion) and
we like it well at the first sight, and we know not what it is within, it may
be excellent, or it may be nothing, we cannot tell, but if you would come unto
us, and open it unto us, and show us what it is within, then we should believe
that it is so* excellent as you say, when we see it opened; Such elegant
arguments as these did he use, with much gravity, wisdom and affection; and
truly my heart much yearneth toward them, and I have a great desire to make
our Indian Town that way; yet the Lord by the Eye of Providence seems not to
look thither, partly because there is not a competent place of due
encouragement for subsistence; which would spoil the work; and partly because
our Indians which are our first and chief materials in present view, are loath
to go Northward, though they say they will go with me any whether; but it
concerns me much not to lead them into temptation of scarity, cold and want,
which may damp the progress of the Gospel; but I rather think where ever I
begin the first Town, (if I live) I must begin more towns then one, or oh
that the Lord would raise up more and more fit laborers into this harvest:

Another Indian, who lived remote another way, asked me if I had any children?
I answered yea; he asked how many? I said six; he asked how many of them were
sons? I told him five; then he asked whether my sons should teach the
Indians to know God as I do? at which question I was much moved in my heart,
for I have often in my prayers dedicated all my sons unto the Lord to serve
him in this service, if he will please to accept them therein; and my purpose
is to do my uttermost to train them up in learning, whereby they may be fitted
in the best manner I can to serve the Lord herein, and better preferment I
desire not for them then to serve the Lord in this travel; and to that purpose
I answered him, and my answer seemed to be well pleasing to them, which seemed
to minister to my heart some encouragement, that the Lords meaning was to
improve them that way, and he would prepare their hearts to accept the same.

There is another aged Sachem at Quabagud threescore miles Westward, and he
does greatly desire that I would come thither and teach them, and live there;
and I made a journey* thither this summer, and I went by Nashaway; but it so
fell out that there were some stirs betwixt the Nazaganset and Monahegen
Indians, some murder committed, etc. which made our Church doubtful at first of
my going, which when the Nashaway Sachem heard, he commanded twenty armed men
(after their manner) to be ready, and himself with these twenty men; besides
sendry of our near Indians went along with me to guard me, but I took some
English along with me also, so that hereby their good affection is manifested
to me, and to the work I have in hand; here also I found sundry hungry after
instruction, but it pleased God to exercise us with such tedious rain, and bad
weather, that we were extreme wet, insomuch that I was not dry night nor day
from the third day of the week unto the sixth, but so traveled, and at night
pull off my boots, wring my stockins, and on with them again, and so continued;
the rivers also were raised, so as that we were wet in riding through; but that
which added to my affliction was, my horse tired, so that I was forced to let
my horse go empty, and ride on one of the men's horses which I took along with
me, yet God stepped in and helped; I considered that word of God, 2 Timothy 2, 3.
Endure hardship as a good Soldier of Christ; with many other such like
meditations, which I think not meet to mention now. And I thank the Lord,
neither I nor my company took any hurt, but the Lord brought us in safety and
health home again.

Because* both Mr. Pelham and your self do so heartily, and with such good
affection send commendations and greetings unto our Indians which pray unto
God, I will tell you what a good occasion was ministered unto me, through the
goodness of God, by a question which one of them propounded the next meeting
as I remember) after I had received my Letters, and I must first tell you the
occasion of the question.

There had been at that time some strange Indians among them which came to see
them who prayed to God, as one from Martins Vineyard, who is helpful to Mr.
Mahu to tell him words, etc. and I think some others, when those strangers
came, and they perceived them to affect Religion, and had mutual conference
about the same, there was very great gladness of heart among them, and they
made these strangers exceeding welcome; Hereupon did the Question arise, namely
what is the reason, that when a strange* Indian comes among us whom we never
saw before, yet if he pray unto God, we do exceedingly love him: But if my own
Brother, dwelling a great way off, come unto us, he not praying to God, though
we love him, yet nothing so as we love that other stranger who does pray unto
God.

This question did so clearly demonstrate that which the Scripture calls love
of the Brethren, that I thought it was useful; first, to try others of them,
whether they found the same in their hearts; I therefore asked them, how they
found it in these hearts? And they answered, that they all found it so in their
hearts, and that it had been a matter of discourse among themselves, wondering
at it, what the reason of it should be, which was no small comfort and
encouragement unto my spirit; Then in my answer I asked them what should be the
reason that the godly people in England, 3000. miles off, who never saw them,
yet hearing that they pray to God, do exceedingly rejoice at it, and love them,
and send them tokens of their love, and then I reckoned up what had been sent
them, and mentioned some names to them, and farther told them that their love
was so great unto them, that they would send them over a great deal more; and
in special, I hoped they would send us such materials as be requisite to make a
Town, and mentioned some such things as I have named in the Catalogue I sent
to you* and asked them if they could tell the reason of it; they answered no;
this being the same with their question; and then I showed the unity of spirit,
etc. And thus you see the occasion and way of communicating the good will and
love of the Saints in England unto them, so as that they might taste a
spiritual blessing, and find some edification of their souls by those outward
blessings which they received. And whereas some, (as I am informed) who came
from us to England, are no better friends to this work then they should, and
may speak slightly of it: I do entreat that such may be asked but this
question; Did they so much regard to look after it here, as to go three or four
miles to some of our meetings, and to observe what was said and done there? if
not, how can they tell how things be? if they say they were, I desire to know
what they except against? If they say the Indians be all naught because such as
come loytering and filtching about in our Towns are so; Wish them to consider
how unequal that judgment is, if all the English should be judged by the worst
of them; and any should say they be all such, this were to condemn the
righteous with the wicked. Had I leisure, I would insert a few more of their
questions, that you might perceive how flesh and sinews begin to gather upon
these dry bones; but I cannot at this time attend it; the present work of God
among them is to gather them togegether to bring them to Political life, both
in Ecclesiastical society and in Civil, for which they earnestly long and
enquire, and some aged ones say, Oh that God would let me live to see that day;
I allude to that in Ezekiel, not because I have any light to persuade me these
are that people there mentioned, only they be dry and scattered bones, if any
be in the world; and the work of God upon all such dry bones I believe will be
in many things Symmetricall; But the work of the day is to civilize them, and
it will be very chargeable, and because in your Letters to Mr. Cotton, you
desired that he and I should speak with the Commissioners what was fitting to
send over for this work, we could not speak with the Commissioners of other
Colonies, nor write to have any seasonable return, nor could we communicate the
state of the business unto them, but what was feasible we have done.

Now dear Sir, it may be you will desire to know what kind of Civil Government
they shall be instructed in; I acknowledge it to be a very weighty
consideration; and I have advised with Mr. Cotton and others about it, and this
I propound as my general rule through the help of the Lord; they shall be
wholly governed by the Scriptures in all things both in Church and State; they
shall have no other Lawgiver; the Lord shall be their Lawgiver, the Lord
shall be their Judge, the Lord shall be their King, and he will save them; and
when it is so the Lord reigns, and unto that frame the Lord will bring all
the world ere he has done, but it will be more difficult in other Nations who
have been adulterate with their Antichristian or humane wisdom; they will be
loath to lay down their imperfect own Starlight of excellent Laws, in their
conceits, for the perfect Sun-light of the Scripture, which through blindness
they cannot see.

England long since had happy experience of it, and it is often in my heart to
desire they would pitch there in this present great change they are about; this
is certain, that all forms and Laws of man's invention will shake, be
unsettled; and many will doubt of subjecting to any way man can devise; and they
will never rest till they come up to the Scriptures, and when they produce
Scripture grounds for all they do, it will answer and satisfy all godly
consciences, and awe the rest, and stop their mouths unless they will cavil
against divine wisdom. It is the very reason why the Lord in this hour of
temptation will bring Nations into distress and perplexity, that so they may
be forced to the Scriptures; the light whereof has sole authority to extricate
them out of their deep perplexities; and therefore all Governments are and will
be shaken, that men may be forced to pitch upon the firm and unshaken
foundation, the Word of God* this is doubtless the great design of Christ in
these later days; Oh that men's eyes were open to see it, and when the world is
brought into this frame, then Christ reigns; and when this is, Government
shall be in the hands of the Saints of the most high.

But I forget my self; this is not my present work, it is my desire and prayer;
my work is to endeavor the setting up Christ Kingdom among the Indians.

Sir, you tell me of one that will publish reasons to prove (at least) some of
the ten Tribes are in America, it would be glad tidings to my heart; and when
Mr. Dudley heard of it, he said that Captain Cromwell, who lately dyed at
Boston, told him that he saw many Indians to the Southward Circumcised; and
that he was often conversant among them, and saw it with his eyes, and was
undoubtedly certain of it; this is Captain Cromwels testimony, and it seems
to be one of the most probable arguments that ever I yet heard of; unless the
Lord shall please to clear it up that they are some of those dry bones which
Ezekiel speaks of.

Mr. Mahew, who puts his hand unto this Plough at Martins Vineyard, being
young, and a beginner here, has extreme want of books; he needs Commentaries
and Common Places for the body of Divinity, that so he might be well grounded
and principled; if therefore the Lord bring any means into your hand, I desire
you would (by the help of some godly Divine) send him over such books as may be
neceassry for a young Scholar; I will name no books, he needs all; I beseech
you put some weight upon it, for I desire he might be furnished in that kind,
and other supplies will be needful for him.

And for my self I have this request (who also am short enough in books) that I
might be helped to purchase my brother Weld his books, the sum of the
purchase is (34. li.) I am loath they should come back to England when we have
so much need of them here, and without ready money there I cannot have them; if
therefore so much money might be disbursed for me, it would be a blessing to
me, but it is on condition that all his books here be comprehended, else I will
not give so much for them.

One thing more I shall mention, viz. if the work go on, and you send us means,
then this may be considerable, which some have advised me, whether it might not
be good to send me over a Carpenter or two young menservants; but if you
should approve it, I desire they may be godly, and well conditioned, of a good
spirit, for they must be employed among the Indians, and if they should be
naught, and of an ill disposition they might do a great deal of hurt, but if
they be honest and meek and well spirited, it may be a great furtherance of the
work, I wholly leave it to your wisdom.

Having some leisure by the Ships delay I will insert a few questions which
they have propounded. viz.

If a man know Gods Word, but believe it not; and he teach others, is that good
teaching? and if others believe that which he teaches, is that good believing,
or faith? upon this question I asked them, how they could tell when a man
knows Gods Word that he does not believe it? They answered me, When he does
not do in his practice answerable to that which he knows.

If I teach on the Sabbath which you have taught us, and forget some, Is that a
fin? and some I mistake and teach wrong, Is that a sin?

Do all evil thoughts come from the Devil, and all good ones from God?

What is watchfulness?

How shall I find happiness?

What should I pray for at night, and what at morning, and what on the Sabbath
day?

What is true Repentance, or how shall I know when this is true?

How must I wait on God?

Shall we see Christ at the day of Judgment?

Can we see God?

When I pray for a soft heart, why is it still hard?

Can one be saved by reading the book of the creature? This question was made
when I taught them, That God gave us two books, and that in the book of the
creature, every creature was a word or sentence, etc.

You said God promised Moses to go with him, how does he go with us?

When such die as never heard of Christ, whether do they go?

When the wicked die, do they first go to heaven to the judgment seat of
Christ to be judged, and then go away to hell?

What is the meaning of the word Hebrews?

Why does God say, I am the God of the Hebrews?

When Christ arose, whence came his soul? When I answered from heaven; It was
replied, How then was Christ punished in our stead? Or when did he suffer in
our stead, before death, or after?

When I pray every day, why is my heart so hard still, even as a stone?

How does God arise, and we worship at his feet, what means it? This was when
I preached out of Psalm. 132.

Why did they eat the Passover, with loins girt, and shoes on their feet?

What means, arise O Lord into thy resting place?

What means, hunger and thirst after righteousness, and they blessed?

What means, thou shall not covet any thing that is thy neighbors?

If one purposes to pray, and yet dies before that time, whether goes his
soul?

If I teach on the Sabbath something that some other Englishman taught me, the
Indians do not like it, if it be not that which you have taught, is this well?

Why must we be like Salt?

If I do not love wicked men, nor good men, am I good?

What means that, love enemies and wicked men?

Does God know who shall repent, and believe, and who not? When I answered in
the affirmative, then it was replied, Why then did God use so much means with
Pharaoh?

What means that his wife shall be like a Vine, and his children like young
plants?

What means, that blessed are they that mourn?

When I see a good example, and know that it is right, why do I not do the same?

What means lifting up hands to God?

Whot anger is good, and what is bad?

Do they dwell in several houses in heaven, or altogether, and what do they?

How do you know what is done in heaven?

If a child die before he sin, whether goes his soul? By this question, it
did please the Lord, clearly to convince them of original sin, blessed be his
name.

If one that prays to God sins like him that prays not, is not he worse? And
while they discoursed of this point, and about hating of wicked persons, one of
them shut it up with this, They must love the man and do him good, but hate his
sin.

Why do English men so edgerly kill all shakes?

May a man have good words and deeds and a bad heart, and another have bad
words and deeds, and yet a good heart?

What is it to eat Christ his flesh and drink his blood, what means it?

What means a new heaven and a new earth?


Much honored and respected in the Lord Jesus.
YOur faithful and unwearied pains about the Lords work for the good of his
dear children here, and for the furtherance of the Kingdom of Christ among
these poor Indians, shall doubtless be had in remembrance before the Lord, not
through merit, but mercy.

By former Letters sent by Mr. Saltonstall; I informed you of the present state
of the Indian work, and though I might add farther matters, yet I shall
forbear, only this, still they continue constant, and earnestly desire to set
upon the way of cohabitation and prepare for their enjoyment of that great
blessing to gather a Church of Christ among them; and since the writing of my
last a Nipnet Sachem has submitted himself to pray unto the Lord, and much
desires one of our chief ones to live with him and teach him and those that
are with him.

You wrote (I thank you) much encouraging to lose no time, and follow the work,
though I borrow materials, but I durst not do so, the work is great, as I
informed you in my former Letters; and I fear, lest it should discourage you,
nor would I be too hasty to run before the Lord do clearly (by Scripture rules)
say go; nor on the other side would I hold them too long in suspense, there may
be weakness that way to their discouragement, but it is the Lords work, and he
is infinite in wisdom, and he will suit the work in such a time and place as
shall best attain his appointed ends and his great glory.

Touching the way of their Government, I also intimated the purpose of my
heart, that I intend to direct them according as the Lord shall please to help
and assist to set up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ fully, so that Christ shall
reign both in Church and Commonwealth, both in Civil and Spiritual matters;
we will (through his grace) fly to the Scriptures, for every Law, Rule,
Direction, Form, or what ever we do. And when every thing both Civil and
Spiritual are done by the direction of the word of Christ, then does Christ
reign, and the great Kingdom of Jesus Christ which we weight for, is even
this that I do now mention; and by this means all Kingdoms and Nations shall
become the Kingdoms of Christ, because he shall rule them in all things by his
holy word; humane wisdom in learned Nations will be loath to yield to Christ so
far, much less will Princes and Monarchs readily yield so far to stoop to
Christ, and therefore the Lord will shake all Nations, and put them into
distress and perplexity, and in the conclusion they will be glad to stoop to
Christ. But as for these poor Indians they have no principles of their own,
nor yet wisdom of their their own (I mean as other Nations have) wherein to
stick; and therefore they do most readily yield to any direction from the Lord,
so that there will be no such opposition against the rising Kingdom of Jesus
Christ among them; yet I foresee a cloud of difficulties in the work, and much
obscurity and trouble in some such respects, as I think not meet to mention,
only by faith I do see through this cloud: I believe the faithful promises of
Christ shall be accomplished among them, and the Lord Jesus shall reign over
them gloriously, Oh my heart yearneth over distressed perplexed England, and my
continual prayer unto the Lord for them is, that he would be pleased to open
their hearts and eyes, and let them see their opportunity to let in Christ, and
to advance his Kingdom over them; yea, my hope is, that he will not leave
tampering with them until he has brought it to pass; Oh the blessed day in
England when the Word of God shall be their Magna Charta and chief Law Book;
and when all Lawyers must be Divines to study the Scriptures; and should the
Gentile Nations take up Moses policy so far as it is moral and
conscionable, make the Scriptures the foundation of all their Laws, who
knows what a door would be opened to the Jews to come in to Christ; I wrote
likewise by my last to entreat for some encouragement to Master Mahu who
preaches to the Indians, and that some moneys may be laid out in book for him;
for young Sholars in New England are very poor in books, as he is in extreme
want.

Dear Sir,

Be helpful in prayer to our work, and above all gathering, gather prayers; I
mean, put the Saints in mind that they pray much about it, as they do both
there and here.

Truly Sir,

The spirit of prayer that is daily going about this matter, is a very great
encouragement for all our meetings, through mercy, ring of it; I would
intimate some more questions which they have propounded since my last, for they
are fruitful that way, but partly I fear I shall want time, yet my heart says,
it may comfort you, and therefore I will set down a few, so many as I have
noted down since may last.

If but one parent believe what state are our children in?

How does much sin make grace abound? I having made use of that Text.

If so old a man as I repent, may I be saved? The wisdom of God drew forth
this question next to interpret the former.

When we come to believe, how many of our children does God take with us,
whether all only young ones, or at what age?

What means that, Let the trees of the Wood rejoice?

What means that, That the Master does not thank his servant for waiting on
him?

What means that, We cannot serve two masters?

Can they in Heaven see us here on Earth?

Do they see and know each other? Shall I know you in heaven?

Do they know each other in Hell?

When Englishmen choose Magistrates and Ministers, how do they know who be
good men, that they dare trust?

Seeing the boody sins, why should the soul be punished, and what
punishment shall the body have?

If all the world be burnt up, where shall hell be?

What is it to believe in Christ?

What means, that Christ meriteth eternal life for us?

What means that, Covet not thy neighbors house, etc?

What means that, The woman brought to Christ a box of Oil, and washed his
feet with tears etc?

What means that of the two debtors, one owes much; another but little?

If a wicked man prays, and teaches, does God accept, or what says God?

At what age may maids marry?

If a man be wise, and his Sachem weak must he yet obey him?

We are commanded to honor the Sachem, but is the Sachem commanded to low us?

When all the world shall be burnt up, what shall be in the room of it; an old
wonans question yester day?

What means God, when he says, ye shall be my Jewels? This was asked from
my text last time, Exodus 19. 5. for so I rendered the word peculiar treasure.

You may perceive many of the questions arise out of such texts as I handle,
and I do endeavor to communicate as much Scripture as I can; The word of the
Lord converteth, sanctifies and makes wise the simple; sometimes they ask
weaker questions then these, which I mention not, you have the best; and when I
am about writing, I am more careful in keeping a remembrance of them; it may be
the same question may be again and again asked at several places, and by
several persons; The Lord teach them to know Christ, whom to know is eternal
life; I shall entreat your supplications at the throne of grace, under the
tender wing whereof I leave you, being forced by the time, and rest

Roxbury this 29. of the 10th 49. Your respectful and loving brother and
fellow laborer in the Indian work* JOHN ELIOT.


Much honored and beloved in Christ, etc.
I Heard of the health and welfare of your family not long since, though the
sharpness and depth of snowes this later part of winter did more shut up and
hinder intercourse then ever I knew in New England

I shall principally attend to give you intelligence about the Indians,
touching whom, I know not that you are like to have intelligence by others; The
Lord has showed them a very great testimony of his mercy this winter, in that
when formerly the English had the Pox much, they also had the same; but now
though it was scattered in all or most of the Towns about them, yet the Lord
has preserved them from it; And that which makes this favor of God the more
evident and conspicuous, is this; That there is a company of profane Indians
that* lately are come to a place near Wamouth, not far from our Indians, who
do not only refuse to pray unto God, but oppose and apprehend that they were
sent thither, if not by the policy of some Pawwaws, yet by the instigation of
Satan, on purpose to seduce the younger sort from their profession, and
discourage others; and indeed they being so near, had that effect evidently in
some of the younger sort. Now it pleased God that this company of wicked
Indians, were smitten with the Pox, and sundry cut off, and those which were
cut off, were of the worst and mischievous of them all; which Providence, all
the good Indians do take a great notice of, and does say that the Lord has
wrought a wonder for them; and it seems to me that the Lord has blessed this
good Providence of his to be a strong engagement of their hearts to the Lord.

The work of the Lord through his grace does still go on as formerly, and they
are still full of questions, and mostly they now be, to know the meaning of
such Scriptures as I have translated and read, and in a poor measure expounded
to them, they long for to proceed in that work which I have in former Letters
mentioned; namely to cohabit in a Town, to be under the government of the
Lord, and to have a Church and the Ordinances of Christ among them; this Spring
the Lord seemed to put some of them upon such streights, about a convenient
place of planting, as if his Providence had meant to call us to a present
setting upon the work, but partly by reason of the undetermination about the
place where, but principally for want of means, wherewith it is yet deferred,
though I see a necessity to speed it forward, for they have been now long in
the expectation, and if I should still fail them, it would both discourage
them, and embolden their adversaries to despise the work (for all the Country
of Indians are in an expectation of it) yea by this delay that has been,
Satan has taken this advantage to my great grief; That whereas at my first
preaching at Nashawog sundry did embrace the word, and called upon God, and Pau
wauing was wholly silenced among them all; yet now, partly being forty miles
of; and principally by the slow progress of this work, Satan has so embolned
the Pawwawes, that this winter, (as I hear to my grief) there has been
Paw-wauing again with some of them.

The reason why there is still a delay of laying the foundation of the work is
this, because we must see first whether any supply is like to be had from
England (for our sins and bad times may disappoint our greatest hopes) and if
any, what measure, that we may by that be guided what foundation and beginning
to make; their condition and the necessary frame of this work requires a
liberal stock to begin withal, and liberal supply to carry it on; And
therefore to begin the work before the Lord has discovered his providing
providence this way, by the rule of prudence may not be; nor can I manifest
unto the Church that God does call me to that work, until I may lay before
them, (at least some) present means to begin the work, and some probable hopes
of supply; and until that be done, the Church has no rule to give me up to
that work; nor I a rule to require it; only I do (through the Lords help)
continually go on to teach them, as for these three years and a half I have
done, instructing them, and preparing them as well as I can against such time
as the Lord, who has promised to guide us by his eye and voice, shall
manifestly call us to go forward with that work which we wait to see
accomplished.

I forbear to mention any thing about the materials requisite, and manner of
proceedings, having done that in my former Letters, by the first ship
especially, and also by the second; both which Ve^^^ls I trust the Lord has
brought in safe to you long ere this time I was in great hopes to have heard
some encouragement by fishing ships, but not one being this year come, nor
tidings any other way, we are put to sad thoughts how it may fare with England,
but we cease not to pray continually in that behalf, and this expectation of
mine is one engagement of my heart to be the more earnest both for England and
for your self also.

Roxbury this 18. of the 2d 1650. Your loving friend and brother in our Lord
Jesus JOHN ELIOT.


Much respected and beloved in our Lord Jesus.
GOd is greatly to be adored in all his Providence, and has evermore wise and
holy ends to accomplish that which we are not aware of; and therefore although
he may seem to cross our ends with disappointments after all our pains and
expectations, yet he has farther and better thoughts then we can reach unto,
which will cause us to admire his love and wisdom, when we see them
accomplished; and yet he is gracious to accept of our sincere labors for his
name, though he disappoint them in our way, and frustrate our expectations in
our time; yea, he will fulfill our expectations in his way, and in his time,
which shall finally appear to the eye of faith, a better way then ours, and a
fitter time then ours; his wisdom is infinite.

For the work of the Lord among the Indians, I thank his Majesty he still
smileth on it, he favors and blesses it; through his help that strengthens
me, I cease not in my poor measure to instruct them; and I do see that they
profit and grow in knowledge of the truth, and some of them in the love of it,
which appears by a ready obedience to it; and to testify their growth in
knowledge, I will not (though I could do it if need were) trouble you with
their questions; but I will only relate one story which fell out about the
fifth month of this year; Two of my hearers traveled to Providence and
Warwick where Gorton lives, and there they spent a Sabbath, and heard them in
some exercises, and had much conference with them; for it seems they
perceiving that they had some knowledge in Religion, and were of my hearers;
they endeavor to possess their minds with their opinions. When they came
home, the next Lecture day, before I began the exercise, the company being not
fully come together, one of them asked me this question; What is the reason,
that seeing those English people, where he had be^^, had the same Bible that we
have* yet do not speak the same things? I asked the reason of his question; he
said, because his brother and he had been at Providence and at Warwick, and he
perceived by speech with them, that they differ from us; he said they heard
their public exercise, but did not understand what they meant, (though the man
understands the English Language pretty well) But afterward said he, we had
much speech; I asked him in what points; and so much as his brother and he
could call to mind, he related as follows.

First, said he, they said thus, they teach you that there is a Heaven and a
Hell, but there is no such matter; I asked him what reason they gave; he
answered, that he said there is no other Heaven, then what is in the hearts of
good men; nor no other Hell, then what is in the hearts of bad men; Then I
asked, and what said you to that; says he, I told them, I did not believe
them, because Heaven is a place whether good men go after this life is ended;
and Hell is a place whether bad men go when they die, and cannot be in the
hearts of men; I approved of this answer. I asked what else they spoke? he
answered, they spoke of Baptism, and said, that they teach you that infants
must be baptized, but that is a very foolish thing; I asked him what reason
they gave? He said, because infants neither know God nor Baptism, nor what
they do, and therefore it is a foolish thing to do it; I asked him what he said
to that? He said, he could not say much, but he thought it was better to
baptize them while they be young, and then they are bound and engaged; but if
you let them alone till they be grown up, it may be they will fly off, and
neither care for God nor for Baptism; I approved of this answer also, and
asked what else they spoke of? He said farther, they spoke of Ministers, and
said, they teach you that you must have Ministers, but that is a needless
thing. I asked what reason they gave? He said, they gave these reasons, First,
Ministers know nothing but what they learn out of Gods book, and we have Gods
book as well as they and can tell wha^ God says. Again, Ministers cannot
change men's hearts, God must do that, and therefore there is no need of
Ministers. I asked him what he said to that? He said, that he told them, that
we must do as God commands us, and if he commands to have Ministers, we must
have them. And farther I told them, I thought it was true, that Ministers
cannot change men's hearts; but when we do as God bids us, and hear Ministers
preach, then God will change our hearts. I approved this answer also I asked
what else they spoke of? He said, They teach you that you must have
Magistrates, but that is needless, nor ought to be. I asked what reason they
gave? He said, That they gave this reason, because Magistrates cannot give
life, therefore they may not take away life; besides, when a man sins, he
does not sin against Magistrates, and therefore why should they punish them?
but they sin against God and therefore we must leave them to God to punish
them. I asked him what he said to that, he answered, I said to that as to the
former, we must do as God commands us; If God command us to have Magistrates,
and commands them to punish sinners, them we must obey. I approved this also.

I asked farther what they said; then both of them considered a while, and
said, they could remember no more, only they said somewhat of the Parliament of
England, which they did not understand. And by such time as we had done this
conference, the company was gathered together, and we went to Prayer, and I did
solemnly bless God who had given them so much understanding in his truth, and
some ability to discern between Truth and Error, and an heart to stand for the
Truth, and against Error; and I cannot but take it as a Divine Testimony of
Gods blessing upon my poor labors; I afterward gave him an answer to his
first question, viz. Why they having the same Bible with us, yet spoke not the
same things? And I answered him by that Text, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. Because they
received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, for this cause God
shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie. This text I
opened unto them; I will add no more at present to manifest their proficiency
in knowledge.

The present work of the Lord that is to be done among them, is to gather them
together from their scattered kind of life; First, unto Civil Society, then to
Ecclesiastical, and both by the Divine direction of the Word of the Lord; they
are still earnestly desirous of it; and this Spring that is past, they were
very importunately desirous to have been upon that work, and to have planted
corn in the place intended; but I did dissuade, and was forced to use this
reason of delay, because I hoped for tools, and means from England, whereby to
prosecute the work this Summer. But when ships came, and no supply, you may
easily think what a damping it was; and truly my heart smote me, that I had
looked too much at man and means, in stoping their earnest affections with
that bar which proved a Blank. I began without any such respect, and I
thought that the Lord would have me so to go on, and only look to him for help,
whose work it is; and when I had thus looked up to the Lord, I advised with our
Elders and some other of our Church, whose hearts consented with me; then I
advised with diverse of the Elders at Boston Lecture, and Mr. Cottons answer
was, my heart says, go on, and look to the Lord only for help, the rest also
concuring; So I commended it to our Church, and we sought God in a day of
fasting and prayer about it, (together with other causes) and have been ever
since a doing, according to our abilities; and this I account a favor of God,
that that very night, before we came from our place of meeting, we had notice
of a Ship from England whereby I received Letters, and some encouragement in
the work from private friends; a mercy which God had in store, but unknown to
some, and so contrived by the Lord, that I should receive it as a fruit of
prayer.

The place also is of Gods providing, as a fruit of prayer; for when I, with
some that went with me, had rode to a place of some hopeful expectation, when
we came to it, it was in no wise suitable; ^ went behind a Rock, and looked to
the Lord, and committed the matter to him; and while J was traveling in Woods,
Christian friends were in prayer at home; and so it was, that though one of our
company fell sick in the Woods, so that we were forced home with speed; yet in
the way home, the Jndians in our company, upon enquiry describing a place to
me, and guiding us over some part of it, the Lord did both by his providence
then, and by after more diligent search of the place, discover that there it
was his pleasure we should begin this work. When grass was fit to cut, J sent
some Jndians to mow, and others to make some hay at the place, because we must
often ride thither in the Autumn when grass is withered and dead, and especially
in the Spring before any grass is come, and there is provision for our horses;
this work was performd well, as I found when I went up to them with my man to
order it. We must also of necessity have an house to lodge in, meet in, and lay
up our provisions and clothes, which cannot be in Wigwams. I set them therefore
to fell and square timber for an house, and when it was ready, I went, and many
of them with me, and on their shoulders carried all the timber together, etc.
These things they cheerfully do; but this also I do, I pay them wages carefully
for all such works I set them about, which is a good encouragement to labor. I
purpose, God willing, to call them together this Autumn to break and prepare
their own ground against the Spring, and for other necessary works, which are
not afew, in such an enterprise. There is a great river which divides between
their planting grounds and dwelling place, through which, though they easily
wade in Summer, yet in the Spring its deep, and unfit for daily passing over,
especially of women and children; therefore I thought it necessary, that this
Autumn we should make a foot Bridge over, against such time in the Spring as
they shall have daily use of it; I told them my purpose and reason of it,
wished them to go with me to do that work, which they cheerfully did, and with
their own hands did build a Bridge eighty foot long, and nine foot high in the
midst, that it might stand above the floods; when we had done, I called them
together, prayed, and gave thanks to God, and taught them out of a portion of
Scripture, and at parting I told them, I was glad of their readiness to
labor, when I advised them thereunto; and in as much as it has been hard and
tedious labor in the water, if any of them desired wages for their work, I
would give it them; yet being it is for their own use, if they should do all
this labor in love, I should take it well, and as I may have occasion,
remember it; they answered me, they were far from desiring any wages when
they do their own work; but on the other side they were thankful to me that I
had called them, and counseled them in a work so needful for them, whereto I
replied, I was very glad to see them so ingenuous.

This business of praying to God (for that is their general name of Religion)
has hitherto found opposition only from the Pawwawes and profane spirits; but
now the Lord has exercised us with another and a greater opposition; for the
Sachems of the Country are generally set against us, and counter-work the Lord
by keeping off their men from praying to God as much as they can; And the
reason of it is this, They plainly see that Religion will make a great change
among them, and cut them off from their former tyranny; for they used to hold
their people in an absolute servitude, insomuch as what ever they had, and
themselves too were at his command; his language was, as one said ( omne meum;)
now they see that Religion teaches otherwise, and puts a bridle upon such
usurpations; Besides their former manner was, that if they wanted money, or if
they desired any thing from a man, they would take occasion to rage and be in a
great anger; which when they did perceive, they would give him all they had to
pacify him; for else their way was to suborne some villain (of which they have
no lack) to find some opportunity to kill him; This keeps them in great awe of
their Sachems, and is one reason why none of them desire any wealth, only from
hand to mouth, because they are but servants, and they get it not for
themselves; But now if their Sachem so rage, and give sharp and cruel
language, instead of seeking his favor with gifts (as formerly) they will
admonish him of his sin; tell him that is not the right way to get money; but
he must labor, and then he may have money, that is Gods command, etc. And as
for Tribute, some they are willing to pay, but not as formerly. Now these are
great temptations to the Sachems, and they had need of a good measure both of
wisdom and grace to swallow this Pill* and it has set them quite off; And I
suppose that hence it is, that (I having requested the Court of Commissioners
for a ge^eral way to be thought of to instruct all the Indians in all parts,
and I told the Indians that I did so, which they would soon spread; and still
in my prayers, I pray for the Monohegens, Narragansets, etc.) the Monohegen
Indians were much troubled lest the Court of Commissioners should take some
course to teach them to pray to God; and Vnkus their Sachem went to Hartford
this Court (for there they sat) and expressed to Elder Goodwin his fear of
such a thing, and manifested a great unwillingnesse thereunto; this one of our
Commissioners told me at his coming home.

This temptation has much troubled Cutshamoquin our Sachem, and he was raised
in his spirit to such an height, that at a meeting after Lecture, he openly
contested with me against our proceeding to make a Town; and plainly told me
that all the Sachems in the Country were against it, etc. When he did so carry
himself, all the ^ndians were filled with fear, their countenances grew pale,
and most of them slunk away, a few stayed, and I was alone, not any English man
with me; But it pleased God (for it was his guidance of me, and assistance) to
raise up my spirit, not to passion, but to a bold resolution, telling him it
was Gods work I was about, and he was with me, and I feared not him, nor all
the Sachems in the Country, and I was resolved to go on do what they can, and
they nor he should hinder that which I had begun, etc. And it pleased God that
his spirit shrunk and fell before me, which when those Indians that tarried
saw, they smiled as they durst, out of his sight, and have been much
strengthened ever since; and since I understand that in such conflicts their
manner is, that they account him that shrinks to be conquered, and the other to
conquer; which alas I knew not, nor did I aim at such a matter, but the Lord
carried me beyond my thoughts and wont; after this brunt was over, I took my
leave to go home, and Cutshamoquin went a little way with me, and told me that
the reason of this trouble was, because the Indians that pray to God, since
they have so done, do not pay him tribute as formerly they have done; I
answered him that once before when I heard of his complaint that way, I
preached on that text, Give unto Caesar what is Caesar's, and unto God what is
Gods; and also on Romans 13. naming him the matter of the texts (not the places
of which he is ignorant) But he said its true, I taught them well, but they
would not in that point do as I taught them; And further he said, this thing
are all the Sachems sensible of, and therefore set themselves against praying
to God; and then I was troubled, lest (if they should be sinfully unjust) they
should both hinder and blemish the Gospel and Religion; I did therefore consult
with the Magistrates and Mr. Cotton and other Elders; Mr. Cottons text by Gods
providence, the next Lecture gave him occasion to speak to it, which I
fore-knowing advised some that understood English best, to be there; and partly
by what they heard, and by what I had preached to the like purpose, and told
them what Mr. Cotton said, etc. they were troubled, and fell to reckon up what
they had done in two years past, a few of them that lived at one of the places
I preached unto; I took down the particulars in writing, as follows. At one
time they gave him twenty bushels of corn, at another time more then six
bushels; two hunting days they killed him fifteen Deeres; they brake up for
him two Acres of Land, they made for him a great house or Wigwam, they made
twenty rod of fence for him, with a Ditch and two Railes about it, they paid a
debt for him of 3. li. 10. s. only some others were contributors in this money;
one of them gave him a skin of Beaver of two pound, at his return from
building, besides many days works in planting corn altogether, and some
severally; yea they said, they would willingly do more if they would govern
well by justice, and as the word of God taught them; when I heard all this, I
wondered, for this comes to near 30. li. and was done by a few, and they
thought it not much if he had carried matters better; and yet his complaint
was, they do nothing; But the bottom of it lies here, he formerly had all or
what he would; now he has but what they will; and admonitions also to rule
better, and he is provoked by other Sachems, and ill counsel, not to suffer
this, and yet does not know how to help it; hence arise his tentations, in
which I do very much pity him. Having all this information what they had done,
and how causeless his complaint and discontent was, I thought it a difficult
thing to ease his spirit, and yet clear and justify the people, which I was to
endeavor the next day of our meeting after the former contestations, therefore
I was willing to get some body with me; And by Gods providence, Elder Heath
went with me, and when we came there, we found him very full of discontent,
sighing, sower looks, etc. but we took no notice of it.

I preached that day out of the fourth of Matthew, the temptations of Christ;
and when I came at that temptation, of the Devils showing Christ the kingdoms
and glories of the world, thereby to tempt him from the service of God, to the
service of the Devil; I did apply it wholly to his case, showing him the
Devil was now tempting him, as he tempted Christ; and Satan shows him all
the delights and dignities, and gifts and greatness that he was wont to have
in their sinful way; Satan also tells him he shall lose them all if he pray to
God, but if he will give over praying to God he shall have them all again; then
I showed him how Christ rejected that temptation, and exhorted him to reject it
also, for either he must reject the temptation, or else he will reject praying
to God; if he should reject praying to God, God would reject him.

After our exercise was ended, we had conference of the matter, and we gave him
the best counsel we could (as the Lord was pleased to assist) and when we had
done, Elder Heath his observation of him was, that there was a great change in
him, his spirit was very much lightened, and it much appeared both in his
countenance and carriage, and he has carried all things fairly ever since.

But the temptation still does work strongly, in the Country the Sachems
opposing any that desire to submit themselves to the service of the Lord, as
appears sundry ways; some that began to listen, are gone quite back; I mean
Sachems and some people that have a mind to it, are kept back; this last
Lecture day one came in and submitted himself to call on God, and said he had
been kept back this half year by opposition, but now at last the Lord has
helped and emboldned him to break through all opposition.

Thus Satan seeks to beat off these poor creatures from seeking after the
Lord by opposing the highest powers they have against the Lord and this work of
his, knowing that the light of the Gospel and kingdom of Jesus Christ (if it
once get footing) will scatter and dissipate that darkness whereby his
kingdom is maintained; But I believe verily that the Lord will bring great
good out of all these oppositions, nay I see it already, (though I see not all,
I believe more then I can see; you who can know the thoughts of Gods love to
his people, it is yet a secret) but this I see, that by this opposition the
wicked are kept off from us, and from thrusting themselves into our society, at
least sundry are, who else might crowd in among us and trouble us; besides it
is become some trial now, to come into our company and call upon God; for
besides the forsaking of their Pau-waus, (which was the first trial) and their
old barbarous fashions and liberty to all sin, and some of their friends and
kindred, etc. Now this is added, they incur the displeasure of their Sachems,
all which put together, it cannot but appear there is some work of God upon
their hearts, which does carry them through all these snares, and add to this,
that if upon some competent time of experience, we shall find them to grow in
knowledge of the principles of Religion, and to love the ways of the Lord the
better, according as they come to understand them, and to yield obedience to
them, and submit to this great change, to bridle lust by laws of chastity, and
to mortify idleness by labor, and desire to train up their children
accordingly; I say if we shall see these things in some measure in them, what
should hinder charity from hoping that there is grace in their hearts, a spark
kindled by the Word and Spirit of God that shall never be quenched; and were
these in a fixed cohabitation, who could gainsay their gathering together into
a holy Church Covenant and election of Officers? and who can forbid that they
should be baptized? And I am persuaded that there be sundry such among them,
whom the Lord will vouchsafe so far to favor and shine upon, that they shall
become a Church, and a Spouse of Jesus Christ, and among whom the pure and holy
Kingdom of Christ shall arise, and over whom Christ shall reign, ruling them
in all things by his holy word.

But though this trouble and oppsition is turned (and shall be more) unto a
spiritual gain, yet it behooves us not to be secure, and regardlesse of our
safety; for if the Adversary should discern us naked and weak, and see an
opportunity, who knows what their rage and Satan's malice may stir them up
unto to work us a mischief? Nay, it is our duty to be vigilant, and fortify
our selves the best we can, thereby to put the enemy out of hope to hurt us,
and to prevent them from attempting any evil against us, if it be the will of
God; and to that end we purpose (if the Lord will) to make a strong Palizado
(wanting means of doing better) and if we cannot get any Guns, Powder, Shot,
Swords, etc. we will make us Slings, Bows, and other Engines, the best the
Lord will please to direct us for our safety; and when we have used the best
means we can, I hope the Lord will help us to trust in his great name, to make
that our strong Tower to fly unto.

I see the Lord delights to appear himself in the work, and will have us
content our selves with little, low, poor things, that all the power and praise
may be given to his great name; Our work in civilizing them will go on the more
slowly for want of tools; for though I have bought a few for them, we can do
but little, for alas afew will set but afew on work, and they be very dear too;
had I store of hoses this Autumn either to lend them or sell them at moderate
prizes, we should prepare (by Gods blessing) good store of ground for corn
against next year; and had I wherewith to buy corn to carry up to the place,
and have it in a readiness to supply them, that so they might tarry at their
work, and not be shut off through necessity to go get food, that also would be
a great furtherance; and had we but means to maintain a discreet diligent man
to work with them, and guide them in work, that also would much further the
work; and many such things I could propound as very requisite unto the work,
but I lay my hand upon my mouth, I will say no more, I have left it with the
Lord, who has hitherto appeared, and he will appear for his own eternal praise
in shining upon the day of our small things in his due season.

The blessing of God upon this work does comfortably, hopefuly, and
successefuly, appear in the labors of my brother Mahu at Martins Vineyard,
insomuch that I hope they also will be after awhile ripe for this work of
Civility and Cohabitation, if once they see a successeful pattern of it, and I
doubt not but they will (as these do) ere long, desire Church Fellowship, and
the Ordinances of Gods worship; the cloud increases, and the Lord seems to
be coming in among them* they are very desirous to have their children taught,
which is one argument that they truly love the knowledge of God; as on the
contrary, it is a great ground of doubt of the truth of grace in that man's
heart, when he has not an heart to take care to train up his children in the
truth and in the practice of all godliness, but this care is in them, and it
is pity it should not be furthered by all means; I have entreated a woman
living near where they dwell, to do that office for their children, and I pay
her for it; but when they go to their plantation, we shall be in a straight for
help that way; the Indians so well like the parties who performs that
service, that they entreat them to go with them, which I look at as a finger of
God; they are I hope a godly couple, and might be a blessing to them, had we
means to encourage them unto so difficult an enterprise, for it is a great
matter to go and live among such a people; but in that case also, I look up to
the Lord, and leave it with his holy care and wisdom; and if the Lord move any
hearts to help in this work, I desire that the care of their schooling may be
among the chiefest cares.

If the Lord please to prosper our poor beginnings, my purpose is, (so for as
the Lord shall enable me to give attendance unto the work) to have school
exercises for all the men by daily instructing of them to read and write, etc.
Yea if the Lord affords us fit instruments, my desire is, that all the women
may be taught to read; I know the matter will be difficult every way, for
English people can only teach them to read English; and for their own Language
we have no book; my desire therefore is to teach them all to write, and read
written hand, and thereby with pains taking, they may have some of the
Scriptures in their own Language; I have one already who can write, so that I
can read his writing well, and he (with some pains and teaching) can read
mine; I hope the Lord will both enlarge his understanding, and others also to
do as he does; and if once I had some of themselves able to spell aright, write
and read, it might further the work exceedingly, and will be the speediest way.

Sir, When I had gone thus far in my Letters, by a Ship that came in, you
wrote unto our Governor touching the two Libraries, my brother Welds and Mr.
Jenners, and of the willingness of the Corporation to discharge for them, for
which cause I do humbly thank the Worshipful Corporation, all the Christian and
much respected Gentlemen my loving friends. And Sir, I thank you for all your
faithful pains in this work, and the more I am obliged thereunto, because
herein I am like to partake of the fruit of your labors, the Lord Jesus give
you a full reward.

Whereas you require the Catalogue of both Libraries, it shall be done (if God
will) but I am to go into the Country to the Indians now, and have much
business, therefore know not whether I can do it by this Ship, if I can I will.

This last Court of Commissioners sat at Hartford Conecticot, so that I could
not speak with them, but this course I took by our Governors advice; our
General Court gave him with some other, power to give instructions to our
Commissioners; therefore all my requests I did write unto him, and he gave them
in his Instructions to our Commissioners, so they went strong.

Sir,

I have done at present, Mr. Whitfeld will inform you farther in any
particulars if need be: The Lord of heaven bless and assist you in all your
ways, and I beg your prayers for me still, and so rest

Roxbury this 21 of the 8th. 50 Yours in our Lord Jesus. JOHN ELIOT.


The Conclusion.
ANd now (loving Reader) having brought thee along through these Divine
dispensations of Gods merciful dealing with the Indians, Vide Ainsw. (...) loc.
I shall briefly acquaint thee with the workings of my own thoughts under the
apprehension of these things.

First, I see plainly the fulfilling of that Divine truth and promise spoken of
by David, Psalm. 138. 2. Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name, i. e.
The Word in the Gospel brought and preached to men. The Lord has made this
Word the only outward instrumental means to bring home these wandering sinners;
to this Word they have attended from the first; from this they have received
their light; unto this they have given up themselves; without this they will
not stir; from this they will not depart; from hence they have their peace,
and have seen good days under the Kingdom of our Lord Christ.

Secondly, the Lord has now declared one great end he had of sending many of
his people to those ends of the earth; for besides that the Lord has made that
Land a place of rest, and a little sanctuary to them in these troubleous times,
Ezekiel. 11. 16.
and has made it a place where mamany, very many have been brought home to
Christ, even amongst themselves; so now apparently in the conversion of many of
the Heathens, who sing and rejoice in the ways of the Lord.

Thirdly, when I looked on my dear native Country (in the bulk and mass of
them) there is one above does know, that my heart melts toward it, desiring
the Lord to give me grace to sorrow in secret for millions of them, who were
never yet acquainted with what many of these poor Indianns have felt and found
of the things of Christ, and that multitudes of such who hold forth a
profession of Christian Religion, yet fall short of them, in regard of their
belief and practice. Here I helped my self by comparing the one with the other,
and that in diverse particulars.

1. These Indians are found (to speak of such whose hearts the Lord has opened
by his Word and Spirit) to prize Ordinances, and such as bring the Light to
them, even that poor Indian, whose best clothing is a simple skin about him, of
whom you read in the first Letter, yet they honor him for his works sake, and
for those gifts, piety, and modesty they see in him; Here Ministers of Christ
are despised, though many of them are eminent for parts, wisdom, and known
integrity.

2. These Indians are plain-hearted, seek for Christ to enjoy him for himself;
they receive the Truth in the love of it, and obey it without shifting or
gainsaying; Here men have their own ends to tend to in matter of Religion,
take up the form, and let the power lie, as not serving their turn, have
evasions to get from under the authority of the truth, and the Majesty of the
Rules of Christ; here is rending and tearing of wits, whilst we wrangle one
another out of the truth, till love and peace be lost.

3. These Indians are industrious and pursue the things of their salvation,
rest they cannot, have it they must, what ever it cost them, bearing up
strongly against all opposition: We have weak and bedridden dispositions, sunk
down into a sottish and sensual way; in many the kingdom of Hell suffers
violence, and none can withstand them, but thither they will.

4. These mourn and weep bitterly, and are pained under the sight and sense of
their sins, when convinced of them; that some of them have been known to have
wet with their tears the places weere they have stood. We here for the most
part, the Lord knows, live with dry eyes, and hard hearts, and slight spirits.

5. They are careful and constant in duties of worship, both in private and
family prayer, hearing the Word, observation of the Sabbath, meet often
together, and will pray together as occasion serves, converse lovingly
together, are teachable, patient, and contented. O that there were such hearts
in us! O that their example did not shame multitudes of us who are fearfully
guilty of omitting what the very light of Nature calls for from us! For this my
heart is sad, fearing that if the Lord do not mightily step in, the next
generation will be betrayed to Ignorance of the Truth as it is in Jesus, to
Delusions and Profaneness, and be rendered odious to all our neighbor Nations;
and that these Indians will rise up in judgment against us and our children at
the last day. Brethren, the Lord has no need of us, but if it please him, can
carry his Gospel to the other side of the world, and make it there to shine
forth in its glory, brightness, power and purity, and leave us in Indian
darkness.

And concerning these Indians, who have tasted how gracious the Lord is, though
it cannot be expected but that the Devil should be like himself, by the
counter-working of this blessed work, both by himself and his instruments, so
as to cause many of them to totter, back slide, and fall away from what they
have professed; yet I have ground to conceive and hope, that there is such a
candle lighted amongst the Indians in those parts which shall not be put out
till Christ comes to judgment, for the accomplishment of which he shall not
cease to pray, who is

Your loving friend in all Christian duties. HENRY WHITFELD.

FINIS.

