A TREATISE TENDING To show that the Just and Holy God, may have a Hand in the
unjust actions of Sinful Men: And that in such a way as shall be without any
impeachment of his Justness and Holiness, or Diminution of his Power and
PROVIDENCE.

By Thomas Whitfield Minister of the Gospel.

The Lord is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17.

How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out, Romans
11.33.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley, 1653.

To the Right Honorable Edward Lord Mountague of Boughton, a fruitful increase
of piety, prosperity, and all true happiness both here and hereafter.
My Noble Lord,
IT would not a little conduce to the happiness of our lives, if our thoughts
(which are the immediate and to often abortive issue of our minds) were rightly
employed and improved: then are they well employed, when they are conversant
about the most excellent object: when they are taken up with the contemplation
of the wisdom, power, providence, justice, holiness, and other excellent
attributes of him who is excellency it self; in the fruition of whom is our
highest felicity: this made the sweet Singer of Israel to say, How precious are
thy thoughts to me, O God, how great is the sum of them? Psa. 139. As if he
had said, the thoughts of thy wisdom, and wonderful workings of thy
providence (things which before he had mentioned) are of great price and worth,
being things of incomprehensible excellency: yea, they are as rare as precious,
the minds of most men being so seldom taken up with them. I am bold to present
to your Lordship this small Treatise, that it might give you occasion to
entertain such thoughts as these, as also that it might be a testimony of my
thankful acknowledgement of all that honorable respect I have received from
you. Thus humbly imploring the Father of mercies, that he would farther enrich
you with the true treasure, and enable you inwardly with the graces of his
spirit proportionably to those outward endowments wherewith he has been
pleased to dignifie you; I resign you to his mercy and rest

Your Honors in all due observance and Christian service. Tho. Whitfield.

The Preface.
IT has been a question much controverted in all ages, how the good and holy
God can have a hand in the great evils that are done in the world: Quomodo id
non fieret praeter Dei voluntate quod fit contra voluntatem (as Austin speaks)
this is done miro and ineffabili modo (as he says:) this one of the mysteries
and depths of divinity worthy our searching into. Scripture expressions for the
most part hold this forth by way of action; As when it is said that God hardened
Pharaohs heart, that he sent Joseph into Egypt, that he took away Jobs Cattle
which were taken away by the Chaldaeans and Subaeans, and the like. Papists and
Arminians confine this only to a way of permission without action, and
calumniate our Orthodox divines, as if they made God the Author of sin, because
they bring it within the compass of his will and decree, and make him to have
a kind of action in it. Thus Bellarmine charge Zunighlius, Calvin, Peter
Martyr, Beza. The like impuration also Arminius seeks to fasten on Mr. Perkins.
I know well that it is far beyond my ability to untie this knot as may give
satisfaction to all; but if I may contribute any beam of light toward the
clearer discovery of Gods manner of proceeding in the production of fin: If I
may help to vindicate the innocence and Orthodoxie of our worthy Writers from
the unjust aspersion of their adversaries: especially, if I may in any sort
vindicate the All wise, and All-working providence and power of God, from that
overmuch streightning and diminution which has been put upon them for the
maintaining of his justice: If (I say) I may by this discourse be helpefull any
of these ways, I shall attain the end which I aim at. Whereunto I shall
only promise these things briefly.

1. That this discourse is not so much intended for those of the learned sort
(who are better able to inform these lines) as for such ingenuous Christians,
who when they meet with those Scriptures wherein by the sound of the words, God
seems to be made the proper cause of sin, they stumble at them, and not being
able to satisfy themselves desire help this way.

2. I shall desire the indifferent Reader, that if in this discourse he shall
meet with that which may seem to go higher then many of our Divines have done,
in making God to have an active hand in the actions of sinful men: he would
forbear either to reject or censure, till he has weighed the strength of the
arguments brought to prove the thing propounded.

3. If I shall let fall any thing in this Treatise, which shall not be
agreeable to clear evidence of Scripture, and this be made appear to be so; I
shall not refuse to unsay any thing which I have said, and readily to embrace
any truth though not agreeing with my former apprehensions. The good Spirit of
truth make us all lovers of truth, and lead us into all those ways of truth
which may bring us at length to the enjoying of him who is the author of truth.
Amen.

Exodus, 9.12. And the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart, etc.


IT is a principal privilege belonging to the Covenant of Grace, and a
special promise which God has made unto his people, that he would take away
their stony heart from them, and give unto them hearts of flesh, Ezekiel. 36.26.
that is, that he would take away the hardness of their hearts: How God should
take away the hardness of heart in some, and yet harden the hearts of others,
is not easy to apprehend. The scope of this Treatise is to show how the just
and holy God, may have a hand in the sinful actions of men; and that not only
by way of permission, but also by some kind of operation and working; and yet
this be done without any diminution of his justice, or violation of his
holiness, but still he remain to be most just in all his ways, and holy in
all his works.

CHAP. I. Showing what hardness of heart is.
HArdness of heart may be said to be an evil quality of the soul, which makes
it in a man insensible of the evil which he does, or the evil which he shall
suffer; when either he has no feeling of it, or feels it not in that measure
which he should do; then is his heart affected with hardness. It is man's duty
to be sensible of the sin which he commits, and of the suffering which will
most certainly follow after. God has placed in his soul that faculty of
Conscience for this very end and purpose, to give him warning and make him take
notice of both these that he might be affected accordingly: Now when after the
comitting of sin, there are no affections of grief, sorrow, and trouble of
spirit stirring in him, when there is no fear to commit sin, nor care to
prevent the evil that sin will bring, then is the heart heardned.

This hardness of heart is either natural, or adventitiall and acquired; the
first of these we all bring with us into the world, being either altogether
insensible of our spiritual misery, by reason of sin and suffering, or not so
sensible as we should be. Hence the heart of man is said to be a heart of stone.

Acquired hardness is that whereby the natural is increased and augmented; this
may in some degree be not only be in the worst but in the best of men, which
is brought to pass either by custom in sinning, or by secret judgment, or by
both; of this there are diverse degrees, as

1. When a man takes liberty, voluntarily and frequently to do such things as
he knows to be sinful. 2. When he does these against the frequent persuasions,
admonitions, and calls of the word to the contrary. 3. Against such corrections,
punishments and judgments which God shall inflict upon himself, or he shall
see inflicted upon others for the same, or for the like sins. 4. When he shall
do this against the stirrings and strivings, the checks or rebukes of his own
Conscience. 5. When notwithstanding all these, he shall take up strong
resolutions and confirmed purposes to do as he has done, namely to maintain
his own will against Gods will. Thus may wicked men harden their own hearts; and
thus i'ts often said of Pharaoh, that he hardened his heart, and would not let
the peoplegoe, when he once saw that the judgment was past. 6. When he shall
come to be past all sense and feeling of his sin, thus the Apostle speaks of
some, that being past feeling, gave themselves to commit all uncleanness with
greediness, Ephesians. 4.10.
2. There may be an acquired hardness by the secret judgment of God. Thus its
said here that the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart: and of Sihon, that the Lord
hardened his spirit and made it obstinate, that he might give him into the bands
of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 2.30.

How this is done, more shall be spoken in the due place.

CHAP. II. Showing that God is not, nor cannot be the author or proper cause of
this, or any other sin.
BY another and proper cause I understand causa perse, such a cause as is in it
self, and in i'ts own nature tends to produce, such or such an effect, as the
Sun is the proper cause of light and heat, the water of moisture and the like:
That God cannot thus be the cause of sin, may appear upon these following
grounds.

Argu. 1. God is the Author of all good, and therefore he cannot be Author of
evil, for out of the same fountain cannot proceed sweet water and bitter,
Jam. 3.11. As the Sun cannot be the proper cause of light and darkness, no more
can the Lord be of good and evil.

2. Sin is a defect, now God is all act, yea he is actus purissimus and
perfectissimus, the most pure and perfect act; therefore he cannot be the
Author that which is a defect: for however sin cleaves to men's actions, as
the accident to be subject, yet it self is a mere defect in a privation of
what should be.

3. Sin is contrary to those excellent qualities and properties which
immediately flow from the nature of God is light, sin is darkness, 1 John 1.5.6.
God is purity and holiness, Sin is pollution and filthiness, Jam. 1.21. God is
righteous, yea righteousness it self, all sin is unrighteousness, 1 John 5.17.
God is perfection in the highest degree, all sin is imperfection: now one
contrary cannot be the proper cause of another.

4. God is said to be such a God as loves not wickedness, neither can evil
dwell with him; yea he hates all the workers of iniquity, Psalm. 5.4.5. he hates
them because of their sin: now he cannot hate that which himself is the
Author and proper cause of.

5. He threatens in his word that he will punish all sin and iniquity, that
he will not hold the wicked innocent, Exodus 34.7. but he will visit the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, even unto the third and fourth
Generation; that the wicked shall not go unpunished, Prove. 11.21. they shall
not escape, 1 These. 5.3. Now it cannot stand with his justice to punish that
which himself is the Author and proper cause of.

6. Sin makes a reparation between God and the soul, Esaias 59.2. It is an
aversion of the soul from God: Now God cannot be the Author of that which is an
aversion from him, for then he should deny himself, but he cannot lie or deny
himself, 1 Timothy 2.13.

7. If God could be the Author of sin he himself might be said to be a sinner;
if he were the Author of unrighteousness, he himself might be said to be
unrighteous; to which the Apostle gives an absit, as a thing blasphemous to
speak or think. Is God unrighteous which punishes (says he) God forbid: How
then shall he judge the world? Romans 3.5,6.

8. The Apostle says, that he who commits sin, is of the Devil, 1 John.
3.8. and that Christ came into the world to dissolve the works of the Devil.
Now Christ came not into the world to dissolve the works of God, therefore sin
is none of his work.

9. If God should be the Author of sin, then the difference betwixt good and
evil would be taken away, both arising from the same cause in the same manner.

10. If God should be the Author of sin, then he should seem to dissemble and
deal deceitfully with men; because he so often calls off, from this as a thing
which he loathes and abhors, and mean while is the parent and producer of it.

By all these grounds it appears that God cannot be the Author and proper
cause of sin, though he has some kind of hand in it.

CHAP. III. Showing how God has a hand in the sinful actions of men.
THe just and holy God may be said to have a hand in the unjust actions of
sinful men diverse ways, as

1. By way of permission, when he suffers them to follow the sinful
inclinations and dispositions of their own wicked natures, and so produce
actions accordingly, without restraining or hindering them. Thus it is said, he
suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own ways, Act. 14.16.

A man may be said to have a hand in that which he willingly and wittily su^ers
to be done when he has power to hinder it: This is granted on all hands, for
if God should not suffer sin to be, it could not be committed. God is able to
restrain and hinder the committing of sin if he pleases, if any thing should
be done whether he would or not, then were he not omnipotent.

2. By suffering Satan to tempt and provoke mon to sin, and by his
temptations to prevail: thus it is said that he did deliver all that Job had
into the hans of Satan, and then Satan stirs up the Caldaeans and Sabaeans,
to take away his Oxen and his Camels, and to kill his Servants Job 1.12,15,17.
And he suffered Satan to enter in the heart of Judas, and to stir him up to
betray his Master.

3. By withdrawing his grace from men, and not affording a continual supply
of his help for their support and sustentation, that they may be preserved
from falling. Thus it is said, he took away his spirit from Saul, 2 Some. 7.15.
And that when the Ambassadors of the King of Babell came to Hezekiah, the Lord
left him to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart, 2 Chronicles. 22
31. The depraved nature of man is like to a ruinous house that his ready to
fall, if it be not continnally under-propped and upheld by some supporters; now
God is not bound to yield this support to sinful men, but he may withdraw his
helping hand from them as he pleases, which when he does, then are they ready
to fall.

4. God often times punishes one sin with another; thus he punishes the abuse
of the means of grace with hardness of heart, and the abuse of light with
greater blindness. Thus it is said of the Jews, that God gave them the spirit
of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears they should not hear,
Romans 11.8. And of the Gentiles, that because they abused the light of nature;
and when they knew the true God by the works of Creation, yet they did not
glorify him as God, but withheld the truth in unrighteousnesr; therefore he
gave them up to vile affections to do such things which were not seemly, Rom
1.21,26. And in the times of the Antichristian Apostasy, because men received
not the love of the truth, therefore God did send them strong delusions to
believe lies, 2 These. 2.10,11. And thus much Bellarmine himself grants, for
speaking of Absolons incest, he says, Bellar. de Amiss. great. and Sta. Pect.
lib. 2. c. 14.
Deus decitur malum illud fecisse, non quia culpa Absoloxis sed qua paena
Davidis erat. God is said to have done it not as it was Absolons fault, but as
it was David's punishment.

5. God may be said to have a hand in the sinful actions of the Creature,
because he so orders them by his providence, that he suffers sin to be
committed in one kind rather then in another: thus he suffered Joseph's brethren
rather to sell their brother into Egypt, then to kill him: Thus Christ gave
leave to the Devils, rather to enter into the Swine, then into men; Besides he
so orders and over rules the actions of the sinful Creature, as he makes
them serve to good uses and purposes; yea some times to ends altogether
differing, yea contrary to what themselves intended. Thus he made the actions
of Joseph's brethen in selling him into Egypt for a slave, to be a means of his
greater advancement: And Hamans emnity against Mordecay, and the Jews in
getting a decree of the King for their destruction, to be a means of their
greater safety and preferment; And the envy of the Jews against Christ, in
procuring him to be put to a shameful and cursed death, to be a means and
occasion not only of man's salvation, but also of Christ's greater exaltation.

6 God has a hand in the sin which man commits, so far as he does sustain and
support him in all his natural motions and actions; God being the Author of
nature, does support man in all, the actions of nature, and that not only in
good, but in evil actions. Sin being a defect or privation, and so a kind of
none entity, cleaves away to something that has being, to some habit, to some
action or motion, as the subject wherein it is seated. Now all natural actions
and motions are in themselves goods hence the rule holds true, that malum est
in bono tanquam in subjecto, evil is in good, as in the subject of it. All
natures works are Gods works, In him we live, and move, and have our being,
Act. 17.25. This is true not only in regard of our External, but also of our
internal motions and actions; not only of the body, but of the mind: As we
cannot move our hand or foot, or not our thoughts, wills and affections without
him.

In every sinful action, there are two things conjoined and included: The
action it self, and the defect or deformity; the inordinacy, and obliquity of
it: One of these is as it were the matter, the other the form of it, which
Divines call the materiale and formale Pacti. The former of these is from God,
the other from the corrupt will of the Creature. It is a true rule that Deus
agit inpeccato non tanquam causa moralis sed tanquam causa naturalis, God acts
in sin, not as a moral, but as a natural cause; so fair only as there is
natures work in any action. All new actions are new entities and beings, and
all beings are from God, who is the first and most perfect being, and from whom
all other beings proceed. All natural motions and actions are creatures, and
all creatures are the work of a Creator. Pet. Mart. loc. commun. loc. 14 sect.
19.
Qui equid est, quatenus est, non tantum a creaturis sed per deum produeitur
says Peter Martyr. Every thing that is, so far as it is, has his production,
not only from the Creature, but from God. And so far as these actions are
beings, and from God they are good. Augustine de Fera relig. cap. 34.
Ipsum quantulum cunque esse bonum est, quia summun esse est summun bonum,
says Augustine. The very being of any thing though never so small is good,
because the chiefest being is the chiefest good.

Object. If it be objected that in sins of Omission there is no action,
therefore in these God has no hand.

Ans. It may be answered though there be no outward action yet there is an
action of the mind and will: for when a man does omit any duty, he omits it
sciens and velens, upon deliberation he does willingly choose rather to let it
alone, then perform it.

Pet. Mart. loc. commun loc. 14. sect. 20.
Homo corruptus vult non amare proximum, vult nonire adsaerum caelum, ac
perinde videmus actum voluntatis; ille actus, qua astus natarae, a Deo est,
(says Peter Martyr.) A corrupt minded man will not love his neighbor, he will
not go to the holy Assemblies; this act of his will, so far as it is an act of
nature, is of God.

Thus we have seen how God has a hand in sin diverse ways; The two first, are
acts of his Sovereignty, whereby he acts as a fire Agem, as being bound to
none. The two second, are acts of his justice, whereby he inflicts punishment
upon such as deserve it. The two last, are acts of his power and providence,
whereby he does not only sustain the Creatures in their several actions and
motions, but guides these with the several adjuncts and accidents belonging to
them, to such ends as seem best to his wisdom; and in none of these does he
appear in any sort culpable.

CHAP. IV. Showing that God has a hand in the evil actions of men, more then
by way of bare permission.
THat permission is excised by God, in the sinful actions of men, is by none
denied (for if he did not suffer them, they could not be). but whether this
permission be accompanied with action whether he has any kind of efficiency or
working in the evil that is done by men, is the great question; the
affirmative part whereof may thus be proved.

Argu. 1. The Scripture expressions whereby God is said to have a hand in sin,
are almost always such as denote action, and not a bare permission only. It
does not say that God suffered Pharaoh to harden his own heart, but that God
hardened Pharaohs heart, Exodus 9.12. It is not said that he suffered the
Cananites to hearden their hearts against Joshua; but that it was of the Lord
that they should harden their hearts to come against Israel, that they might
destroy them, and they might have no favor, Josh. 11.20. It is not said that
he suffered Absolon to commit wickedness with his Fathers Concubins, but he
tells David, What thou have done in secret I will do in the sight of the Sun, 2 Samuel 12.12. It is not said that he suffered the Egyptians to hate his people,
but that he turned their hearts to hate them, Psalm. 105.25. that he suffered
the false Prophet to be deceived, but I the Lord have deceived him, Ezekiel. 14 9.
that he suffered the Gentiles to follow their vile affections, but he gave them
up to vile affections, Rom 2.26. that he suffered those who received not the
love of the truth, to be led away with delusions, but he should send them
strong delusions, to believe a Lie, 2 These. 2.11. When our Savior directs us
to pray against temptation, he does not bid us pray that God would not suffer
us to be led into temptation, but that he would not lead us into temptation. By
these and many other places, where Gods working in sin is held forth to us by
way of action, it plainly appears, that in the sinful actions of men God does
exercise more then a bare permission: else why should the Scripture so
constantly use such expressions as denote action? The Scripture does never so
frequently and constantly speak improperly in any subject, where it might as
easily have spoken properly.

Argu. 2. When God is said to harden Pharaohs heart, and Pharaoh is said to
harden his own heart, if one of these may be taken by way of permission only,
why not the other also, and so Pharaoh should have no action in the hardening of
his own heart; for though God does act and work in another manner then Pharaoh
himself does (as shall more largely be shown afterward) yet the same
expression being applied to both, it plainly argues that action belongs to both
in this hardening, though the manner of their acting be far different.

Argu. 3. It is granted by all, that God does permit sin to be, otherwise it
could not be: Now if he does permit, then he does volens permittere, he does
willingly permit it; for if he should not willingly permit it, th^n it should
come to pass against his will: but it cannot stand with his omnipotency that
any thing should come to pass whether he will or no: It is the true rule of
Austin, August in enchirid. cap. 95.
Nihil fit, nisi quod omnipotens fieri velit, vel ipse faciendo vel permittendo
ut fiat; There is nothing done but the omnipotent God will have it to be done,
either by doing it himself, or by permitting it to be done by others. If he
willingly permits it, then he wills it, (for an act of his will passes upon it)
if he wills it, look how far he wills it he works it; For he is in Heaven and
does whatsoever he will, Psalm. 115.3. so far as he wills any thing shall be or
come to pass, so far he acts in bringing it to pass; for his will is an
active and operative-will. The acts of his will are actus ad intra, acts within
himself; and all immanent acts are of the same nature with himself, who is
totus actus, all act: how then can it be conceived that such acts as these
should be without action? All these immanent acts, namely the acts of his will,
counsel, and purpose touching things which shall be as they are in him from
all eternity, so in time he puts them forth in some outward action and working.
Hence it is said, That he works all things according to the counsel of his
will, Ephesians. 5.11.

Bella mine says, Bellar. de amiss. great. and statu pcti. lib. 2. c. 14.
Deus est causa indurationis, non positive sed negative seilicet permissive,
God is the cause of hardening not positively, but negatively; namely, by way of
permission, so that he makes permission to be such a thing wherein God denies
and withholds all action, and thus he says God hardens; But to harden is an
act, and how can an act be without action, so that this is nothing else but to
bring in a clear contradiction for the blinding of the truth, yea, he says
further, Deus praesidet ipsis malis voluntatibvs, eas regit, gubernat, terquet,
flectit, in iis invisibiliter operando; God does as it were sit President over
the evil wills of men, and does rule, govern, wrest and bend them by working
invisibly in them. Is not here a manifest contradiction to his negative
permission? for are not all these actions, and can there be action without
action? Far more agreeable to truth is the assertion of Dr. Twisse speaking of
this subject, Dr. Twisse vindict. l. 2 p. 27.
Non tantum voluisse Deum ab aeterno dicimus, sed conformiter ita operatum esse
in tempore, and totum negotium ita administrasse ut revera peccaret Adamus; We
affirm, that God did not only will from all eternity, but did answerably so
work in time, and so order the business, that Adam should certainly fall.

Argum. 4. The Scripture says that Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the people of
Israel were gathered together against Christ, to do whatsoever the hand and
counsel of God had determined before to be done, Acts 4.27,28. what these did
to Christ in his suffering was sinful in a high degree, yet it was done by the
determinate counsel of God: and as it is in this, so it is in all other actions
of the like nature; whatever is done in time is determined, and decreed before
all time. Now the decrees of God are one^geticall decrees, whatever he has
decreed shall be, he some way or other procures the being of it; so that though
he be not the Author of it if it be evil, yet he has some kind of efficiency
and working in it: for if he should leave it to others, and have no hand at all
in the effecting of it, then the thing might never be, and so God might be
disappointed of the thing which he decreed. It is a true rule being rightly
understood, Qua decrevit fecit. If God should decree to permit sin, and that
this permission should be without action, without doing any thing in it, then
he should decree to do nothing which cannot stand with the nature of a decree.

Argum. 5. So far as sin makes for the glory of God, so far he has a hand in
effecting it (for he both decrees and works all things which make for his
glory, so far as they make for his glory: but sin by accident makes much for
the glory of God; The Jews crucifying and killing of Christ made way for the
glorious work of our redemption. The Apostle says that man's unrighteousness
commends the righteousness of God, and that the truth of God abounds through
our lie, unto his glory, Romans 3.5.7. so far as sin is for God, so far it is
from God. Of him, through him, and by him are all things, to him be honor and
glory, Romans 11. last.

Argum. 6. The Substratum or subject of sin, namely, the natural motion or
action whereto sin cleaves, is such a thing without which sin could not be (for
an accident could not be without a subject) men could not use their tongus to
deceit if they could not speak at all, neither could their feet be swift to
shed blood if they could not go at all. But of this natural motion and action
God is the author and proper cause (as has been showed) if God wills to yield
his concurrence to the substance of any act, it is plain that he wills that act
should be done, now without this act the sin that cleaves to the act could not
be; therefore he must needs likewise some way both will and-work in the sin of
the act: especially, because in many evil actions, not only the action it
self simply considered, but the pravity and deformity of it, makes way, and is
an occasion whereby God gets himself glory.

Argu. 7. If Gods permission of sin, should be a bare permission without
action, then he should be a mere spectator of men in their sinful actions,
himself not doing any thing. And this would much diminish and strengthen the
work of his providence in ruling and governing the world, by excluding and
shutting him out from having any working hand in the greatest part of those
actions that are done in the world; for the number of wicked men in the world
being far greater then the number of good men, the number of evil actions,
must needs far exceed the number of good actions: yea thus the actions of
greatest consequence, as the mutation or overthrow of Kingdoms, States,
Commonwealths, (which for the most part are done in a sinful way) should be
exempted, and excluded from the working of his providence.

Arminius says, Quae deus neque fires vult, neque non vult, ea permittit:
Those things which God neither wills, nor wills not to be done, those he permits.
But is not this to make God an idle spectator of the greatest part of actions
that are done in the world? If a man stands and sees a thing to be done, which
he neither would have to be done, nor would not have to be done; wherein he
will neither help nor hinder; does he not here stand as in idle spectator, as
one not at all caring whether the thing be done or not? and yet such a kind of
carriage do they attribute to God in regard of the greatest part of things
done, who make his permission to be without action: yea, herein they do after a
sort contradict themselves. For Arminius makes permission to be, Armin. in
Perk. 134.
efficacis impedimenti suspensio, the withholding of an efficacious
impediment, of such a thing as would certainly hinder the doing of a thing.

Bellarmine says, Permittere est, gratiam efficacem qua peccatum vitetur
negare. To permit, is to deny such effectual grace, as whereby sin may be
avoided. But can this withholding of an impediment, and this denial of
effectual grace be without any action, at least without the action of Gods
will? and does he not work answerably to his will?

Argu. 8. It is granted by the adversary, that God does punish one sin with an
other; Now is it not a ridiculous thing, to say that the judge permits only
punishment to be inflicted upon a Malefactor? does he not appoint it? and if it
be not just, he ought not to permit it: There can be neither appointing, nor
executing of judgment and punishment without action.

By all these aguments it plainly appears, that God does exercise more then a
bare permission in the sin which man commits.

This may further be confirmed by the testimony of the most Orthodox Writers:
Excellent Calvin says thus, Instit. lib. 1. cap. 18. Sect. 2.
Deus indurat corda hominum non tantum permittendo sed etiam agendo. God
hardneth the hearts of men, not only by permitting, but by acting.

Lib. 2. cap. 4. Sect. 3.
Deus dicitur indurare reprobos little corda vertere inclinare impellere. Id
quale sit, nequaquam explicatur si confugitur ad praescientiam and
permissionem. God is said to harden reprobates, to turn their hearts to incline
and move them. How this is done, is not sufficiently explicated, if we fly to
praescience and permission only.

Peter Martyr says, Locj. Com. loc. 13. Sect. 16.
Est permissio quidem sed aliquid amplius efficacibus illis loquutionibus
ostenditur. There is indeed a permission, but something more is held forth in
these strong expressions (namely such as before were mentioned.)

Locj. com. loc. 13. Sect. 7.
Si minus proprie loqui velineus, Deus poterit aliquo modo dici, aut initium,
aut causa peccati, non propria quidem, sed ea quae removens prohibens
appellatur. If we will speak improperly, God may be said some way to be either
the beginning, or the cause of sin: no proper cause indeed, but that which is
called the removing of what hinders.

Piscator says, Ad Amic. coll. vorstij. Sect. 17.
An vero negari potefl, illum procurare negotium cujus consilio and decreto
negotium geritur? Can he be denied to procure a business to be done, by whose
counsel and determination the thing is done?

Mr. Bayne says, Bayne on the Lords Prayer. p 129.
Gods sufferance is not to be understood without his action, he is a voluntary
agent in the things he suffers; we must not think his permission to be a pure
permission, without action.

Yea, not only our modern Divines, but that famous ancient Angustin himself
gives a large suffrage to this truth. August, in Enchirid. ad laurent. cap. 100.
Deus permittit (says he) aut volens aut invitus, non certe invitus, quia id
esset cum tristitia, and potentia se majorem haberet: si volens permittit,
permissio est genus quoddam voluntatis. God permits a thing either willingly,
or against his will; if against his will, this would be with pain and grief to
him, and then he should have some other greater in power then himself; if he
permits willingly, then his permission is some kind of will.

Ibid.
Sencti affliguntur secundum Dei voluntatem, 1 Pet. 3.17. at illi non possunt
pati nisi alter agat. Qui unit passionem vult actionem, actio proficiscitur ab
agente. The Saints are afflicted according to the will of God, 1 Pet. 3.17.
They cannot suffer unless another acts; he that wills the passion, wills the
action also, and action proceeds from an agent.

Here by the way we may take notice how ill Bellarmine agrees with S. Austine
in this point, for the writing of this subject, and answering to that place,
Act. 2.23. where it is said that Christ was delivered to be crucified by the
determinate council of God. He says, Bellar. de Amiss. great. and statu. Pcti.
lib. 2. cap. 13.
Saepe accidit ut actio sit mala passio bona, Deus voluit passionem and
patientiam sanctorum, non autem actionem eorum a quibus affliguntur. But this
crosses Austine, who says that in the Saints suffering, who suffer according
to the will of God, Qui vult passionem vult actionem, and it is contrary to
right reason; for action and passion are one and the samemotion, one cannot be
without the other, therefore he that wills the one, must needs will the other
also.

Further, Austine speaking of that place, Romans 1.26. where God is said to give
men up to their vile affections: has these words.

Contra. Iul. Pelag. l. 5. c. 3.
Quid est quod dicit, cum desiderijs suis traditi dicuntur: relicti per divinam
patientiam intelligendi sunt, non per potentiam in peccata compulsi? Quasi non
simul posuit haec duo idem apostolus patientiam nempe and potentiam, Romans 9.
What is it which he says, when men are said to be delivered up to their to
their own affections and desires? are they to be understood as left only by
the divine patience, and not put forward to sin by the divine power, as though
the same Apostle did not join both these together, namely patience and power,
Romans 9.22. Thus we see that this learned Father goes as high, or rather higher
in his expressions, touching the manner of Gods working in sin, then those of
our Divines have done, who are so much quarreled against, by Bellarmine and
Arminius. I know well that most of our Orthodox writers do seldom use that
expression, that God did decree sin, or is the cause of it, but only that he
did decree to permit sin: but their meaning must needs be, that he did decree
that sin should be effected and brought about in such a way and manner, and by
such means, as himself would not be the Author or proper cause of it, but
only a cause by accident: For if they should mean that he would have no
efficiency or working in it, then they should make him to exercise a bare
permission in it, and so to be an idle spectator of all the sinful actions done
in the world; which is an opinion that they altogether renounce and reject, as
has been already showed.

Doctor Twisse has a passage where he affirms, that though God intends the
evil action which man does, yet he intends not the evil of the action: But
that is meaning his, he does not so intend it, as to be the Author of it,
though he has a working hand in it, appears by many other places in his
writings; as when he says, Vindic. great. lib. 2. page 156
Cum peccatum Adae eveniebat non nisi Deo volente eveniehat. When it sell out
that Adam did sin, this fell out by the will of God. Excaecare est preouldubio,
Effectum dare ut quis excaecaretur. To blind, is so to work and bring it about
that a man should be blinded. Ibid. p. 87.
An quae Satanas in sanctnm Job patravit Deo tantum permittente facta sunt?
Annon Job profitetur Deum abstulisse quae dederat? Were those things which
Satan did ill against Job, done only by Gods permission? does not Job profess
that God had taken away what he gave?

Ib. p. 157.
Decretum permissiuum nihilominus est efficax ad fines a Deo sibi praestitutos
quam effectivum. The permissive decree is no less efficacious for the ends fore
appointed of God, then his working decree. These are the words of that learned
man, by which it appears, that his meaning in the former words, is not as if
he denied that God did decree the evil actions of men at all (for here he
grants a decree, and that an efficacious decree) but only that he does not so
decree the evil of an action, as to be the author or proper cause of it; for
if he should not at all intend the evil of men's actions, then the evil of
those actions should fall out besides his intention; and then it should be
either besides his knowledge, and so he should not be omniscient, or against
his will, and so he should not be omnipotent.

CHAP. V. Showing more particularly the manner how the righteous God has a
hand in the unrighteous actions of sinful men.
THat God is not the Author or proper cause of sin, and yet has some kind of
efficiency and working in it, has been already showed: it follows now to show
more particularly, the manner how he works in producing of it. The manner of
Gods working in sinful actions is secret and hidden, not easily to be
apprehended, much less to be explicated; which made Austin speak thus of it,
Contra Justinum Pelag. lib. 5 cap 3.
Quanta est poena tradi passionibus ignominiae, sive deserendo, sive alio
quoque vel explicabili vel inexplicabili modo, etc. how great a punishment is
to be given up to unseemly passions, whether this be done by way of desertion,
or by any other explicable or inexplicable way; yet there is one way, which is
not altogether above our apprehension, but therein we may in some sort discern
Gods manner of working in sinful actions, and that is by administering
occasions, by presenting such objects, and offering to men such things are in
themselves lawful and good, but they make an ill use of them, taking occasion
by them to be stirred to evil in some kind or other.

Vindic. lib. 2. p. 133.
Licet Deo ita se gerere in rerum omnium administratione ut materiam and
occasionem objiciat unde homines naturaliter excitentur pro varia affectuum
qualitate vel ad bonum vel ad malum says Dr. Twisse God may so carry himself
in the administration of things, as he may offer matter and occasion, whereby
men may be excited either to good or evil, according to the diverse quality
and tempers of their affections; yea, Bellarmine himself confesses, Bellar.
de amiss. grariae and sta. pcti. l. 2. c. 14.
Deum immutare cor principum immittendo aliquam bonam cogitationem aut saltem
indifferentem, ex qua tamen impediuntur a proposito suo and ita decipiuntur;
That God does change the mind of Princes, by putting some thought that is good,
or at least indifferent, whereby they are hindered from their purpose, and so
are deceived.

Thus God may administer occasions of sinning either inwardly or outwardly;
Inwardly by stirring up and suggesting such thoughts to their minds as are in
themselves lawful and good, or at least not evil, and yet they take occasion
by them to be led to evil.

It was no ill thought for Joseph's brethren to think that their Father loved
him better then he did them, yet this was the occasion of their envy and hatred
against him, Genesis 37.4. It was no ill thought for Pharaoh to think that if the
Israelites should continue to multiply and increase as they began, they might
in time grow too strong for him, and so depart out of his country whether he
would or no; yet hence he takes occasion to oppress them with heavy burdens,
and to give command for murdering their male children, Exodus 2.10.13,14.
Shimei whose heart was full of rancor and bitterness against David, because
the Kingdom was translated from his tribe to the Tribe of Judah when he saw
that David was in distress, being driven from Jerusalem by the conspiracy of
his son Absolon, and thinking it may be) that this came upon David as a just
judgment of God for his unjust dealing with Vriah the Hittite, hence takes
occasion to vent his spleen by cursing of David, the the hope of impunity
likewise helping him forward. Jeroboam thought if the people should go up
yearly to worship at Jerusalem this might be a means to make them return again
to the house of David, this was no evil thought, yet hence he takes occasion
to set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel, whereby he made Israel to sin, 1 Kin.
12.26,28. If the Jews thought that to morrow they should dye, that is, that
destruction would shortly come (the Prophet having denounced it) this was no
ill thought, yet hence they take occasion instead of fasting to fall to
feasting; Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall dye, say they, Isai.
22.13. The Jews thought if they should let Christ alone all men would follow
after him, this thought was not evil, but hence they take occasion of taking
counsel to kill him, Joh. 11.48. Vind. lib. 2. p. 83.
Deus non modo occasiones ministrat sed ad consilia ex occasionibus nata
formanda concurrit, says Dr. Twisse. i. e. God may administer occasions
outwardly, and that both by his works and by his word; By his works diverse
ways, as

1. By his works of mercy; Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily (says Solomon) therefore the hearts of the sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil, Eccles. 8.11. These things have thou don (says
God) and I was silent, and thou thoughtest that I was such an one as thy self,
Psalm. 50.21. When God holds his peace at wicked men, when he does not speak to
them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure, then they are ready
to think that he likes of them well enough, and of their ways and and
courses, so that we see Gods patience and long suffering is an accidental
cause of man's security, of his presumption and boldness in evil ways. Magna
peccandi illecebra impunitatis spes (says the Orators) hope of impunity is a
great allurement to iniquity. And as his patience is an occasion of
presumption, so is bounty of forgetfulness, yea, of rebellion against God.
When thou have eaten and filled thy self beware thou forget not the Lord thy
God, Deu. 8.10,11. (says Moses to the people) Give me not riches least I be
full and deny thee, Pro. 30.9. When Jeshurun waxed fat then be kicked, then he
waxed wanton and rebellious, Deuteronomy. 13.15. and it follows, Psalm. 18. Thou have
forgotten God that formed thee?

2. By works of justice Thus men men oftimes take occasion by the judgments
and punishments which God inflicts upon them for sin, to break out further
into sin. The Lord led his people through the wilderness, and caused them
sometimes to meet with want of water, other whiles want of bread, sometimes to
be assailed by enemies, to humble and to prove them, that he might do them good
in their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.2. But the bad ones amongst them, hence took
occasion to murmur and rebel against him: When the Lord powers the vials of
his wrath upon the followers of the Beast, and the adherents of Ante-Christ,
hence they take occasion to blaspheme God of Heaven for their pains and sores,
and repented not of their works, Rev. 16.10. when the King of Moab was brought
to great streights, by the Armies of Judab and Israel, (to whom the Lord had
promised success in their expedition against him) 2 Kings 2.17. he takes his
eldest son and sacrifices him upon the wall, ver. 27.

3. By his works of providence. It was the work of a favorable providence
which caused the Israelites so exceedingly to multiply in Egypt, yet hence
Pharaob takes occasion to oppress them and to murder their male-children. It
was a work of providence that brought David in his slight from Saul, to
Abimelech the Priest for relief at such a time when Doeg the Edomite was with
him, 1 Samuel 22.7. now hence he takes occasion by his false slanders to stir
up Saul to kill all the Lords Priests at Nob, and to make him the instrument, 1 Samuel 23.18. It was a work of providence that brought David to the sight of a
woman washing her self in her garden, when he was walking upon the roof of his
house in an evening; this was an occasion to him of entertaining thoughts of
uncleanness, and of putting them forth into action, 2 Samuel 11.2,4. there was
no fault at all in offering the occasion, but all the evil arose from David,
for Joseph had as strong an occasion offered to allure him to the like sin, yet
was not at all hurt by it, Genesis 39.9.

It was a work of providence that brought the wise men that came from the East,
to Jerusalem to enquire after the King of the Jews who was then borne, it was
the special command of God to direct their going home another way, and not to
return again to Jerusalem; yet Herod hence takes occasion to murder all the
male children in Bethlem, and the bordering coasts, that were two years old
and under, Mat. 2.16.

2. As God by his works administers occasion to men to break forth into sin,
so he does the like by his word; Thus he sent his word and command to Pharaoh,
charging him to let the people of Israel go, but hence Pharaoh took an
occasion to grow stubborn and rebellious, and more to harden his heart in a
resolution not to let them go, Exodus 5.2. I know not the Lord (says he)
neither will I let them go; yea, the ofner Moses came to him with command from
God for doing it, the more he still hardened his heart against it; look as a
strong stream the more it is stopped the higher it rises (though no new water
be added to it) so it is in this case; Thus the Jews the more they were warned
by the Prophet of their Idolatry, and that they should not go down into
Egypt, Jer. 42.17. the more obstinate and wilful they waxed both these ways,
Chap. 44.16 so when Christ's hearers heard that which they thought touched
themselves, it is said, they were filled with with wrath, and thrusting him out
of the City they led him to the edge of an hill, with purpose to have thrown
him down headlong, Luke 18.27. When Stephen preached so excellently to the
Jews, they hurst with anger, and gnashed upon him with their teeth, running
violently upon him: Act 7.54.57.
So that Christ's and Stephens preaching was an accidental cause of the wrath
of these wicked men, as the stopping of a stream is the cause of the rising of
it.

Hence the Apostle speaking of the Law, says, where there is no law there is
no transgression, Romans 4.15. and that sin took occasion by the command, and
wrought in him all manner of concupiscence; for without the Law sin is dead,
but when the Law came sin revived, Romans 7.8,9. that sin took occasion by the
command and deceived him, verse 11. so that the Law quickened sin, put life into
it, and set it on work, it lying as it were dead before, and not stirring so
strongly as it did after the coming of the Law; by all which it appears that
the Law is an accidental cause of sin. Now so far as the Law works it, God
works it, the Law being his agent and instrument.

Quest. But here it may be asked, how can it be that the Law which in it self
is holy, just and good, should any way be the cause of evil?

Answ. This arises from the contrariety that is betwixt the good and holy law
of God, and man's corrupt and wicked heart. there is nothing more pure and holy
then the Law of God, (it being the perfect rule of righteousness, and an exact
idaea of all purity and holiness) there is nothing more corrupt and and impure
then the wicked heart of man, it being the fountain of all pollution and
filthiness, Mat. 15.19. Jer. 17.9.) Now it is a true rule in Logic, Contraria
juxta se posita magis elucescunt, when contraries are placed near together, the
contrarieties of their natures does more appear and put forth it self; keep
fire and water at a distance, and the contrarieties of their natures does not
much show it self, but bring them together, cast water upon the fire, or put
coals of fire into the water, then they fight one with the other, and the
stronger overcomes the weaker: so the more near and close the most pure and
holy word of God be brought and applied to the corrupt and rebellious will of
man, the more is the innate corruption and rebellion of it irritated and
stirred up, and the more strongly does it put forth it self. The more strongly
the command was pressed upon Pharaoh touching letting the Israelites go, the
more strongly did his rebellious will rise up against it. This we may see true
in the ordinary carriage of wicked men: Let a proud swearer, or filthy speaker
be rebuked for their ill language, and they will the more break forth into
abusive speech. Thus we see how the Law and Word of God that in its own nature
tends to restrain and repress sin, may accidentally provoke and put men
forward to greater eagerness and violence in sinning; yea, not only the Law
but the Gospel may by accident be an occasion of greater evil. Thus our Savior
tells the Pharisees, that if they had been blind they had had no sin, but
because they said they did see therefore their sin remained, Joh. 9. last. if
they had had no means of knowledge, their sin had not been so great, but now
the light shined upon them, thereby their sin was increased, because they shut
their eyes against it. Hence likewise the Apostle says, that the Gospel was to
some the savor of death, 2 Cor. 2.16. In it own nature it did tend to life,
but by accident it came to be an occasion of death to such as rejected it. Thus
we see how God may be accidentally a cause of sin, namely, by administering
occasion, and that both inwardly and outwardly, both by his works and by his
word; and Bellarmine himself is forced in a manner to acknowledge thus much;
for he says, Bellar. de amiss. great. and statu. pcti. l. 2. c. 14.
Patientia Dei aliquo modo indurat, Caeterum non dicitur excecare vel indurare
nisi per accidens sed ipsis homines abutentes rebus bonis seipsos obdurat. The
patience of God does after a sort harden men: but yet he is not said to blind
or to harden but only by accident, for when they do abuse good things they
harden themselves. Here Bellarmine grants that God may be said to blind and
harden men by accident, when they abusing his Patience and long suffering take
occasion from thence to harden themselves in sin.

CHAP. VI. Showing, that such causes as work by accident, may have a true
efficiency, and yet not be altogether blameless, in blameworthy actions.
THat accidental causes may have a true efficiency, and yet not be faulty when
the effect is faulty, may appear both by Reason and Scripture.

1. The rule of reason tells us, that whatsoever has a vis, any power or virtue
to bring forth an effect, is so far a cause of that effect; For causa est cujus
vi res est. Now there be many things which have an efficiency in bringing forth
such or such an effect, which yet cannot justly be blamed, though the effect be
evil.

When a man stands so near the fire that he scorcheth his legs, the fire
has a true efficiency in this scorching; yet not the fire, but the man only
is to be blamed: for though it be the natural property of the fire to burn,
yet the end why the fire was made, was to warm, not to burn those that stand
before it; and that it scorcheth the man's legs, it is his own fault, because
he did not stand further off when he might have done it: and the fire was only
an accidental cause of scorching.

When a man wears a sword for his defense, and he in a Melancholic or mad
humor, shall run the Sword into his own body; here not the Sword, but the man
is to be blamed, because the end of wearing a Sword is the safety, not the hurt
of the owner: and though it has a true efficiency in hurting wounding him, yet
the fault only is his own, because he willingly turned the Sword against
himself.

When a Physician according to the true rules of Art, shall administer
wholesome Physic to his Patient for such or such a disease, and this meeting
with some hidden distemper or corrupt humor in the body, shall cause greater
pain or (it may be) death; yet here neither the Physic nor Physician are to be
blamed, because the work of both these in their own nature tended to health,
and was fit to procure it.

When Jason had his impostume cured by the thrusting of a Sword into his body,
by the hand of his enemy, this was no thank to his enemy, who intended not his
health, but his death: so on the contrary it is no blame to the Physician that
intends health, and uses fit means to procure it, though death follows by
accident.

When the same Sun beams lights upon a Garden and a Dunghill, and raise a sweet
smell from the one, and an ill savor from the other; neither the Sun nor the
beams thereof are to be blamed, because the efficacy of them did extend to
both a like, but the different effect did arise from the difference of the
matter whereon they did light.

The like instances also may be brought from Scripture, when a man is hewing
wood with an Axe, and the head of the Axe slippeth from the helve, and slayes
the stander by; here neither the Axe nor the man are to be blamed, though they
have an efficiency in the death of the other, because they are only causes by
accident; the scope of neither being to hurt the stander by, Deuteronomy. 19.5.

When King Uzziah went into the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense, Azariah
with fourscore other Priests, went in after him and withstood him, telling him
that it did not belong to him to burn incense to the Lord; then it is said
Vzziah was wrath, 2 Chronicles. 26.16,17,18,19.

Here the Priests were causes of the wrath of the King, but no faulty causes,
because they did but their duty, and their intention was only to hinder him
from doing that which was unlawful for him to do, but not to provoke him to
anger and wrath.

When the Pharisees were filled with wrath against Christ, and the Jews breast
with anger against Stephen, because they justly reproved them, they were
accidental causes of their wrath and anger, but no faulty causes.

The Apostle says, that the Law causes wrath, Romans 4.15. It causes wrath by
means of Transgression, (for transgression only properly causes wrath) as
the Law is the cause of wrath, so likewise is the cause of transgression,
namely an accidental cause, yet no faulty cause, for the proper end of the Law
was neither to procure wrath, nor to procure transgression, but rather to be a
means to preserve man from both these, by directing him so to walk as he
might please God; so when he says that the motions of sin were by the Law,
(that is, were stirred up by the Law) Romans 7.5. and that sin took occasion by
the Commandment, and wrought in him all manner of conceupiscence, verse 11.
here sin is said to be stirred up by the Law, and to take occasion by the
Commandment of working concupiscence, and therefore the Law has some kind of
efficiency in producing of sin it is an accidental cause but no faulty cause.

As the Law is in it self holy, and just, and good, Romans 7.12. so it is good
that it should be brought to man's understanding by the knowledge of it, and to
his will and affections by the right application of it: but the more this is
done (he being lest to himself) the more does it irritate and stir up
corruption in him, and his will (by reason of the contrariety that is in it to
the holy Law of God) waxes so much more stubborn and rebellious as the Law is
more closely applied to it. When the Apostle says, that believers are not
under the Law, Romans 6.14. and that they are delivered from the Law, that being
dead (namely that corruption) wherein we are held, Romans 7.6. this must needs be
understood of the accidental work of the Law, whereby (by means of our
corruption) it stirs up sin in us; for it cannot be understood of the Law as it
is a rule of obedience (because then the Law should be wholly abolished, to
which the Apostle gives an absit, do we then make the Law of none effect
through faith, God forbid, Romans 3.31.) neither can it be understood in this
place of the condemning power of the Law: for though it be true that believers
are freed from the curse and condemnation of the Law, yet this is an effect of
justification, and has reference to that, whereas the subject of the Apostles
discourse in these two Chapters, where he speaks of freedom from the Law
(namely the sixth and seventh) is altogether about sanctification, and he
brings many arguments to prove the necessary connection of these two together,
and this amongst the rest, because they were not under the Law they were
delivered from it; they must not suffer sin to reign in their mortal, because
they were not under the Law but under grace, cap. 6.14. they were delivered
from the Law (lust and concupiscence being killed in them, chap. 7.6. How were
they not under the Law? how were they delivered from it? So far as they were
truly sanctified they were no longer under the accidental work of the Law,
whereby it had power to irritate and stir up the rebellion and corruption of
their natures, and so to cause sin more to abound in them, being implanted into
Christ and made partakers of the virtue of his death and resurrection, their
old man was crucified, and their body of sin destroyed, so as they should no
longer serve sin, as they did before, chap. 6.6. while they were in the flesh
the motions of sin which were by the Law (which were stirred up by having the
Law brought nearer to them) did work in their members to bring forth fruit
unto death; but they were delivered from the Law (from that accidental work
of the Law) that being dead wherein they were held, (their sinful lusts being
in part mortified) that they should serve God in newness of spirit, and not in
the oldnesse of the letter, chap. 7.5.6. by both which places it appears that
the Law has power to stir up sin and corruption in those that are in the a
state of corruption that remain as yet altogether unsanctified, and so it is
an accidental cause of sin, yet no faulty cause, that remaining still holy,
and just and good.

In this sense likewise Christ says of himself, that be came not to send
peace but the Sword, that he came to set a man at variance against his Father,
and the daughter against the Mother, Mat. 10.34,35. that he came to set fire on
the earth, Luke 12.49. How is this to be taken, that Christ came not to send
peace but the sword? is he not the Author and purchasor of peace? Is he not
called the Prince of Peace? Isai. 9.6. Is it not said of him that he is our
peace? Ephesians. 2.14. how then does he say, that he came not to send peace? these
words must needs therefore be taken with similation: he came not to send peace;
that is, not peace only but the sword also: but especially, his coming was the
cause of peace in another manner then it was of the sword. How did it cause the
sword? this coming was not the proper cause of the Sword, but the sword (that
is, wars and troubles) broke forth in the world occasionally upon his coming:
for after that Christ came and the Gospel was peeached in the word; some there
were that rejected it, others embraced and entertained it, believed and obeyed
it, and accordingly made profession of Christ and his truth; now those who did
thu^ came to be hated and maligned, yea to be persecuted, and ill entreated by
the other: yea by this means it came to pass that those who were joined
together by the nearest bond of outward relation came to be divided, and be
carried on with the greatest enmity and ill affection one against another, so
that the brother did deliver the brother to death, and parents their children,
and children did rise up against their pa^ents and cause them to be put to
death, Mat. 10 21. By which it is plain, that Christ and his Gospel had a hand
in both these, both in sending peace, and sending the sword, because the same
expression is used in both; if there were a bare permission in sending the
sword there was permission only in sending peace: if there was efficiency and
working in the one, there was so also in the other (although after another
manner.) In like manner, when Christ says, that he came to set fire on the
earth (to send persecution, and that his desire was this fire might be kindled,
Luke 12.49. It is plain he has a working hand herein, for what he intends and
earnestly desires, that he likewise some way or other effectually procures.

Object. If it be asked how the same cause can bring forth contrary effects,
how the same Christ and the same Gospel can bring both peace and trouble?

Answ. The answer is, that though Christ had a sufficiency and work in both,
yet in a far differing manner; for he is the author and proper cause of peace,
this he both purchased and prayed for, of this he is causa per se, of the other
he is causa per accidens, an accidental cause only; the end of his coming
and of causing his Gospel to be preached to be preached, being not to bring
trouble and persecution, but this arises from the perverse refractory wills of
wicked men, who therefore hate the light because their deeds are evil. As the
same heat of the Sun softens the wax, and hardens the clay, and the same light
of the Sun helps a good sight to see better, but hurts sore eyes, so it is in
this case. Thus also it is said that Christ is set or appointed for the rising
and fall of many, Lu. 2.34. Not only for the rising of some, but the fall of
others; that he is the corner stone elect and precious be is made in head of
the corner to believers, but a stumbling stone and rock of offense to those
that are disobedient, 1 Pet. 2.7,8. He has an efficiency in both these, for
the text says he is made to both, but of the one he is the author and proper
cause, and therefore altogether faultlesse and blameless, their own wilful
unbelief being the proper cause of their stumbling.

CHAP. VII. Showing that God may work in the same blameworthy actions with
Satan and sinful men, and yet himself be altogether blameless.
THat the holy God does work in the same action with the sinful creature has
been already showed: Not only Satan moved David to number the people but God
also, 2 Samuel 24.1. Jacobs sons sold their brother into Egypt, so it is said,
that God sent him thither, Psalm. 10,17. when Jobs cattle were taken away by ill
instruments, Job says, the Lord took them away. Job 1.21.

Now it follows to show yet further how the Lord may be blameless when he
works with the creature in the same blameworthy actions. This has been in
part made plain, by that which has been showed already, namely, that in all
sinful actions he is only causa per accidens, an accidental cause, no proper
cause, which works out of inward principles, and according to its own nature;
and this yet will more clearly appear, if we consider the differences that are
betwixt him and the sinful creature in their working: though they work
together in the same action, yet they differ in the ground in the manner, and
in the end of their working.

1. They differ in the ground; the ground of all Gods actions is his own most
holy will, his own purpose and good pleasure. He works all things after the
counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, that did
he in heaven and in earth, Psalm. 135.6. But evil instruments are guided by
their own wicked wills, and not by Gods will in their evil actions, (for they
do that which is contrary to his revealed will, and his secret will they know
not) if they do the same things God wills yet not because he wills them, but upon
other corrupt grounds, when a wicked man sins he seeks to fulfill the will of
the flesh, but not at all to fulfill the will of God, Ephesians. 2.2. he does that
which seems good in his own eyes, and not which seems good in Gods eyes.

2. They differ in manner of working; for in sinful actions God works with evil
not as a moral cause but as a natural cause only; God no where does counsel or
command, or persuade men to do evil, but altogether the contrary: But herein
wicked men follow only the dictate of their depraved judgment, the sway of
their corrupt will, the motion of their inordinate affections: or are carried
on by the counsels and persuasions, or examples of others that are like unto
themselves.

It belongs to God (as the author of nature) to uphold the creature in all its
natural motions and actions. And he moves the creatures with a motion
agreeable to their several natures; as irrational creatures, so also Angels
and men: when he moves good men they work according to their natures, when he
moves bad men, they work also according to their natures, and this without any
iniquity or injustice at all in God: for he is the author and proper cause of
the motion: of the obliquity of it he is only an accidental cause (says Dr.
Twisse.) Vindict. l. 2 p. 86.
True it is that in good actions he uses a further motion and concourse then
he does in other actions, for there he works not only as the author of nature,
but of grace, not only by a general influence of nature, but by an influence
of special grace; but in all actions he works as the supporter of nature,
whereas wicked men work as the abusers of nature. Bellarmine grants, that Gods
has an influx into all the actions that proceed from men, and yet that he is
not the author of sin, because he has only a general, no particular influx
into the action wherein sin is committed, such an influx as is indifferent
either to good or evil. But by this reason as he is not the Author of evil, so
he should not be the Author of good, and if God be the Author of nature, he
must needs have a particular influxe into all natural actions, but into good
actions he has a double influxe, namely, not only a natural, but a gracious
influxe.

3. As they differ i^ the ground and manner, so also in the end of their
actings. The end of all Gods actions is himself, and his own glory, He has
made all things for his own sake, even the wicked for the day of evil, Prove.
16 4 for this purpose he stirred up Pharaoh that he might show his power in
him, and might declare his name through all the earth, Romans 9.17. and for this
end does he suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared for
destruction, namely to make his power known, verse 22 Now the now the end
which wicked men aim at in their actions is not God and his glory, but some
unworthy and base respects of their own; wicked men usually make themselves,
and the satisfying of their lusts the end of their actions: they prefer their
own glory before Gods, Is not this great Babel which I have built by the might
of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty, (says that proud King, Dau.
4.27. How far evil instruments when they work in the same action together
with God, do differ from him in the ground and end of their working will yet
further appear if we shall look into some particular instances. When Satan
assailed Job with his temptation, he did it out of hatred against him, and to
drive him to distrust and impatience, and so overthrow and ruin him. But God
did this out of love, that thereby he might exercise his faith and patience,
and make way for his greater advancement. When Satan moved David to number the
people, he did this out of malice against David and the people, and that hereby
he might stir up the anger of God against them: But God did it to humble David,
and to make it an occasion of inflicting just punishment upon the people for
their many miscariages. When Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt, they did it
out of envy and hatred, and that they might rid themselves of him; but God did
it out of love to Jacob and his family, that it might be an occasion of Joseph's
preferment in Egypt, and so of preferring of Jacob and his household in the time
of extreme Famine: when the Jews high Priests and Elders, delevered up Christ
to the Soldiers to be Crucified, they it out of envy and ill will, and that
they might rid the world of him: but God did it out of love and good will to
his Elect, that they might be saved and delivered out of their lost condition,
so that the ends of evil instruments in those actions wherein they work
together with God, being altogether differing, yea sometimes contrary to Gods
ends, they may be justly blameworthy, when he is altogether blameless.

Object. But wicked men are blameworthy though they propound good ends to
themselves in the bad actions they do, how then can God be blameless, when he
concurs with them in the same actions, though his end be good?

1 Because he differs from them not only in the end but also in the ground and
manner of his working.

Answ. 2 There is not the same reason betwixt God and man, betwixt the Creator
and the creature. Man is bound not only to aim at a right end, but also to be
guided by a right rule, he is bound to regulate all his actions by the holy Law
of God: but though man be bound to yield obedience to the Law, God is not bound
to do it; for he made the law not for himself, but for the creature, not to
put himself but man under the subjection of it: he having no other Law but his
own most righteous and holy will, Who shall say to him, What do thou? Job
9.12. He gives not an account to any of his matters, cap. 33.13.

If he be not to give an account to any then is he not subject to any Law, for
whoever is subject to the Law must give an account to some or other, else the
Law would be of no use. So that this is sufficient to make all Gods actions
good, because the end is always good (namely, himself and his own glory) If a
man were free from all obligation of a Law, and only bound to aim at the
glory of God, or the good of his neighbor in the things which be does then if
he propounded these these ends to himself in all his dealings with God and
men, he should be free from blame, but besides this he is obliged to live by a
Law, to this law he owes subjection, which God does not.

But God is a Law to himself.

If this be so understood, as that whatever is the ground and guide of his
actions, it is within himself, then it is true: (for he borrows nothing from
without himself, which he makes the motive and ground of any of his actions,
but all proceed from his own good will and pleasure.) But if this be so taken
as that whatever Gods law binds man to do, his nature binds him also to do the
like; then it holds not, for the Law binds a man to do many things to which God
is not bound: it binds man not only not to commit sin, but also to hinder it
(if he has power to hinder it:) but God is not bound to this, yea, man is
bound to employ all the skill and power that he has to hinder the committing
of sin; if it were so with God then there should never be any sin committed in
the world, for by his omnipotent power he is able to hinder it;) besides, if
there were no sin at all, he should loose a great part of his glory, for as he
is able to bring light out of darkness, good out of evil, so he daily does
it. The Apostle says our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God,
and some sins by accident make much for the glory of God (as before has been
showed.) Besides, the Law binds man to do all the good he can, to convert all
his children and kindred, his friends and neighbors, if we were able to do
it; God is able to do this, but he does it not, neither is bound to do it. God
supporteth sinful men in their sinful actions, and supplyeth them with
natural strength for the acting of them, as in the actions of uncleanness, of
drunkenness and the like: but man (if he were able) were bound not to do this;
so that we see, God may do many things which his Law binds men not to do, and
the other side may not do many things which by his Law men are obliged to do,
and therefore he is not subject to it as men are, he is Dominus legis, non
subditus.

True it is, that God is so a Law to himself that he can do nothing which is
contrary to his one nature, as he cannot lie, he cannot deny himself; but
there are some things forbidden in the Law, which are not contrary to the
nature of God; Thus we see how God may work in the same actions with the
sinful creature, and yet himself be altogether blameless; for look as when
God gets himself glory by the actions of wicked men (as by the Jews
crucifying of Christ) it is no thank to them because they never intended it;
so on the other side, when they abuse his power and providence (supporting the
strength of nature even in sinful actions) it is no blame to him, because he
being the good of nature must sustain nature in all her actions and motions;
and because that as the evil which wicked men do is only an accidental
cause of his glory, so the good which he affords them, and the help which he
administers in upholding their natural strength, is only an accidental cause
of the evil which they commit.

CHAP. VIII. Showing how those Scriptures are to he understood which by the
sound of words seem to make God the author and proper cause of sin.
THose Scriptures wherein the same sinful actions are attributed both to God
and men, and set forth by the same expressions (as when God said, that what
David had done he would do, 2 Samuel 12.12.) seem to sound so as if both were
alike causes of these actions; therefore it will be needful to speak
something that may be helpful to weaker apprehensions for the right
understanding of these Scriptures, and for clearing of Gods holiness and
justice, I shall instance only in some of the principal of them, and what
shall be held forth for the clearing of these may likewise be helpful for
giving satisfaction to other places wherein the like expressions are used.

Object. In that place, Exodus 9.12. which was propounded for the subject of
this discourse) it is said that God hardened Pharaohs heart, afterward it is
said that Pharaoh hardened his own heart, verse 34. Now it may be asked, since
the same action is attributed to both, how both were not causes alike in
producing of it.

Answ. The Lord did this in another way then Pharaoh did it, he did it only by
administering occasion; he sent Moses with a peremptory emptory command to
Pharaoh to let his people go; this did irritate the natural pride and rebellion
of Pharaohs heart, and stir up in him a stronger and more stubborn resolution
not to let them go. As the command was holy, just and good, so it was good that
it should be applied to Pharaoh, by propounding it, and urging it upon him; but
the more this was done, the worse he grew: for the command being holy, and his
heart altogether unholy; these two being contrary, the nearer they were brought
together, the more they did strive and fight one against another, this being
the nature of contraries (as before was showed.) But here was no fault at all
in the command, for the proper end of the command was to inform Pharaoh of his
duty, and to stir him up to the performance of it: But Pharaoh takes a contrary
course, for whereas the end of the command was to make him willing to let the
people go, he takes occasion from it to grow more refractory; either because
it put him in mind of the damage he should receive by their departure, (they
being so serviceable in making brick for his buildings) or that it might appear
that he thought not any (no not the great God) greater then himself; and
therefore he scorned to stoop and submit himself to any of his commands. By
all which it appears, that the command was only an occasion or accidental
cause of Pharaohs hardening, but no faulty cause at all. Now as the command did
it, God did that being his agent, and he working by it. Neither God, nor his
command, put any evil into Pharaohs heart, but by propounding good to him, and
not imparting grace to perform it, he takes occasion to become more evil.
Augustine Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Deus obdurat non impartiendo malitiam sed non impatiendo gratiam, (says S.
Austine) God hardneth not by infusing any evil, but by not bestowing grace.

To this purpose, Doctor Twiss says well; In his answer to Mr. Cotton.
that when a man is moved to courses contrary to his corrupt humors, whether
by the word of God, or his works, these motions being only by way of
persuasion; and he does not by grace remove or correct those corrupt humors:
in this case to move and to deny grace, is to harden. It is a good thing to
move to good actions by outward persuasions, neither is God bound to confer
grace inwardly, upon all those whom he does thus persuade outwardly.

Object. 2 It is said that God did, that which Absolon did when he defiled his
Fathers Concubines.

Answ. 1. As God did it, it was an Act of justice in punishing David's sin with
Vriahs wife, by suffering Absolon to commit the like sin with his wives.

2. God administered occasion of this action, by causing David to leave his
Concubins to keep his house: There was no evil in this, but hence Ahitophel
takes occasion to give that wicked counsel, and Absolon takes occasion to
follow it in defiling his Fathers Concubines.

Object. 3. David says, that God bad Shimei go and curse him, 2 Samuel 16.10.

Answ. This is not to be taken properly, as if Shimei had received a command
from God to do this, but only it shows the efficacy of the divine
administration of things, even in such things whereof God is only a cause by
accident.

2. God did administer occasion to Shimei, for his heart being full of rancor
against David; he seeing now David to be brought into distress, thought this a
fit time to vent bis malice, because now he might do it with hope of impunity
(as before was showed.

3. He did it as an Act of justice, David had caused the name of God to be
blasphemed by the sins which he had committed, and the Lord suffers this wretch
to curse and blaspheme him.

Object. 4. It is said that God turned the heart of the Egyptians to hate his
people, Psalm. 105.25.

Answ. He is said to do this, not that he infused any hatred into their
hearts, but in that he administered occasion, for he caused his people to grow
and increase exceedingly both in number and in wealth: Now this gave occasion
to the Egyptians to envy and to hate them: here the goodness of God to his
people stirred up evil affections in them; but this was long of their own
wickedness, no fault in Gods goodness.

Object. 5. It is said, that if the false Prophet be deceived, the Lord has
deceived him, Ezekiel. 14.9.

Answ. The deceiving of the false, is here attributed to God in these respects.

1. In that he withdrew his grace from him, and left him to the deceitfulness
of his own heart, which was of it self ready enough to run out into ways of
error.

2 He did this to punish the people because they rejected the doctrine of the
true Prophets, and would not believe nor obey that truth which they held forth
to them; both these were acts of justice.

3. By administering occasions for the judgments threatened by the true Prophets
were not presently executed, hence the false Prophets took occasion to persuade
that they should never be. But further, sometimes the true prophets did
foretell a peaceable and flourishing estate of Judah and Jerusalem; as that
Jerusalem stould be called the throne of the Lord, and that all nations should
be gathered unto it, Jer. 3.17. That Jerusalem should be a praise in the earth,
Esaias 62.6. That their Land should no more devour the inhabitants, Ezekiel. 36.14.
These and many other like promises which were not to be fulfilled till the
latter days; the false Prophets understood and applied to the present times,
and so thereby deceived both themselves and the people: but that they made a
false interpretation or application of the doctrine of the true Prophes, the
fault was only in themselves, and not in the Doctine which the other had truly
taught.

Object. 6. It is said that God gave up the Gentiles to vile affections, To.
1.26. and that he sent strong delusions to those that lived under the
Antichristian Apostasy, 2 These. 2.2.11.

Answ. These Gentiles had vile affections of their own, and the other wanted
the love of the truth, and that God left them to their vile affections, and to
the deceitfulness of their own hearts, or to the delusions of false Teachers;
this was an act of Justice to punish the one for going against the light of
nature, and, and the other for not receiving the truth in love, when it was
held forth to them.

Object. 7. When the evil spirit offered himself to seduce Ahab, the Kord bids
him go and do it, 1 King. 22.22. Here is more then a permission, here is a
command; therefore here the Lord seems to be Author of Ahabs being deceived by
the evil spirit; what a man commands to be done, that he is Author and proper
cause of.

Ans. 1. It is plain by this Scripture, that the evil spirit was desirous to
seduce Ahab (for he offers himself as an instrument to effect it) but that he
had no power to do it without leave from God: Now when the Lord bids him go and
do so, this has but the force of a permission, as if he had said thou may go
and do the thing thou desirous to do, namely to persuade Ahab to go up to
Ramoth-Gilead to battle, that he may fall there.

2. It may be answered, that all this which is here spoken by the prophet
Michaiah, of the Lords sitting upon a Throne, and all the host of heaven
appearing before him, and the question and answer here made, that all this, (I
say) is delivered in a parabolicall way, and therefore cannot in every breach
be taken properly.

Locj. commun. loc. 14.
Deus inducitur per prosopopeiam (says Peter Martyr) God is brought in the
person of a man, and speaking after the manner of men. Now in parables, the
scope of the parable is chiefly to be looked at, and what truth it holds forth;
neither is every parabolical application to be urged as a thing really done: as
in the parable of the Rich Man, he is brought in as speaking to Abraham, and
Abraham answering him again, which we cannot think was really done; so in this
place, every circumstance cannot be urged as a thing really acted, touching the
Lords sitting on a Throne, and all the host of heaven shanding before him, and
the question propounded and answered; but this is brought in by way of
resemblance to Kings and Princes, who when they have business of weight in
hand, are wont to consult with their Nobles, and those about them. All parables
are similitudes, and of them the rule is true, that in every similitude there
is aliquid dissimile, there is something that is unlide, and therefore they
ought not to be stretched beyond their bounds, and so urged as if they agreed
in every thing to that which they are brought to illustrate.

These are the principal Scriptuers wherein such expressions are used, as seem
to make God the Author of sin; for other like unto these, they may receive
the like answer, namely that when God is said to do the same things which
sinful men do, he does it, either as the Author of nature and supporter of it
in natural actions, or as the righteous judge by withdrawing of his grace, and
punishing one sin with another, or by administering occasions; In all which he
is altogether blameless.

CHAP. IX. Containing an answer to some objections which arise from that which
has been before delivered touching the manner how God has a hand in sin.
IT has been showed before, that God does not only permit sin, but that he
does willingly permit it, therefore his will is conversant about it, and his
will is more then a velleietas, a mere wishing, what he permits, that he wills
with an active will: against this it may be objected.

Object. 1. That will may be said to be evil whose act is evil, that act is
evil which has an evil object (for all acts receive their information, and
so their denomination from their object) when the act of a man's will is carried
after things unlawful then is this act evil and so is the will whence it
proceeds.

Answ. To this it may be answered, that sin is not so wholly and absolutely
evil, but it may have some respect of good, it may have some good joined with
it,

1. For in sinful acts natures work is good (as has been showed) It is a
true rule, that actus peccati in genere entis bonus est, in genere moris malus.
The act of sin as it is an entity, it is good, in regard of the moral
affection or quantity of it, so it is an evil.

Secondly, though in it self it be evil, yet it may be made a means an
occasion of good, God is able to bring good out of it. Hence Augustine says
excellently, August. in Enchirid. cap. 96.
Quamvis quae mala sunt in quantum mala sint, non sin bona, tamen ut non solum
bona, sed etiam sint and mala bonum est. Although evil things so far as they
are evil are not good, yet it is good that not only good, but evil should be.
Sin is in it self against the glory of God, therefore he cannot will it as it
is in it self, and in its own nature, and as wicked men will it. But as the
skillful Physician can so order and temper some poisons that though they be in
themselves destructive to nature, yet he can make them medicinal and helpful;
so the wise and mighty God is able to make that which is in it self against
his glory, to be serviceable to his glory, he can work out his own glory from
the work of men's actions, he can make them useful to the best ends; and so far
he may both will them and work them, namely, as he can, and will bring good
out of them.

Enchirid. cap. 100.
Non sineret bonos fieri malis, nesi omnipotens etiam de malo facere p^t been
(says Augustine) the good God would not suffer evil to be, unles he being
omnipotent could bring good out of evil. To the same purpose he says also in
another place, De correpes great. cap. 10.
Scivit Deus magis ad omnipotentissimam ejus bonitatem pertinere, etiam de
malis benefacere, quam mala non sinere. God did know that it more befits his
omnipotent goodness to bring good out of evil, then not to suffe any evil at
all to be; yea, Bellarmine himself acknowledges that God did Ex lapsu hominis
ingens bonum elice^e, did draw forth a wonderful great good out of the fall of
man. So that we see that sin (though evil in it self, may have some respect
of good in it, and some way make for the glory of God now in this respect
only, God wills it, and this he may do and his will still be a just, holy, and
righteous will.

Object. 2. If man's sin be the object of Gods decree, then man's sins
necessarily (for what God has decreed must necessarily come to pass) and if
the decree of God be the cause of this necessity, then likewise it is the
cause of that sin which follows upon it, and so God shall be the Author and
proper cause of sin.

Answ. That Gods decrees do not take away the liberty of man's will may appear
many ways.

1. Christ's death was decreed, for he was delivered by the determinate counsel
of God, Acts. 23. yet he dyed freely, for he says of himself, that he laid
down his life when no man had power to take it from him, John. 10.17,18. he
laid it down willingly and freely; beside if he had not done thus. if Christ's
death had not been voluntary, it had not been an act of perfect obedience, and
so could not have been meritorious. The steadfastness and firm standing of the
good Angels in their integrity is a free act, for they are not enforced to it,
2 (...) 2.13.
yet this was (...) for they are elect Angels. The Saints are chosen to faith
and sanctification, yet they believe and repent freely, not being led to it by
any natural or violent necessity. All our natural motions and actions proceed
freely from us: yet to deny these to be within the compass of Gods decree,
were to deny a great part of his providence, In him we live and move, Act.
11.28. Pro. 16.9. And what he does in time he has determined to do before all
time.

2. Gods decree is, actus ad intra, one of those immanent acts which are
always within himself: and of these acts the rule holds true, that they do
nihil ponere in objecto, they put nothing into the object about which they are
conversant; Gods decree alone (being an instrument within himself) works
nothing upon the creature, till it comes to execution, till some some way or
other he does put forth his purpose by some outward act: unless therefore it
can be showed how God in the execution of his decree, by some outward act upon
man does necessitate man's will, his decree alone will never infer any
necessity upon it, and we find the contrary by experience, namely, that we are
carried forward to the committing of sin freely as we are to eat out meat, or
drink our drink, or perform any other action most agreeable to our natures,
being led to it neither by any violent or natural necessity.

3. Gods decree is so far from infringing the liberty of the second causes that
it establishes and strengthens them in their liberty: for he does not only
discernere rem ips^m sed modum rei, not only determine and decree the thing it
self, but also the manner of it; he determines that somethings shall come to
pass necessarily, other things freely and contingently. That necessary things
shall come to pass by necessary causes, contingent things by contingent
causes. All entilies and beings as from God, with all the adjuncts and
properties that belong to them, and he works in all things according to the
nature of the things: and therefore in natural agents he causes things to
come to pass necessarily, in free agents contingently: so that though Gods
will determine man's will, yet it determines to work contingently and freely,
Vt voluntas necessario movetur ad agendum ex suppositione motionis divinae, ita
etiam necessari^ movetur ad agendum libere, quia movet Deus voluntatem hominis
conveniunter suae naturae (...) page 31. page 27.
(says Dr Twisse) as the will is necessarily moved to act, upon supposition of
the divine motion, so it is necessarily moved to act freely, because God moves
man's will in a way agreeable to its own nature. Posito decreto necesse erat ut
primus home peccaret, sed necesse erat ut peccaret libere. Upon supposition of
Gods decree it was necessary that the first man should sin, but it was also
necessary that he should sin freely.

4. Causes by accident, never work necessarily, but contingently: the Sun
sends forth light necessarily, but darkes weak eyes contingently. The Law is
only an accidental cause of sin (as before was showed) and look how the law
works it God works it, and as he works it so he has decreed to work it,
therefore his decree inferres no necessity. Besides a cause by accident never
works, till causa per se such as is properly, and in its own nature a cause,
sets it on work. The Sword which a mad man wears will never move to hurt him,
till he himself begins to move it. The wall will never hurt the glass or pot,
till the drunken man or some other dasheth it against the wall: no more will
the Law of God ever hurt a man till he dasheth himself against it. Causes by
accident are always reducible to other causes; so the last resolution of sin
must be in the freewill of man as into the true and proper cause of it.

Object. But here it may be further objected, that if that which God has
decreed does not necessarily come to pass, then his decree may be frustrated.

Answ. This Objection makes as much against Gods foreknowledge, as against his
decree, for as he cannot be disappointed in his decree, so he cannot be
deceived in his foreknowledge; but it is granted on all sides, that God did
foresee and foreknow Adams fall (as all other sins) before it was committed;
and therefore his foresight does not hinder the free working of man's will, no
more does his decree.

2. It follows not that his decree may be frustrate and disappointed, though
some things come to pass contingently, because although it be necessary that
what God has decreed should come to pass, yet not that it should come to
necessarily: that it should be effected, Necessario modo and necessarijs medijs
in a necessary manner, and by necessary means. God having decreed that not a
bone of Christ should be broken, it was necessary that this should come to
pass, and that Christ's legs should be preserved from breaking, when the
others were broken that were crucified with him: but yet this came not to pass
necessarily, for both Christ's bones were in their own nature fragilia, talia
quae frangi possint, such as might be broken, as also the Soldiers did freely
abstain from breaking of them, without any compulsion at all.

But it is not possible that the same effect should come to pass, both
necessarily and contingently.

Yes, it is possible; as this effect has reference to diverse causes, as the
not breaking of Christ's bones had reference to Gods decree and appointment, it
was necessary (as has been showed) because that could not be disappointed; but
as it had reference to the second cause, namely the free will of the Soldiers,
as it was not necessary but contingent. So on the other side, the Suns giving
light in the air, and the fire burning of combustible matter, are necessary
effects as they have reference to the second causes, but contingent as they
have reference to the first cause; for God does freely, not necessarily concur
with the Sun in his shining, and the fire in his burning

Hence arise these distinctions so frequent with Divines, of nenessitas
absoluta and hypothetica, necessitas causae and consequentiae, an absolute and
condition all necessity; a necessity of the cause, and of the consequence. The
absolute necessity, or necessity of the cause is, when things are so fast and
firmly tied together by the order of the second causes, as according to the
course of nature, the effect cannot come to pass otherwise then it does: As if
a man be a man, he must needs bea reasonable creature; if fire be fire, it must
needs have the property of burning; if a stone be a stone, the motion of it
must needs tend downward. The conditional or consequentiall necessity, is when
there is no such fast linking together of the second causes, but that when they
work one way, there is a disposition in them to work another way, though one
thing does certainly follow another, yet by no necessary causation, but by a
free and contingent manner of working. Upon supposal of Gods Ordination and
appointment, the rising of the Sun follows the rising of the morning Star, and
(in the Countries where we live) the coming of the warm summer, follows the
coming in of the Swallows amongst us, and this by a consequentiall necessity,
for it is never otherwise, but not by any absolute or causall necessity. God
having decreed and appointed concerning Esau and Jacob, that the elder should
serve the younger, it was necessary that Jacob should get the birth-hood and
blessing from his brother Esau; but this was effected by as contingent means
as might be: for it was no whit necessary that Esau should come in hungry from
hunting, that Jacob should have Pottage in a readiness, that Esau should be
desirous of them, and be willing to part with his birthright for them; all
these things were done freely on both parts: there was no necessity that Jsaac
should mistake Jacob for Esau, and his savory meat for Esaus Veinson; but all
this was done most freely (though guided by a secret providence.) God having
determined that the Israelites should spoil the Egyptians of their Jewels, of
Silver and Jewels of Gold at their departure out of Egypt, Exodus 12.35. compared
with Chap. 3.22. and 11.2. this must necessarily come to pass; yet it was done
in a most free manner without any enforcement or necessity; for it is said they
asked of the Egyptians Jewels, of Silver, and Jewels of Gold, and the Lord gave
them favor in their eyes, that they granted their request, Chap. 12.34,35. So
God having decreed the fall of Adam, it was necessary that this should come to
pass, but it was also necessary it should come to pass freely: and
accordingly he did freely and willingly yield to the enticing persuasion of the
Serpent, without any compulsion at all: For as the power of God, whereby he his
able able to change the nature of things, does not hinder the necessary working
of necessary causes; so likewise the will of God, (whereby he has determined
the event one way) does not hinder the free and contingent working of
contingent causes. Besides every necessary truth, is an eternal truth; this
being a most true rule, that axioma necessacium est quod semper verum est ne
falsum esse potest, a necessary proposition is that which is always true, and
can never be false, that man is a reasonable creature, was a necessary truth
before man was born: That a Cain should kill his brother, was no necessary
truth before the thing was done; no more was it a necessary truth that Adam
should eat the forbidden fruit, before he had eaten it; and although it was a
truth afterward, yet no necessary truth: for no circumstance of time can
change the nature of things, as to make a contingent truth to become necessary,
or a necessary truth to become contingent. True it is that when a thing is
done, it cannot be undone, (for a thing cannot be, and not be both at once) but
it was not necessary that it should be done, if it be a thing of contingent
nature. What I now speak or write, is necessary should be thus spoken or
written when it is once done: but before it was done it was not necessary that
I should speak or write in this manner, or speak or writ at all, these being
acts of freedom and liberty: so it is in all actions of the like nature, in all
contingent actions.

Thus we see that Gods determination and decree does no whit infringe or
obstruct the liberty of man's will, and therefore not withstanding such decree,
man is no whit less blameworthy, nor God at all faulty in the evil which man
does.

Object. A third objection which may be raised from what has been delivered
is, that God has been said to be an accidental cause of sin, if so, then the
sinful actions of men fall out besides his scope and intent: for that is said
to be an effect by accident, quando aliquid p^aeter efficientis s^pum accidit,
when some event happens besides the intent of the efficient: Now how can God
will or decree sin, if it falls out besides his scope and intents?

Answ. To this doubt answer may be made by distinguishing betwixt intentio
operis and operantis, the intention of work and the workman: Sin is besides
the scope of the work which God does, but not besides his own intent who is
the agent and workman. When he decrees sin shall be, he intends it shall be by
such ways and means, by which acts and works (so far as he works in it) as
in themselves and their own nature tend only to good, and are mere accidental
causes of the evil which man does. The Law, and word of God, his mercies,
judgments and all his dealing with men, in their own nature tend to this end,
namely, to make men better, nor worse; and if they be made worse by them, it is
propter scopum, besides the scope and intent whereto these things in their own
nature tend. The Gospel in it self tends to life, when therefore it is the
savor of death, it is besides the proper scope intent and of the Gospel: but
though it besides the intent of the Gospel to be the savor of death, it is not
besides Gods intent, for he both knows and intends in what effect the Gospel
shall have: otherwise he should be defective in his wisdom and providence:
besides what power the Gospel has to produce an effect either way, it receives
from him. Hence it is aid to be the power of God unto salvation, Romans 1.16. the
powerful instrument which God uses to bring men salvation, which power he
puts into it: and so likewise when he works the other way it is power also.
The Lord bids the Prophet Go make the hearts of this people fat, and make their
^ares heavy, and shut their eyes, etc, Isa. 6.10. and how should he do this?
namely, by preaching the word unto them; by which it appears, that sometimes
the word does harden men's hearts, close their ears and shut their eyes; and
that God intends it should do so, and sends it for this very purpose; yet the
word in own nature tends to soften their hearts, to open their ears, and
eyes, to make them see and hear better; so that the word here is only an
accidental cause (it being beside the scope and intent of the word to harden:)
yet this is not besides Gods intent, who in all his actions, and in the use of
such instruments as are employed in them propounds to himself a most sure and
certain end. By all which appears as the secret and just judgment of God, so
his infinite wisdom and skill, who can work out his own ends by such
means, as in their own nature do tend a contrary way.

CHAP. X. Showing some useful conclusions which do necessarily follow from
what has been spoken of this Subject.
Conclu. 1. IF God so orders things, that in all the sins which are committed
by men though he has a secret working hand, yet he works in a most just and
holy manner, and does nothing but what is right and good:

Hence it follows, that in all the sin which is committed, in all the evil
which is done, either by our selves or others we lay all the blame on our
selves or them, not imputing the least miscarriage on God, not so much as in
our thoughts, He is just in all his ways, and holy in all his works; what ever
he does is well done, be the instruments never so bad by whom it is done.

In all the evil that befalls us, we have no just reason at all to repine and
murmur, to be impatient or discontent; for all his dealings with us, whether by
his word or his works, his mercies or his judgments, do in themselves tend to
good: when therefore any evil comes we must take heed we do not charge God
foolishly, Job. 1.22. but remember that we have procured these things to our
selves (as the Prophet tells the people, Jer. 2.17.) Sin is the seed of sorrow:
all the evil of suffering arises from the evil of sinning, and this arises
only from our selves: yea, though sometimes we suffer many evils altogether
unjustly as they proceed from men, yet as they come from. God (who guides all
the actions of men) they are done most holily, wisely and justly. Thus Daniel
acknowledges in regard of himself and his people, O Lord, righteousness
belongs to thee, open shame to us, Dan. 9.6. Thou art just in all that is ^one
upon us (says Nehemiah) for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly,
cap. 9. last. Let God be true and every man a liar (says the Apostle, Romans
3.4.) So let God be just and holy, and every man sinful, wicked, and wretched
abundantly worthy of all the evil which comes upon him.

Conclu. 2. Hence it follows, that we ought with all reverence to admire and to
adore the infinite wisdom, justice and power of God, that is able to work in
the most blame worthy actions of sinful men, and yet himself remain
altogether blameless: that is able to bring about the best ends by the worst
means: that in many great works which have been done in the world, has
wrought out such ends, as have been altogether different, yea, sometimes
contrary to the scope and intent of those who have been the principal actors
and agents in them. Little did Joseph's brethren think that when they sold
their brother for a slave, this should be the means of making him the greatest
mam in all the Land of Egypt next to Pharaoh. Little did Haman think that when
out of his hate and indignation against Mordecai, he gate a decree of
destroying all the Jews in the Kings Dominion in one day, that this should be
a means and occasion of making them have a hand against their adversaries and
of procuring liberty to destroy them? yea, of bringing himself to the
Gallows, Hest. 8.11.7.10.

Little did the Jews think that their envy and hatred against Christ should
be an occasion of redemption of mankind, that when they spit upon him, buffeted
him, beat him with rods, crowned him with thorns, caused him to suffer the
shameful and accursed death of the Cross, that this should be a means of his
greater advancement and exaltation: yet the Scripture says, that because he
made himself of no reputation, and humbled himself to the death of the
Cross, therefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every man,
Phil. 2.8. what reason therefore have we in way of admiration to cry out with
the Apostle, Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and ounsell of
God, unsearchable are his judgments and his ways past finding out, Romans 11.33.

Conclu. 3. Thirdly, hence it follows, that we ought to acknowledge with all
thankfulness that infinite goodness of God, which does not suffer us to go
on in a course of sinning, especially in such a sort as would ruin our souls,
and drive us to destruction: for if he should it would be in vain for us to
complain against him; he would easily acquit himself and justify his own
proceedings: he would be justified in his words, and overcome when he is judged
(as the Apostle speaks, To. 3.4.) he would easily convince us, that in all the
evil which we have done, or shall suffer, the just blame lies upon our, own
heads, and our destruction is of our selves: he would cause our mouths to be
stopped, and make us (as all the world) to be found culpable before him, Romans
3.10, If he should enter into judgment with us, we should not be able to
answer one of a thousand: what a mercy is it that he does not suffer us to fall
into sin so frequently, and in so foul a manner as we are ready to do,
especially that he does not charge our sins upon us. What reason have we to say
with the Psalmist, Praise thou the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy name, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, and heals all thine
infirmities, who does not deal with us after our sins, nor reward us after our
iniquities; but as high as the heaven is above the earth, such is his mercy
toward us; as far as the East is from the West, so far he does remove our sins
from us, Psalm. 103.1,3,10,11,12. to him alone be all glory now and ever.

FINIS

