AN ESSAY TO A Continuation OF ITER BOREALE; Attempting something upon the
happy influence, which that seasonable and successful march OF THE LORD
General Monck Out of the North, had upon the Arts and Sciences.

BY a LOVER of LEARNING.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Smith, and are to be sold at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

An Essay to a Continuation OF ITER BOREALE.
COme, come my Muse away, make have to greet
Great Genera^l Monck, go kiss his welcome feet;
Indeed the art something tardy but however
The Proverb holds, it is better, late then never.
Some Candid Reader will suppose the lack
Of generous Wine, might set thy fancy back.
Excuses may be found for coming late,
For thankfulness is seldom out of date:
What Art or Science shall not stoop to the
Great Hero, Patron of their liberty.
Lilly and Cambden both, had taken their flight
From British-coasts, and left a shady night,
But for thy coming, they had packt away
Their Parts of speech, and durst no longer stay:
The Nouns were frighted at the Martial brood,
And feared Declension as the Cases stood;
The Substantives began to make their moan,
They must have help, they could not stand alone;
The Adjective that could not stand before,
Did never look to be supported more;
The Numbers were too weak to keep the field,
And with the fifteen Pronouns meant to yield.
Comparisons grew odious, what degree.
Can be expected from an Anarchy?
The Verb and Participle found no fence,
That might secure them in the Future-Tence
POSSVM was called with all his force, but he
Confessed he wanted possibility.
The other Parts of speech did want protection,
Witness the sighing of the Interjection.
SYNTAX dispair'd, saying, will they spare
A quiet place where any concords are;
And poor Prosodia all besmears her eye
With weeping to her mournful Elegies.
But thou have wiped them, and she means to raise
Her highest note to celebrate thy praise.
SECT. 2.
Rhetoric that pleasant Mistrisse, Learnings grace
Whose gaudy Varnish wont to hide the face
Of horrid Acts, grows mute, and does deny
To color treason by an Encomy.
Her smoother style was turned to Haesitation,
Stifled with guilt, it marred her pronunciation.
But by thy coming, thou have raised the hopes
Of fainting Suada, and redeemed her Tropes
By casting subtle figures, so that all
She speaks of thee, must be Myoticall.
Now may she speak her mind and may declare
What kind of Mushroms our late Courtiers were;
That NOL a Brewer was, and PRIDE his Dray man,
HEWSON a Cobbler, PACKER but a Layman
The Rump forlorn, and of that cursed Crew
Some lose their pelf, some bid the World adieu.
Thus have thou furnished Pytho with a spring,
To curse the wicked, and salute a King.
SECT. 3.
Logic, the Queen of Reason, to whose bent
All power stoopt by force of Argument,
Is now so baffled, that she prostrate lies
A Captive Vassell to absurdities.
'Twould melt your heart to hear the doleful story
And sad complaint from every Catagory;
SVBSTANTIA lost her substance, and she meant,
Had thou not come to turn an accident;
'Twas well poor QVANTITY was so discreet,
To stay her time, thy kind access to greet.
All QVALITY was so transformed of late,
She lost her skill, nor could denominate:
Princes, must go on foot and beggars ride,
Cobblers turn Peers, and Carters magnified;
The noble quality which wont to adorn
The Courts of Princes now become a scorn
To base Plebeians, you would spue to see
A stinking Rump dressed up in Majesty.
RELATIONS all grew heavy and each eye
Was turned a Fount by kinder sympathy
Nor do I wonder when all Royal ACTION
Is solely managed by a cursed faction.
PASSION grew high, and could not brook such things
As mounting Beggars and deposing Kings.
VBI looks out in hope she might descry
Some kinder succor in extremity.
QVANDO thinks long, and says, what shall I be
Servant of Servants to eternity.
SITVS was restless; while she makes a moan,
The worst of Varlets did profane the Throne.
The HABITS were so wicked in the Nation,
That now Rebellion calls for abjuration,
'Twas God that sent thee in this doubtful season,
To make us men and bring us to our reason,
The ill bred genus thou have packt from hence,
Defining Kingdoms by a difference;
The cursed Juncto of Hypocrisy,
Themselves are baffled by a fallicy:
The World could not have found so fit a pate,
In such a nick of time to moderate.
SECT 4.
MOralls that wont to guide us heretofore,
A crowd of Clowns had voted out of door.
The vertuer hide themselves while bolder Vice
Has friends at Court, and is upon her rise.
'What need is there of Ethics, why should we
'Consult the heathen for felicity.
'Alas! Their summum bonum is a toy
'Compar'd with ours; three Kingdoms we enjoy,
'And can we keep them we shall not envy
'The great Mogoll in all his Majesty:
'Why should we Christians stoop to higher powers,
' Adam their Grandsire was, and so is ours.
Thou heardst our rudeness, and could easily spy
Our great defect in this Phylosophie.
Thou readst an Ethick Lecture, we incline
And prove proficients in thy discipline:
The great usurping Dons which governd ail,
Were Taught a Lesson more Monastical.
Thy precept and thy practice both do ply
The strictest lessons of Oeconomie,
And where thou find'st a student is for tricks,
Thou shewst thy skill as well in politics.
The saucy Rump who scornd the best of Kings,
In lower Congies broke her twatling strings
To entertain thee, while a Chair of State
Must be prepared and all that is delicate.
Thou taught'st the Court, the Camp, and all to cry,
^ong live KING CHARLES God bless his Majesty.
^ext under God we owe thy conquering banners,
^he late Edition of our English manners.
SECT. 5.
PHYSICS had lost their Science, whiles that all
Was out of course, and turned unnatural;
In vain their Students shall hereafter pry
In Natures Secrets, alls a prodigy;
Materia prima like, poor England stood
For some Impression, give it what you wood.
Natures best friend thou came and found us thus,
And brought a Form, by bringing Carolus.
The Causes all conspire, and God direct
The blessed production of this good effect;
Thou have engaged the Sophister to ply
The choicest tracts in this Philosophy.
SECT. 6.
THe Metaphysics feared their tender Ens
With verum bonum would be banished hence;
The Angels could not save, although they lent,
The strongest force of each intelligent:
It was the In-created substance staid
The spiteful hands, and made them all afraid,
By sending great St. George, who by his might,
Did banish darkness, and recover light.
SECT. 7.
THe Law's a Kingdoms Bulwark, and the Fence,
The two edged Sword that keeps from violence,
Lost both their tongue and sense, so that the wise
Called all oppression, in a Legal guise;
Our Lives, our Fortunes, Names and all must be
Poor fettered Prisoners to necessity.
What doleful sound was heard, what lamentation
Of Plunders, Thefts, of Rapes, and sequestration?
Here sits a weeping Orphan, and anon
We meet another ruined and undone.
Astrea went her way, but (O the pity)
She left her business with a dull Committee.
The Meaning pretenders without the practice of godliness.
godly mend their pack, the Saint inherit
Not by the Norman Law, but seeming merit;
Each place of Trust and profit that way ran,
And lo, the Saint is turned a Publican.
High Courts of Justice never known before.
Must be erected as a Postern* door
For King and Peers, and to stop the ery
Of Royal blood, they cloak their Butchery
By seeming Law; and by a strange pretense
All that was done was done by providence:
And wilt, O God, endure so great affront
From Hypocrites, and stand no more upon it?
What shall the worst, and greatest of Impiety
Acted by men, be charged upon the Deity?
Shall such unheard of mischief still be hie,
Under Religions Cloak? let God forbid:
Thou heardst our suit, and sent great Monk to chase
The Rumpant Rebel and Redeem the Mace.
SECT. 8.
MFdicks whose skill was wont to bring again
A swooning Patient and remove the pain,
Consults her Herbal, but could not descry,
A proper Plant for Englands malady;
The bolder Emprick comes, and for his Fee,
Prescribes Purgation and Phlebotomy;
The Noblest blood runs out, the dregs remain,
And still the Patient does increase her pain;
Now giving up the Ghost she was heard to cry,
O give me something Sovereign, or I die,
Thou heardst, and do employ thy utmost skill
To give her ease by giving her her will.
A College of Physicians do consent
She must be pleased, her Cure is content.
Then hoist up sail, and lets not spare for c^st,
Bring home that Drug, or England will be lost,
She gladly takes it, and anon her dolor
Ceast, looks fresh, and gains her color
Nay, then great Sir, since we are saved thus,
We I gil^ thy Shrine, Great Esculapius.
SECT. 9.
ARITHMATICK whose chiefest skill does lie
In total Sums, forgot to multiply;
There was so much Division and Substraction,
Her total Numbers mouldred into fraction.
Her eager Students cry, when shall we be
Past Subdivision, at the Rule of three.
The Cheating Treasurers began to boast,
The had past accounts, but reckt without their Host.
What do I stand for Ciphers? Reach a Pen,
There must be more, you must account again:
Thus did thou teach the cheating Knave a trick,
And taught him better in Arithmatick.
SECT. 10.
ASTRONOMY whose Lectures made us wise
In Revolution, and to read the Skies,
Now curse the Stars, and do conclude from thence
Her ruin came, Malignant Influence
Became her bane, and now she must deny
To Court the Planets, all is Inconstancy.
The new erected Lights eclipse the Sun;
Prodigious Comet ^ay we are undone.
Lilly was non-plust, and at last he sell
From Reading Heaven to consult with Hell*
But stay, me thinks a glorious star appear
From Northen parts, presage a happy year;
This Star Rise higher, and at length obtain
The wished sight of Charles the seconds Wain.
Now thanks to Heaven, all the Stars conspire
To give poor England in, her hearts desire.
SECT. 11.
THEOLOGY which teach us to adore
One only God, and to admit no more,
Bids us to rear an Altar, and to pay
Our thankfulness, befitting such a day:
A day, whose brighter beams did put to flight
Those Owls and Bats that Revel'd in the night:
A glorious Church was brought to mere Confusion,
Undoubted truth, expelled by strong delusion,
Unhallowed hands profane the Sacred Rite,
And Ignorance pretend to greatest light,
The Cobbler lays aside the old Translation,
Puts up his Tools, and works by Inspiration.
The Canting Quaker makes a hideous cry,
England Repent, Repent or else you die:
The Dipper counts the wicked world unclean,
And must be damned, or dipped once again:
Now Englands Ark may fear destructive Rocks,
Whose only Sin was to be Orthodox
But is there any hope some man of Order
Will sympathize, and look upon our border?
At length Religious Monk, was heard to say,
Quaker be gone, Phanaticks all away.
Thus did thou give our Church a better face,
And given hopes to see her wonted GRACE.
SECT. 12.
MUSIC whose Noble Science did inspire,
Diviner souls, and raised the fancy higher,
Her self was out of Tune by raging Billows,
And hangs her warbling Harp upon the Willows,
Is this a time for mirth? May every eye
Keep time in tears, and weep by sympathy.
Are Law and Gospel both turned out of door?
Put up the Viol bring the Lute no more.
Thus lay the mournful Virgin like to die,
But now recovered to an ecstasy:
Now does she choose her most delightful airs,
And tunes her Song according to affairs;
Now does she make the Christian world to ring
Thy great achievements for thy exile King:
She Will serve the here, and when thou shall expire,
She Will raise her Heavenly Note a great deal higher,
She may attend the in the Angels Qui^e.
FINIS.

