AN ANSWER TO Mr Francis Cornvvells POSITIONS and INFERENCES, Concerning
Dipping, Anabaptisme, Antipaedobaptisme, Tithes, and Consecrated Churches.
Wherein the English Ministry is vindicated from Anti-Christianisme, so deeply
by him Charged upon them. Published in special reference to the good of Mr
Cornwells misled Congregation. By Robert Whittle, Minister of the Word of God
at East-Malling in KENT. Whereunto are annexed. The forementioned Positions of
Mr Francis Cornvvell, ENTITVLED, THE NEW TESTAMENT Ratified with the Blood of
the Lord Jesus, is the Magna Charta of Believers in Jesus the Christ dipped; by
which they are justified to be no Heretics.

London, Printed for W. H. and are to be sold by George Badger in S. Dunstans
Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1646.

An Answer to Mr. Francis Cornwells Positions and Inferences, etc.
IT is an ordinary fault amongst carnal man, that when they have begotten
children in their own Image, by their over-doating upon them, they make Idols
of them: and that from self-love, and selfe-seeking; because they are
persuaded, their children are like them, and themselves hope to be perpetuated
in them: And certainly, this over-doating is more ordinary upon the Brats of
men's own Brains, in which, though never so mean, whilst men, out of an
overweening esteem, please themselves, they set them up for others also. If
this were not true, in these our clayes of so much spurious braine-brood, why
should Mr. Cornwell have set up these lines, so like himself, in print,
against me and my brethren, the English Ministry? He is not such a stranger,
or so far distant from any of us, by him named, but that a private letter might
easily have passed, and been sufficient, if not to have satisfied each other,
yet to have expressed any of our parts, especially his or mine: but he
over-runs himself into print, and calls me after him. I must needs follow, to
look upon, and try (according to his desire) what he has set up.

Concerning this subject, whereof I am now to treat, there has been so much
already spoken, even in these our times, by learned men, so every way
satisfactory to unprejudiced Readers, that it may be accounted presumption and
folly in me, so every way conscious to my self of mine own weakness, to
think of putting pen to Paper: But that Master Cornwell, defying the Host of
Israel, the English Ministry, which are the Chariots and Horsemen thereof
steps forth and warily makes choice of one of the weakest to Combat with. I
must answer the Challenge, as being particularly engaged, to satisfy the
expectation, and setrle the minds of my people, and (if possible) to deliver a
silly Lamb or twain from the paw of the Bear, or the jaws of the she though
not subtle Fox, who goes about seeking whom he may beguile. Thus then
trusting, that I am girded with the girdle of truth, and that God has
committed to me, with my Brethren, the Sword of the Spirit, which is mighty in
Operation, Vincat veritas.

By the superscription, he seems only to desire to justify himself, and
those of his Sect from being Heretics, but in the sequel, flies upon, and
condemns the whole English Ministry, for Antichristian, and denying Christ;
two hard taskes for his weak hands to undertake: yet he adds fearful
denunciations against us, and his best persuasions to draw us to them. As for
the name of Heretic, whether or no it belong to Master Francis Cornwell, and
those of his Sect must be tried, for hence is the quarrel, because I refused,
and dissuaded others from his company, upon this ground, because he was an
Heretic. And yet surely that is the Scriptures rule. Tit. 3. 10. A man that is
an Heretic, after the first and second admoniti^^, reject, or avoid. I am ^^re
Mr. Cornwell has had his first and second admon^ion, both verbal, by the
Tongues and Pens of the learned Masters of the Assemblies, Doctor Featly and
others, whose words cannot but be as Goads and Nails fastened in him, Eccles.
12. 11. making him condemn him himself, Titus 3 11. As also, he has had his
admonition by the hand of Justice, and yet persists in his obstinacy even to
the seducing and sub (...) souls, creeping into houses, and leading captive
silly women, laden (...) ed away with diverse lusts, etc Paul foretells of such
before the (...) now they are come, we should not think it strange, 2 Timothy 3.
1. 6. This word Heretic, I find but once named in Scripture, and here we see
it is with a charge of avoiding him; those therefore that use the company, and
frequenc^ the Congregations of Heretics, either out of unselednesse, or
curiosity, walk contrary to the Scriptures rule, and do like the Gnat, play
with the flame, and thrust their finger into the fire; for as w^e shall find
all Heresy to be a fire, so this of Anabaptisme, Wilde-fire, doing much
mischief, and not easily quenched.

I should be glad to hear that Master Cornwell and his followers, would prove
themselves no Heretics, their only way to make it appear, is by reno^^^cing
Anabaptisme, and Antipaedobaptisime, how then should we embrace you, as the
returned Prodigal, after your misspent Talents, and as the found sheep, after
your so far wanderings! But you have no cause to be angry with me, for
calling Anabaptists Heretics; I gave them not that name, but only called them
by that name, by which they are called and known to those that write of them
as Musculus and others: I might tell you also how they are called by Caloin,
who was not mean instrument in the Church of God, fanatici and phrenetici, mad
and frantic, as all other Heretics are, 1 Timothy 3. 9. (...)

But I forbear, and will see what Master Cornwell can say for himself: I
pass over his Super^cription, wherein he thrusts himself into such a mist,
that I can scarce see him; but we shall afterward more plainly discover him.

First, he lays down two Positions, as the foundation of his ensuing
discourse, and from thence to conclude, that he and his Sect are no Heretics,
as if Heretics could not profess two known truths, and yet be Heretics in
respect of other truths.

For the first; That there is no salvation for any, save in the Lord Jesur
Christ only: He is rather an Insidell then an Heretic, that being of
understanding will not profess to believe it.

For the second; That the new Testament is the last Will and Testament of Jesus
the Christ, ratified with his own blood, and given to the Church of Believers
in Jesus the Christ dipped, together with all the Promises, Ordinances,
Privileges, and the inheritance therein bequeathed, (the Testator Jesus being
dead) is now in force, to all Believers in Jesus Christ's dipped. And no men,
nor powers, (by what name or title soever distinguished) under the penalty of
Anathema Maranatha, (for not loving the Lord Jesus Christ) may add to it, or
detract from it, lest they disannull the everlasting Testament of the Lord
Jesus, which is to continue until Christ's second coming, to restore all
things, Rev. 22. 19. Luke 22. 20 This Cup is the new Testament in my blood shed
for you; viz. Believers in Jesus the Christ dipped.

For the new Testament being in ^^rce, is not to be questioned amongste us, it
is the undoubted Doctrine of the Church of England; And the Apostle tells us
what that Testament is, Hebr. 8. 10, 11, 12. I will put my Laws in their mind,
and write them in their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people etc. For Testament and Covenant here are both one, (...) or if
you speak of the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, which by a
Metonymie, are commonly known by the name of the new Testament, we reverence
and receive them all, we will be far from adding to them, or detracting from
them. but if you account our receiving the Moral Law and the Prophets, any
adding to this new Testament, there we leave you to the Anabaptists your
Brethren; who as Polanus tells us; are divided into two Sects, the modester
reject the writings of the old Testament, the other reject the whole Scripture,
both old and new Testament, and pretend immediate Revelation; you seem to
incline to the former, but we do not make void the Law through faith, but we
establish the Law. Romans 3. 31. And are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief cornerstone.
Ephesians. 2. 20.

But suppose both your Positions (as far as you speak plain) granted, only
with a reservation of something to be said concerning your affected Word
Dipped, whether you refer it to Christ or Believers, where you impose a
necessity of it to salvation, what will follow hereupon? That you are no
Heretics? Nay in the very first consequence you draw from thence, you show
your self Heretical: For say you, First then, it will necessarily follow,
that no man nor woman, according to the Scriptures of the new Testament. can be
saved, except they believe in Jesus the Christ, and be dipped, Mark 16. 6.
What? a necessity fo Baptism to salvation? So, that none can be saved without
Baptism? the Text by you alleged does not prove it, what then is this your
assertion upon it, but an addition to it, and so a bringing your self under
your threatened Anathema? the Text threatens indeed Damnation to unbeleevers,
but not to the unbaptized. Neither will your following exception help you.

Corcerning the salvation of the elect, (whom he will save in mystical
Babylon, even in the darkest times of Popery and Superstition) we meddle not;
say you.

But how can you meddle with the Salvation of any, if not of the Elect, seeing
salvation belongs only to the elect? again, if you except only the elect,
(whom he will save in mystical Babylon, even in the darkest times of Popery
and superstition) what then shall become of the Elect, under the light of the
Gospel? shall not the foundation of God stand sure for these, without man's
putting to his helping hand to dip them? Shall their salvation depend upon
that, which is in the power of man to give or deny? I should think it
blasphemy in my se^^ so to limit the power, or restrain the grace of God.

Again, suppose you should convert one to be, and make profession, for matter
of faith altogether as your self, and that he should desire to be Dipped; if
he should dye (as it is possible he might) before you could dip him, were it
unpossible for him to be saved? It is an ucomfortable Doctrine to your poor
Congregation, not any way warrantable by the Word of God: you must go to the
Council of Trent for your Warrant, for this your necessity, and to Bellarmine,
for arguments to uphold it, and then in pity to some poor souls. set up a
Limbu^^ or else it will down. The Apostle tells us, that we are justified by
Faith, Rom ^ 28. and saved through faith, Ephsians 2. 8. Without annexing
dipping, why then do you make Dipping, necessary to Salva^ion? for that
without which a thing cannot be done is absolutely necessary to the doing of
the thing, and of this kind you make dipping to Salvation.

As for your second consequence, if you understand it, of men and women,
disting^ished from children, we account Faith and Baptism necessary for their
admission and continuance in the communion of Saints: but because you afterward
require a ma^ifestation of the belief of their hearts, by the confession of
their lips, and would, for want of this, exclude children from Baptism, and
the Communion of Saints, we shall hereafter examme that more fully. Here you
will have Baptized more properly Dipped; and so impose upon us a necessity of
Dipping; which is the maine thing wherewith you trouble ignorant people, That
their Baptism, was no Baptism, because they were not dipped.

The Question then is, whether Dipping be necessry in Baptism? which you and
your followers much insist upon. First the word (...), to Baptize, is of a
larger signification, than, that it can be expressed by any one word, in any
language, known either to you, or me, and therefore that word it self,
borrowed from the Greeks is used in most languages. It signifies, as the
Masters of the Greek tongue declare, as to Dippe, and to dye; so to wash, and
to cleanse, by any appliction of water to the thing, or the thing to water, as
sprinkiling or pouring on of Water, and of a larger extent even in Scripture
Phrase, than all these; and therefore not to be restrained to your one word
dipping. If so often as the Word Baptizing is used in Scripture, you should
render it by dipping, you would make it ridiculous to your own Congregation,
unless you had prepared them to swallow any thing upon your bare word. Do you
think that the washing of Tables was by dipping? co^ld every house have a place
fit to dip a Table in? yet it is called (...), Baptism, Mark 7. 4. Let any
indifferent reader judge, whether it were proper or fit, to render that Matthew.
3. 11. He shall dippe you with the Holy Ghost and with fire, which signified
the Holy Ghosts coming upon them, Acts 1. 5. 8. being a fulfilling of that
Prophefie, Joel 2. 28. I will power out my Spirit upon, etc. Acts 2. 3, 4. Acts
2. 16, 17. So that here you see by Bapti^ing is not meant dipping, but pouring
upon; and so in Ba^tisme we power water upon the child. Or that place, they
were all Baptized to Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, ^ (...) 10. 2. Will
you render it dipped? When the Scripture tells us, that Israel went on dry
ground through the midst of the Sea? Exodus 14. Or can it be imagined that
they were dipped in the Cloud, when the Cloud was made a comfortable covering
unto them? and it cannoto be conceived, how they were baptized in it, but by
the sprinkling drops that fell from it?

The Apostle tells us, Heb. 9. 10. of diverse Washings, or different Baptismes,
yet all be there called Baptismes, (...). If there be diverse and different
sorts of Baptismes, why do you restrain the word to one sort, and that of
Dipping? The Apostle tells us, speaking of Baptism, Ephesians. 5. 26. that Christ
cleanses his Church with the washing of Water by the Word; so that Baptism is
here called by the general name of washing, which is done other ways as well
as by Dipping, by any application of water to the thing, or the thing to water.
The Author of Eclesiasticus, who was questionless well acquainted with the
Ceremonies of the Hebrews and the language of the Greeks, calls the
sprinkling of the waer of Purification upon him that touched the dead, (...),
Baptismes from the dead, Ecclus. 34. 25. as Casaubon well observes. Yet we know
that those Baptismes were by Gods special appointment, but sprinklings, Number.
19. 18. 20. The like manner of Purification had the Heathen both Greeks and
Latins: So that the word does not not signify Dipping only, but any Washing,
by pouring on, or sprinklng of water. Neither can it be proved by Scripture,
that ever the Sacrament of Baptism was administered by Dipping; no one word
seems to make for it, although some urge John's Baptizing of Jesus, or Philips
Baptizing of the Eunuch, as for John's Baptizing, the Phrase Baptizing in Jordan
implies Dipping, no more then Baptizing in a Font or Basin, implies Dipping in
a Font or Basin: and whereas it is said, Jesus went up out of the Water, the
Word (...), which is translated out of, signifies properly from; so that it is,
went up from the water; which he might do without having been in the Water:
And as for the Eunuch and Philip, they went down both into the water, and they
came up out of the water, so they might do for any kind of washing, as to
have water powered upon him as well as to be Dipped, and it is not probable that
being in his journey he was provided. of Clothes fit to be dipped in, and if
he was to be stripped in the presence of others, that may seem an undecent
manner of approaching to Gods Ordinances, unless we will turn Adamites. For
that instance, Acts 2. 41. of three thousand we read not of their going to any
River, or place of Waters to be Dipped in, and it would have been a hand matter
to have Dipped three thousand in one day, according to your manner: neither is
it probable, that the Jailer, who at midnight was Bahtized, went forth of his
house, or had in his house any convenience for Dipping; so that for ought that
can be collected from Scripture, Baptism may be administered by any washing of
Water, Ephesians. 5. 26. either Dipping, or Sprinkling, or pouring on of water. As
also, the thing signified in Baptism is as well expressed by other application
of water, as by Dipping, as that the party Baptized is made partaker of the
benefit of Christ's Bloodshed.

The Appostle having showed, Heb. 9. 13, 14. That the blood of Christ, which
was fore-signified by those Legal Sprinklings, purges the conscience,
exhorts Cap. 10. 22. to draw near, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water; what sprinkling can this be,
but of the blood of Christ? and what washing of water can, better than
sprinkling, express, this sprinkling of Christ's blood, which we are Elected
unto? 1 Pet. 1. 2. Elect unto obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus
Christ. So also Christians Heb. 12. 24. are come to Jesus the Mediator of the
New Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than
that of Abell: which cannot be understood but of the blood of Jesus, and
because it is called the blood of sprinkling, when he is called the Mediator
of the new Covenant, the Sacrament of our admission into this Covenant, cannot
better signify and seal unto us that blood of the Covenant, than by
sprinkling: which also was fore-shewed by those Legal Sprinklings. When the
people entered into Covenant with God, and promised obedience to what was
written in the Book of the Covenant, Moses sprinkled the Blood of the Covenant
upon the people: Exodus 24. 8. Also when Isaiah prophesied of the conversion of
many Nations: Isa. 52. 15. he sets it forth under that phrase of Sprinkling,
He shall sprinkle many Nations: and how, can they be said to be sprinkled upon
their conversion, but by the Seal of their admission, even Baptism
administered unto them upon their conversion, in many Nations by Sprinkling? Not
that I account Sprinkling necessary, or Dipping unlawful in Baptism, if this
were the only difference, we should quickly be reconciled; any decent manner of
applying and washing with water, is indifferent to signify the application of
the benefit of Christ's blood to the party baptized. And if it could be proved
that Baptism was administered by Dipping in the Apostles time, yet it would not
follow that the Church were therefore necessarily tied to that particular in
the administration, being no Precept for it, more than for any other kind of
washing: bare Example without Precept binds not; we have Christ's example for
administering the Communion with unleavened bread, after Supper, and in a upper
Chamber; yet none will say we are bound to follow his example in these
particulars, because there is no Precept for them. Thus supposing that Mr
Cornewell has laid a good foundation in his positions, yet it appears by his
Hay and Stubble, that he has built upon it, that he has forgotten the
Apostles Counsel, 1 Cor. 3. 10. Let every man take heed how he builds
thereupon.

Now he begins to set up something against me and my Brethren to fight against:
He hopes it will appear that Believers in Jesus the Christ Dipped, are no
Heretics as Mr Whittle and his Brethren do affirm in public they are:
Certainly, his extreme weakness cannot but appear, in placing me so weak
and unworthy, in the front of my so much worthier Brethren: but where, and when
did ever any of us affirm in public this indefinite proposition thus
indefinitely? which may bear the force of an Universal, which none of us will
affirm, that all Believers are Heretics; but if you will lay it as a
particular, that some which profess themselves Believers in Jesus Christ are
Heretics: that will appear too true; there are more Articles of the
Christian faith than one or two to be believed, to keep us from Heresy.

I approve of M. Cornwels profession of his faith in Christ, as far as he
goes without making mis-application of it, in too much restraining the subject
of Baptism one way (of which hereafter) and too much enlarging it another way;
that voice of the Gospel, Acts 2. 38. Be baptized in the name of Jesus:
belongs as a Precept only to those which have not as yet been baptized, but
if Mr Corn. shall extend it, to those that have been already baptized, then
there will be no end of re-re-rebaptizing, but so often as they hear this voice,
Be baptized, they must be baptized again, till they turn Hemero-baptists:
Therefore it cannot be (as he pretends) the love of Christ, but the ignorance
of the will of Christ, and a blind zeal, which constained him to arise and be
baptized, after he had been before baptized.

When the Israelites murmured at their Manna, and called it light bread, the
Lord sent fiery serpents among them, which stung many of them, even unto
death, Number. 21. 5, 6. These things were types of us, 1 Cor. 10. 6. When many
therefore amongst us were not content with the ordinary food of their souls,
the Word sincerely preached, sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 3. unless after their
lusts, they might have quails, some novelties, some new opinions, to feed
their humors withal, God has sent fiery serpents also to sting them, even
given them over to an headstrong, headlong, fiery, blind zeal, whence have
sprung so many heresies, even now in these days of Reformation; yet my hope
is, that as God appointed a brazen Serpent for their cure, so God will give to
these, eyes to look up, unto the shining firmness and stabilitie of him who
is so lifted up, and exalted in the preaching of the Gospel, that they may be
healed.

Master Cornewell proceeds from the profession of his faith, to the condemning
of others, but a bad manifestation of the truth of his faith, which should
work by love; he accuses the English Ministry, without any exception, of
Anti-Christianisme, in denying Christ in all his Royal Offices. D. Featly calls
the Author of his former Book, a brazen-faced Author, and with what face can he
lay this accusation against the whole English Ministry? By the hearing of some
of them, his faith was wrought in him, if he have any, and that might be a
sufficient Seal of their Ministry to him: but this accusation is like a
Chancery Bill, wherein he lays many and great things to our charge, and can
scarcely prove any of the least of them.

First, he accuses us, that we deny Christ to be come in the flesh, because we
hold up some part of the Ceremonial Law, which Christ by his death has
abolished, as Tithes, Temples, etc. Here we deny that we hold up any part of
the Ceremonial Law, which Christ by his death has abolished: your instances
cannot prove it: they are but of two sorts, either those which concern the
maintenance of the Ministry, or the places of public worship. As for the
maintenance of the Ministry, we claim and receive it by the Law of the Land,
grounded upon the Word of God, even the Word of the New Testament, as appears
by many places and therefore a just and Christian Law: It is called 1 Cor. 9.
14. an Ordinance of the Lord; The Lord has ordained that they which preach the
Gospel, should live of the Gospel. The Apostle in that Chapter uses many
Arguments, even from God himself, to confirm the equity of it; And shall men
which profess themselves the servants of that God, dare to speak against that
which God has ordained, and so pleads for? Neither are our Tithes and
Offerings any part of the Ceremonial Law: Our Offerings are in lieu of
Personal Tithes, and so all are but Tithes, the right whereof belonged to the
Judicial Law, as the right of inheritance of all the other Tribe^s, so Tithes
being the right of Lovies inheritance: Now the Judicial Law remains still in
force concerning the substance and end of it: as that public peace be
preserved, that the good be defended, the wicked punished, and every man's right
maintained, by them to whom the sword is committed: And if you will affirm
that Tithes were a part of the Ceremonial Law and so abolished by Christ, you
must then show how they were shadows, and whereof they were types, that Christ
has abolished them. As for Ministers living upon the Gospel, you cannot in
plain terms deny that, without open rebellion against Christ; and if Christ
have not appointed how this livelihood should arise, does it not necessarily
follow, that it is left to the Judicall power under which we live? which is
Gods Ordinance, Romans 13. 2. and whosoever resists that power, resists the
Ordinance of God. And whereas you are so much displeased with paying of Tithes,
do but consider that which you cannot but know, that before the giving of the
Law, Tithes were paid to Melchizedek Genesis 14. 20. in his Priesthood: And though
we challenge Tithes as our right, only by that judicial Law, whereby every
man's right is, or ought to be maintained; yet you will never be able to show
that any one thing is abolished, which belong to the order of Melchizedeck;
which order is for ever confirmed in Christ: Heb. 7. 17. Again, the payment of
Tithes is confirmed by Christ himself, being come is the flesh: Matthew. 23. 23.
And therefore it is not any denial that he is come in the flesh, as you
blindly, and therefore boldly assirme,

And why may not that word (...), so, 1 Cor. 9. 14. signify the manner how the
Ministers should live upon the Gospel? even as the Levites did, which was by
Tithes?

Neither think that I thus plead for Tithes, because of the greatness of my
living, or for the love of Money, whereof you afterward accuse us: It is a
subject upon which (to my best memory) I never yet pleaded in the Pulpit,
though justly I might, and having lived now nineteen years in a Congregation
of many hundred people, I never yet sued, or any way troubled any one of my
Congregation for Tithes, or any other dues, although my small livelihood that
way, has come in only by small Tithes; yet I know not what distractions may
arise from such as you, sowing your seeds of distractions amongst them which
formerly lived in peace and love; And if any shall hereafter refuse to pay to
their painful Pastors their accustomed dues, they may justly be suspected to
have tasted too deep of your wild Gourd Pottage, wherewith your Auditors are
so swollen in themselves, and against the Ministry, and cannot perceive death
in the Pot, because they are not of the Sons of the Prophets: But all that I
have said, is to vindicate from your so false and horrible calumny of denying
Christ to be come in the flesh, both the Ministry in receiving Tithes, and the
Magistracy in making and maintaining a Law, for the paying of the same, for
through the Ministry you strike at the Magistracy: but it is a plausible
Doctrine to the multitude, with whom you strive to prevail, first cry down
Tithes, under the name of the Ceremonial Law, then from Christian Liberty cry
down all Law, then from wresting the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 3. 21. Plead your
general right, scrie All things are yours, and so seize upon them; it is the
course which your Brethren in Germany steered before you, you cannot deny it.

The next thing that offends you is our Temples, (as you call them) Consecrated
places for Worship, and ministering in our consecrated places; but why do, you
not call them by their usual names, our Churches, or those names by which you
teach your Disciples to call them our steeple houses? these are your eye sore^,
you cannot look upon them without offense taken, though none given: you cannot
pass by them in your mad humor, without snapping at them: if you like your
chimny corners better, or if you think your Barnes and Hogsties as good, (as
some of you are not ashamed to affirm) please your selves in your choice, and
let us alone with ours, let us not envy one another: But why not consecrated
places for the Worship of God? let but your followers know, that by consecr^ted
places we mean no more, but places sanctified to us for our coming together
for the Worship of God, and they shall quickly discover you; Are not all things
sanctified unto us by the Word of God and Prayer? 1 Timothy 4, 5. and we
acknowledge no other Holiness in these, no inherent Holiness, but only a
relative Holiness, in respect of that use for which they are set apart, even
the public Worship of God: do we not usually call those places profane, which
are as the public Schools and Stages of profaneness? why then may we not as
well call those places holy, which are set apart for the public teaching, and
practice of the duties of holiness? why was that place holy where Moses stood,
where Jacob slept, but because God manifested himself there? And where does
God now so manifest himself as in the public dispensation of his Ordinances?
are not then these places sanctified unto us for this use? you think it decent
in your private house, to have one room set apart of the dressing of your
meat, another for the eating of it, and another for lodging; and is it not as
decent to have one room set apart for the public Worship of God, one house
in a whole Parish? I confess I should account that man but profane, who having
built him a dwelling house, would not pray to God to bless and san(...) to him
and his, for that use for which it was built: and shall any man co(...) ^uch an
height of profaneness, as not to think that house to be sanctified unto us by
the Word and Prayer, which is set apart for the Worship of God? for we account
not of their Consecrations by Holy Water and Popish Exorcismes. If you be
offended with these places, because they were before profaned by Idolatrous
and superstitious Worship, consider that if they be not now capable of
holiness, neither were they before capable of profanation, nor are they any
longer holy or profane, but in and for their use and abuse.

But how come you to be angry with our word Church? surely, if you knew but the
signification of the word, you could not wonder that the people of God, and the
house set apart for those people to meet in, for the Worship of God, should be
fitly called by that one name Church, or Kyrke, which comes of the word (...)
or by contraction of (...), which signifies no more but the Lords, or the Lords
house, now whereas the eart(...) Lords, and all that is th(...) will you not
allow him a house to be called his? not where he may dwell, (...) where his
servants in whom he dwells may meet to serve him, where his na^^ may be
publicly called upon? If you make our Churches a part of the Ceremonial Law,
take heed you do not make all decency and order, and all circumstances of
Worship Ceremonial, and so bring in disorder and confusion.

Thus I hope it will appear to any indifferent Reader, that we deny not Christ
to be come in the flesh, by having places set apart to us for the Worship of
God, or by living upon the Gospel, when we Preach the Gospel: do not you
rather prove your selves worse then the Heathen? they never denied a place of
Worship, even to their Idols.

And do not you plead for them that are given to filthy lucre, in denying a
c^^taine livelihood to them that preach the Gospel? and if your self be a
Minister of England, do you not throw dirt in your own face, when without
exception, you thu^ condemn the whole English Ministry? but I forbear,
because may be you do it ignorantly, I hope this will ere long be your excuse.

He proceeds to accuse us for denying Christ in all his Offices, That we (...)
him to be our anointed Priest and Prophet, in holding up Infant Baptism; and
that we deny him to be our King, because we are not dipped: with many other
abs^^^ities and false accusations, only charged upon us, and not any way
proved. The Apostle commands, not to receeve an accusation against an Elder,
under two or three witnesses: 1 Timothy 5. ^19. Surely then he walks contrary to
the Apostles (...), which lays so many and grievous accusations against all
the Elders of a whole National Church, without any proof.

He accuses us, for holding and teaching that Beleever-Infants have ^ right to
heaven, by a fleshly Covenant. But when did we ever affirm this? where did we
ever teach this Doctrine? It is only the Covenant of Grace that entitleth us to
that Kingdom, not a fleshly Covenant: this we hold, this we teach.

And as for your explication of your accusation, namely, the promise of life in
Christ, belongs to the Believer and his Seed, and the Seed and Posterity of
all the faithful borne within the Church, have by their birth an interest into
the Covenant of Grace, and a right to the Seal of it; we teach no more hereof,
(...) what the Scripture teaches. The Apostle Acts 2. 39. when he exhorts them
all to be baptized, brings in this as a reason, because the Promise is made to
you and to your children, therefore we teach, that the Promise which should
bring (...) Baptism, belongs to the faithful and their seed; the Covenant of
Grace being the same with the faithful now, in respect of the substance of it,
that it was with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7. Even that everlasting Covenant, To be a
God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee. This was the Covenant confirmed of
God in Christ, Gal. 3. 16, 17. Looking upon all that are in Christ as one: ver.
16. This Covenant was not disanulled by the Law: ver. 17. either by the giving
of the Law, or by the taking away the Ceremonial part of the said Law by the
death of Christ: and the Apostle tells us plainly, that all that are in Christ
are one in him, and Abraham's seed and heirs according to the Promise: Gal. 3.
28, 29. So that you must either exclude the Children of Believers from Christ,
or give them the same interest in Christ with their Parents, and so to be in
Covenant with God in Christ, and to have a right to the Seal of the Covenant:
neither do I affirm this to be any fleshly privilege that gives this right,
but the promise of God of his free grace, to be a God to them and their seed,
to show mercy to thousands. For if the root be holy so are the branches, Romans
11. 16. therefore we account the Children of believing Parents holy, 1 Cor. 7.
14. with a federall holiness, and that from hence, that Gods Covenant is to
them and their seed. The Covenant therefore belonging unto them, I see no
reason why they should be denied the initiall Seal thereof, to seal unto them
the Privileges of the same.

Neither does that which our Savior speaks to Nicodemus, any way make
against it, but much for it. That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and
that which is born of the spirit is spirit, marvail not that I say unto you,
that you must be born again Joh. 3. 6, 7. and v. 3. except a man be borne
again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Our Savior would give Nicodemus and
us to understa^d, that we must take heed that we content not our selves in an
outside profession, which the Apostle calls, having confidence in the flesh,
Phil. 3. 3. where the Apostle reckons up Circumcision, as the first part of the
flesh, v. 5. and yet we know, that was the Seal of the Covenant of Grace,
which God made with Abraham and his Seed. As Paul durst not, so Nicodemus and
we must not rest in the outward Ordinance, but in and through these we must
look, at and for, the work of Gods Spirit in our hearts. To be borne of the
flesh, even to have Abraham for their Father, which the Jews so much rested
upon, did but privilege the Jews with the privileges of a visible Church,
which though great, Romans 9. 4. A^ Adoption, and the glory, and Covenants,
whereupon they are called the children of the Kingdom, Matthew. 8. 1. though to
be cast out, the Children of the Covenant, Acts 3. 25. though many of them
believed not. And the children of God, Gen 6. 1. Deuteronomy. 14. 1. though with many
of them God was not well pleased; as Paul calls all them of the Churches of
Galatia, Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the Children of God by faith in Christ Jesus,
though we cannot conceive, but that there might be some Hypocrites in those
Churches: yet as there was, and is, the outward part of the Seal of the
Covenant, and the Inward; the outward, Circumcision of the flesh, and washing
with Water: the inward, Circumcision of the heart and Regeneration; so there
are the outward Privileges of the Covenant, and the inward: The outward
belonging to all that are within the face of the outward visible Church, as to
have Gods name put upon them, to be called his people, and to partake of his
Ordinances, which are the means of Salvation: The inward belonging only to
the mystical body of Christ quickened by his Spirit; and lest we should content
our selves in, and rest upon the outward, our Savior shows us the necessity
of being partakers of the inward part, in the work of Regeneration. Now whereas
all were corrupt and lost in Adam, as well children as others, and flesh and
blood cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, there is required, for the
salvation of children, the renewing of their nature, by the secret work of the
Spirit of God in them, these beginnings of the Kingdom of heaven, being in
them, like a grain of Mustard Seed sown in the earth, which when it is sown,
cannot be seen or found, by them that (...) say where is it? or how shall it
grow? yet he that has sown it, know it i^ there, and though for some time it
lie hid, yet in due time it shall grow up, and bring forth fruit: so are the
beginnings of grace in Infants; therefore they ough^ not to be denied that
Seal, which Christ appointed to be set to that grace, which his spirit works
in regenerating and renewing them, Baptism being the lav^^ of Regeneration. If
the Papists should hear you urge this place against the Baptism of Infants,
they would laugh at you, as being the maine place by which Bellarmine and
others use to prove the necessity of their Baptism: and many reverend Divines
have seen and declared a great force in these words (...) Baptism, but never
any could see any thing in them against it, as f^rre as ever I could either
read, or any way learn. The Spirit of God moving upon these waters of Baptism
in this new Creation, or work of Regeneration, as he move^ upon the waters at
the first Creation; until God create light in us, freeing us from the powers
of darkness, wherein we are by nature; therefore in this particu^^^ hold your
peace, unless you would be ridiculous: We affirm not, that generation can
bring our Children to heaven, being all by nature the children of wrath, but
that the Infants of Believers are the Children of the Kingdom and of the
Covenant, though many of them may be cast out, yet they are within the
Covenant, as the Children of the Jews were, to be partakers of all the outward
visible pr^viledges of the Church; and many of them; even of the Infants of
Believers, are ingraffed into Christ; and shall grow up in him to everlasting
life: this is not to deny Christ our anointed Priest; but for any to deny unto
Infants, the benefit of the Covenant, which is ratified to all that are in
Christ, by his blood; this is as far as I conceive, to deny Christ to be the
anointed Priests for infants, therefore take heed lest judging others, you
condemn your self.

Your next accusation, is, that we deny Jesus the Christ to be our anointed
Prophet, whom we ought to hear in all things, who (say you) teaches, that
none are the subject of Baptism, but such as manifest the belief of their
hearts; by the confession of their lips, and repent of their dead works, yet
we baptize, or (as you say) rather rantize Infants, that cannot confess their
faith, nor manifest their repentance.

But where does Christ teach this which you affirm of him? take heed you be
not found a false Witness against Christ, you produce for your evidence, Acts
8. 38. the Eunuchs example: if Christ teach this your Doctrine in this place,
it is either in direct Words, or by Consequenc: In direct Words it is not, the
Words being only a declaration of matter of Fact; and not doctrinall, let us
see therefore if it may be collected by consequence: and because you have not
laid your consequence, I will lay it for you as strongly as I can. The Eunuch
was baptized upon confession of his faith required of him, therefore none must
be baptized, but such as make confession of their faith: I shall show you the
strength of this consequence, by another of the like nature: A Father had two
sons, the one grown up, the other an infant; the elder asks his Father for
food; his father answers, if he will work he shall have food; thus the elder
upon his profession to work required of him, receives food; does it follow,
that therefore the Infant must receive no food, because he does not make
profession that he will work? this consequence is as strong as yours can be,
and somewhat stronger, because this is backed with a Precept, (which yours
l^cks) 2 These. 3. 10. if any would not work, neither should he ^ate; but you
can no where ^^^d, If any profess not his faith, let him not be baptized. The
like may be said concer^ing repentance: Act. 2. 38. As for rantizing or
sprinkling, I suppose I have already cleared it, that that is baptizing.

It seems this is all you have to say against Paedo-baptisme for the prefers,
till afterward in the close, where I shall find you out: only you are
offended with Mr Bright, and Mr A^iston for preaching: That though there be no
command from Christ, for baptizing Infants, yet there is no command against it,
therefore they may baptize them. I know not whether this was their Doctrine or
not, but I believe none of them would teach, or grant, that Christ gave no
command no for it: you have this but by hear^-say, from some ignorant others:
but that there is command against it, therefore they may baptize them, this
Argument was used by (...) and others, with whom Mr Corn is not worthy nor able
to contest^ Infantes sun^ baptizandi quia unsquam prohibeture the strength of
which reason, depends upon the perfection and sufficiency of the Scripture,
that it contains all things necessary both for knowledge and practice, either
in particulars or generals, either directly, or by consequence, therefore
nothing is unlawful but therein forbidden, nothing necessary either to be
known or done, but therein is revealed and commanded, either you must confess
this, or with the Papists, bring in your unwritten traditions, and set up their
authority upon that Tence of the Scriptures insufficiency.

As for your application well may your soul be sadded at the consideration of
the the place by you alleged: Deuteronomy. 18. 20 if you do but truly lay to heart,
that in this very point, you speak that in the name of the Lord, which he has
not commanded you to speak, when you to say that Christ teaches, that none
are the subject of Baptisms, but such as manifest the belief of their hearts
by the confession of their lips; Christ never taught this, you never learned it
of him, and yet you teach it: do you herein make Christ your anointed Prophet?
look to it.

In the next place, you fly upon us for denying Christ to be our anointed
King, and so for open rebellion against him: and all because we will not be
dipped: we acknowledge but one Baptism, In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, with which we have been already baptized in our
Infancy: and whosoever shall despise that Baptism: wherein he was then
sprinkled, or any way washed with the blood of the Covenant, does he not tread
under foot the Son of God, and count the blood of the Covenant wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy thing? and does he not come near unto offering despite
to the Spirit of Grace, Heb. 10. 2^. which offered unto him Grace in that
initial Seal, and he esteem it not? but we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God; yet I hope you may obtain mercy because you do it ignorantly,
unless this ignorance that is in you proceed from the hardness of your heart:
Ephesians(...). 4. 18 As for your charge of persecution, you can neither tell when,
not whom in particular we have ever yet persecuted, and I suppose our Negative
may pass as well as your Affirmative: if you account our walking contrary to
all men, (which you would fasten upon us) any part of persecution, let any that
is impartial judge whether we, which maintain our Union and Communion with
all the Churches of God, or you and your Sect, which separate from them all,
walk more contrary. But many times, they that are themselves most guilty,
think to excuse themselves by accusing others, Ahab is ready to charge the
Prophet for troubling Israel, when it was himself and his father house.

He proceeds to a relation of his reading concerning the Testaments; He reads
but of one, whereof, the former made, and to be observed by the circumcised
people in their generations, until the time of Reformation: now if he
understand the Books of the Old Testament, Moses and the Prophets, that they
were to be observed only by the circumcised people, and only till the coming
of Christ, he will thereby prove himself Heretical: Romans 3. 31. Ephesians. 2. 20.
but if he understand by Testament, the Covenant which God made with his people,
then he may read of the Covenant which God made with Noah and his seed after
him: Genesis 9. 9. the Covenant which he made with Abraham and his seed: Genesis 17.
7. the Covenant which God made with his people Israel, when he took them by
the hand, to bring them out of the Land of Egypt; Jer. 31. 32. And the new
Covenant, promised to the house of Israel, and the house of Judah: Jer. 31. 31.
Which is that new Testament, under which we now are: Heb. 8. 8. Heb. 9: 15. Now
then if Mr Cornewell have read the Scriptures, he has read of more Covenants
then two, or must acknowledge some of these Covenants to be one and the same:
and from which of these Covenants can it be collected, that the Seal of the
Covenant does not belong to Children with their Parents? does not the form of
them all run, to them and their seed, the Children of Israel, the house,
without any exception of children? And seeing he must needs have one lash more
at Infant Baptism, he takes it from a distinction of I know not whom, as if
there were one promise for the Father, and another for the Seed, whereas we
teach, that the same Promise belongs to the one and the other, both the
Father and his seed included in that one promise of the Covenant, I will be thy
God, and the God of thy seed.

And whereas Mr. Cornewell lays it down as a ground, that only the
Circumcised Israelites should keep the Passover, his collection from hence
surely is most false, that hence the Covenant of circumcision was given at once
to Abraham, and all borne in his house, and bought with his money: surely it was
not hence, that Abraham was circumcised, that he should eat the Passover,
which was not instituted in many years after Abraham's death: And whereas he
urges one way for admittance of the father and his seed, from hence, that
Abraham and all his were circumcised the same day, does this make any thing
against the baptizing of children, when their Parents are baptized? let any
indifferent Reader judge if this does not make for the admission of children
with their Parents, as we affirm?

In the last place he urges the Baptism of Infants to be contrary to our
Covenant, to oppose all Popery and Popish Innovations, and so will make this a
Popish innovation. Where, first let him remember, that we are as well tied by
Covenant, to endeavor the extirpation of all Heresy and Schism, and let him
first clear himself of these, before he accuse us of the other: but let us see
how he will prove this to be a Popish Innovation. He tells us, we join with the
Apostate Fidus, and the Council of the 66 Bishops in the days of Cyprian. If
Fidus were alive to answer for himself, he would return to Mr. Cornwell the
name of Apostate, and content himself with his old name Fidus, by which he
has bin known these 1400 years; and whereas the title of Priest is cast upon
him, as a reproach, it is no other then Presbyter sotranslated by Mr. Cornwell;
and if it be accounted an Innovation, to join with 66 Bishops, and that
glorious Martyr Cyprian, faithful Pastors assembled together in the Primitive
times, and that in the received doctrine and practice of the Church of God,
continued from the Apostles, (as Origan and Augustine witness concerning the
Baptism of Infants) which has so good warrant from the word of God against a
Sect sprung up within less the one hundred and thirty years, first spread by
St^rkins in Germany; if (I say) to join with these, in this, be Innovation,
then let us be accounted Covenant-breakers.

But let Mr. Cornwell, or his adherents show, when ever in the Primitive times
the Baptism of Children was not in practice in the Primitive Church, or else
no body of a sound mind can believe it to be an Innovation.

The question from Fidus to Cyprian was, not whether Infants were to be
baptized, or not, but whether or no they were to be baptized before the eighth
day, because Baptism succeeded in the room of Circumcision. To this, Cyprian
with 66. Bishops assembled together, answered in his eighth Epist. lib. 3.
Quantum ad causam infantium pertinet, quos dixisti^intra secundum vel tertium
diem, quo ^atisunt constitutos baptizari non oportere, and considerandam legem
esse circumcisionis antiqu^; (...) ^ntra octavum ^iant, cum qui natus est,
baptizandum and sanctificandum non put (...), long^aliudin concilio nostro
omnibus visum est: in hoc enim quod tu putaba^ esse faciandum, ne^o consensit,
and a Baptismo and gratia prohiberi non debet infans receus natus. None agreed
to the not baptizing of Infants, but were all of another mind, even that
children, though newly borne, were not to be kep^ from Baptism. This was then
the Doctrine and practice of the Church, and how can you have the face to
affirm, that it was left arbitrarie, till in the time of (...) the third, it
was ratified by a Deor^^ under the penalty of Excommunication: you ha^^ been
already lasht, for (...), and dare you persist? you cannot but know that this
is a mere falsehood of your own invention, if you do but open your eyes, and
look into any Antiquity, but you think none of your Congregation can discover
it, then do matter. Innocent the third lived about the year 1198^ Math.
Palmerii (...) and (...), You have taken a leap of above 900 years to join
Cyprian and Innocent together.

When you say, By this Act of Fidus, and the Council of 66. Bishops, and the
Decree of Innocen^ius the third, the National Churches have trodden the holy
City of Believers in Jesus Christ dipped, under fo^t (...) 42 Months, which
reckoning a day for a year, may (...) 1260 years, Rev. ^1. 2. From whence do
you take your Computations of (...) 1260 years? if from Cyprian it will amount
to more by above one hundred and thirty years, if from Innocent, not (...) so
much by above 800 years, and you cannot reckon from Fidus or Cyprians time, for
your self confess that in their time, and a long season after, until
Innocent the third, baptizing of infants was held an arbitrary thing, and
therefore that was no trampling of any under foot; for if arbitrarie, all had
their liberty; therefore your account must be from Innocent the third, whom you
give us both in Figures and words at length, lest any should think you were
mistaken: and here sure you come short of your reckoning above 800 years: will
you not confess your self here at fault? tell your Congregation you were
mistaken, and let them for other things trust you accordingly.

But let us see if it were left arbitrary till Innocent the thirds time. I
suppose you know, that the Decrees of Counsels were so binding, that they left
nothing a^bitrary which they bound under the penalty of Anathema, you may find
a Decree in the Milevitan Council many hundred years before Innocent the
third, Quicunque parvulos recentes ab uteris matrum Baptizandos negat Anathema
(...) Whosoever denies Children to be Baptized, as soon as they are borne, let
him be Anathema. Was this to leave it Arbitrarie? And if it had been
Arbitrary, yet from thence it appears, that it was the practice of the Church
in those Primitive times, even whilst under Persecution, neither can Mr.
Cornwell or any other show when ever the Baptizing of Infants was not in
practice in the Church of God.

And whereas he requires Actual faith and repentance, as necessary to
Baptism, he cannot but know that faith and repentance are as necessarily
required in Scripture phrase to justification and salvation, as to Baptism,
Luke 13. 3. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish, Romans 3. 28. A man is
justified by faith, Mark 16. 16. He that believes not shall be damned. Now if
the want of Actual faith and repentance, (even in the judgments of
Antipad^baptists themselves) do not debar Children from justification and
salvation, why should it debar them from Baptism? And seeing that the
blessing of Abraham is come upon the Gentiles even the Covenant of grace, which
God made with Abraham, not abrogated, Gal. 3. 15. 17. but continued and
confirmed to all that are in Christ as Abraham's seed, verse twenty ninth; For
that Covenant or Testament which the Apostle speaks of as the old Testament
abrogated, was not in reference to the Covenant made with Abraham, which was
the essential Covenant of Grace, but in reference to that Covenant which he
made with the Israelites, when he took them by the hand to lead them out of the
Land of Egypt, as appears, Heb. 8. 8, 9, 13. which as the same Apostle
explaining himself, tells us, stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings,
and carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9. 10. Which were outward Ordinances annexed to
the Covenant, for its manner of Administration, yet called by the name of the
Covenant, even as Circumcision also is called the Covenant, though but a Sign
or Seal of the Covenant, by a Metonymie of the Adjunct: these outward Adjuncts
are only abrogated, as it stood only in these: but the substance, I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed, continues still firm: God then having
ordained a Law, that Children should be within the Covenant, and have the
initiall Seal of the Covenant, Genesis 17. let them show where the Law is
repealed, that Children may not have the initiall Seal, as well now under the
Gospel, as under the Law; unless Children be by the coming of Christ
debarred from some manifestation of Gods grace to them, which before they were
partakers of, as to be members of the Church, and to have the initiall Seal of
the Covenant, which Baptism is to us, as Circumcision was to them, even a
Seal of the righteousness of faith, Rom 4. 11. Baptism succeeding in stead
of Circumcision, Col. 2. 11, 12. where the Apostle tells them, they are
complete in Christ, not wanting Circumcision, being Baptized, as is to be
collected from that place. As also Children belong to the kingdom of God, Luke
18. 16. and how can we let them come to Christ, but by Baptism? So likewise
the children of Believers are holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. and the promise belongs to
them, Acts 2. 39. and they were Typically baptized in the Cloud, and in the red
sea, 1 Cor. 10. 2. and we have Christ's command for Baptizing all Nations,
Matthew. 28. 19. And the Apostles examples for Baptizing whole Families, without
any exception of children, which are a great part of a Nation and Family, and
not one word in Scripture against the Baptizing of children; therefore I can
see no reason, why Children should not be Baptized; and whosoever shall
despise that Baptism, which they received in their Infancy, despise the Blood
of Christ, which was therein offered unto them; and unless they repent of
their heinous sin, they may justly fear, that God has given them over to
strong delusions, and have great need to pray, as we shall be ready to pray for
them, that if it be possible, this their wickedness may be forgiven them, that
they may return from their wanderings, and come home to that great Shepherd,
into his own Fold, to hold the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace and
love; to the praise of the glory of Gods Grace.

The New Testament ratified with the blood of the Lord Jesus, is the Magna
Charta of believers in Jesus the Christ dipped; by which they are justified to
be no Heretics.
Certain Positions subscribed by Francis Cornwell, a believer in Jesus Christ
dipped; to be tried by the Doctrine of Christ, whether they be Heretical, yea
or nay.
Position 1.
THat there is no salvation for any man or woman, save in the Lord Jesus Christ
only, Act. 4. 12. There is salvation in none other. For there is none other
name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved.

2. That the New Testament is the last Will and Testament of Jesus the Christ,
ratified with his own blood, and given to the Church of believers, in Jesus
the Christ dipped, together with all the promises, ordinances, privileges, and
the inheritance therein bequeathed, (the Testator Jesus being dead) is now in
force to all believers in Jesus Christ dipped. And no men, nor powers, (by what
name or title soever distinguished) under the pe^^l^ie of an Anathema
Marana^ha, (for not loving the Lord Jesus Christ) may add to is, o^ (...) from
it; lest they dis-anull the everlasting Testament of the Lord Jesus, which is
to continue until Christ's second coming to restore all things, Rev. 22. 19.
Luke 22. 20. This Cup is the New Testament in my bloodshed for you, viz.
believers in Jesus the Christ dipped.

These Positions being granted, which I cannot see how otherwise under the
penalty of a curse they can be denied;

First then, it will necessarily follow, That no man, nor woman, according to
the Scriptures, of the New Testament, can be saved, except they believe in
Jesus the Christ, and be dipped, Mark. 16. 16.

He that believes (in Jesus the Christ) and is dipped, shall be saved. But he
that believes not ( viz. in the Christ) is damned; because there is salvation
in none other, Mark. 16. 16.

Concerning the salvation of the elect (whom he will save in mystical Babylon,
even in the darkest times of Popery and Superstition;) we meddle not with:
because secret things belong to God; and revealed things contained in the
inspired Scriptures of the New Testament, belong to us.

Secondly, no man, nor woman, is a fit subject to be admitted into the Church
of believers in Jesus Christ, to continue in the Apostles-Doctrine, and
fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayer, according to the Scripture-record
of the New Testament; unless he or she believe in Jesus the Christ, and be
baptized: or, more properly in English, dipped, Act. 2. 41. They which gladly
received his word, were dipped, and the same day were added to them, (viz. the
congregation of Christ gathered, consisting of an 120 persons in one place,
both of men and women, Act. 1. 4, 15.) about 3000 souls. And they continued
steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship in breaking of bread an^
prayer.

These things being thus premised; I hope it will appear plainly to every
loyal English Covena^ter, that stands for a Reformation in England,
agreeable to the word of the New Testament, ratified with the blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ: That believers in Jesus the Christ dipped, are no Heretics, as
M. Whittle, Minister of East-Maling in Kent, and his brethren, do affirm in
public they are: For these ensuing Reasons.

1. The Congregations of believers in Jesus the Christ dipped, do confidently
affirm in all their teaching; that there is no salvation, save in the Lord
Jesus the Christ only, Act. 4. 12.

2. That Jesus (who was crucified, dead, and risen, through whom we that
believe, receive remission of sins, and are justified from all things from
which we could not be justified by the law of Moses, Act. 13. 39.) even I say,
that Jesus in whom we believe, and preach, is exalted to be the Christ, as holy
Paul affirms, Act. 17. 3. and Peter, Act. 2. 36.

1. The Lord Jesus is the Christ; in English, Anointed of God, to be our high
Priest, that offered his own body in sacrifice to take away our sins, Heb.
10. 10, 14. and that ever lives to make intercession for us, Heb. 7. 5.

2. He is the Christ, in English, Anointed of God, to be our Prophet (whom the
Father of glory commands us to hear) Matthew. 17. 5. Hear him.

Peter tells us the extent how far, in all thing whatsoever he shall say unto
us, Act. 3. 22.

Else the danger follows, It shall come to pass, that every soul which
refuses to hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from amongst the people,
Act. 3. 23.

He is the Christ; in English, Anointed of God to be our King, whom the Father
of glory has exalted to be the highest power in heaven and earth, Ephesi. 2.
20. Matthew. 28. 18. 22 Christ himself acknowledges: therefore every soul must
be subject in spiritual things to this highest power. For whosoever resists
this power, resists the ordinance of God: and they that resist, receive to
themselves (for not obeying the voice of the everlasting Gospel, that cries to
them to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus for remission of sins,
Act. 2. 38, 39, 40. compared with 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.) damnation.

Hence it is that we poor despised believers in Jesus the Christ dipped, own
Jesus the Christ to be our eternal high Priest, that manifested his love to us
in the Covenant of Free grace, to dye to take away our iniquity (who were
sometime foolish and disobedient, etc. Tit. 3. 3.) and ever lives, to
reconcile us to the Father of glory. This love discovered, caused us to hearken
to the voice of Jesus our Anointed Prophet; for his voice is lovely: And when
he revealed to us, by his word and good Spirit, that none was the subject of
baptism; but such as believe in Jesus the Christ, and repent of their dead
works. When this truth was revealed, we hearkened to the voice of Christ only,
as his sheep ought to do, Job. 10. and regarded no more the voice of a
stranger, the Pope, the Bishop, the Priest. Nay when Christ was discovered to
be our King, and that we were but as Rebels, until we did obey his command,
when he by his good Spirit discovered what his commandment was, namely, that
we which believe in Jesus Christ, must repent and be dipped in the name of
Jesus Christ: the love of Christ our King constrained us to arise and be dipped
in the name of Jesus Christ: as we find 3000 at one time gladly received his
word and were dipped, Act. 2. 41. Yea, and Saul and the cruel Jailer, being
instructed what duty Christ required of them, arose and were baptized: Seeing
it is written for our everlasting consolation, Christ to become the author of
eternal salvation to them that obey him. Heb. 5. 8.

Now M. Whittle, seeing you and your brethren, the English Ministry,
acknowledge, That there is no salvation but in Jesus Christ alone, Act. 4. 12.
it is your duty to prove, that the same Jesus whom you say you preach, is the
very Christ: namely, that you own him in all your practices and ordinances,
your Anointed Priest, Prophet, and King; lest by denying Jesus the Christ, you
discover your selves Antichristian, 1 John 2 22. Now M. Whittle, though you and
your brethren confess Jesus to be the Christ, with the lips, yet by your
practices you deny him in all his royal Offices.

Namely, first, they which hold up any part of the Ceremonial Law, which
Christ by his death has abolished, deny Jesus the Christ to be come in the
flesh: But you, M Whittle, and your brethren the English Ministry, hold up
some part of the Ceremonial Law, that Christ by his death has abolished; as
Tithes, Temples, viz. Consecrated places for Worship, Offerings, and
Priesthood, to receive Tithes, and Minister in your Consecrated places:
Therefore you deny Jesus the Christ to be come in the flesh, whatsoever you
seem to profess to the contrary.

Secondly, you and your brethren hold and teach, that beleever-infants have a
right to heaven by a fleshly Covenant: Namely, the promise of life in Christ,
belongs to the believer and his seed, and the seed and posterity of all the
faithful borne within the Church, have by their birth an interest into the
Covenant of grace, and a right to the seal of it; Baptism, (which you say) is
a seal of the infants ingrafture into Christ, and union with him,
Regeneration, Adoption, Remission of Sins, and Life Eternal. Which Doctrine
of yours contradicts the Lord Jesus Christ, who tells Nicodemus, a form of
believing Abraham, and borne within the Church of the Jews, and circumcised
the eighth day. That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is
borne of the Spirit, is Spirit, Marvel not that I say unto you; that you must
be borne again, Joh. 3. 6. So that by the Doctrine of Christ, who is Truth it
self, and cannot er^e, (though M. Whittle, and the whole English Ministry
may,) that it is not generation, nor any fleshly privilege, can give the
Infant of a believer an interest into the Covenant of grace, but Regeneration.
Do you not M. Whittle, by this your Assertion, deny Christ your Anointed
Priest; that, (according to the Scriptures) purchased eternal life for
believers? Act. 10. 43. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Again, M. Whittle, you and your brethren deny Jesus the Christ to be your
Anointed Prophet, whom you are to hear in every thing he shall say unto you,
or your souls must perish, Act. 3. 22, 23. Now Christ teaches, that none are
the subject of baptism, but such as manifest the belief of their hearts, by
the confession of the lips, That the Lord Jesus is the Christ, Act. 8. 38. And
repent of their dead works, Heb 6. 1. Act. 2. 38. yet you baptize, or rather
rantize Infants, that cannot confess their faith in Christ, nor manifest
repentance from dead works.

Yea, M. Whittle, some of your brethren, as M. Bright, M. Aliston, and others,
preach and publish; though there be no command from Christ for baptizing
Infants, yet there is no command against it; therefore they may baptize them.

Now truly, Sir, my soul is sadded to hear what they affirm, knowing what
is written, Deuteronomy. 18. 20. That Prophet which shall presume to speak a word in
my Name, that I have not commanded him to speak: Even that Prophet shall dye.
So that your souls are in danger of wrath (my learned Contrymen,) if you
have not commandment from Christ to warrant your Infant baptism.

Moreover, M. Whittle, you and your brethren deny Jesus Christ to be your
Anointed King, in that you yield not obedience to his Gospel-Commandement;
namely, Repent and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ,
for remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Spirit, Act.
2. 38. (Seeing they are the first Gospel Commandments with promises,) and for
your rebellion against the Crown and Dignity of King Jesus, and your
disobedience in not obeying the Gospel of the Lord Jesus; you can expect no
other but to be punished with everlasting perdition, 2 Thessalonians. 6. 7, 8 9.
unless the good Lord persuade you to change your mind, and be dipped in the
Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of your sins, which are very grievous
before the Lord.

First, your sin of persecution; For you persecute them that contend for the
faith of the Lord Jesus Christ in truth, that you seemingly profess: so are
abominable and disobedient, etc. Tit. 1. 1. 16.

Secondly, you stand out In rebellion against the Crown and Dignity of Jesus
Christ, And would not he should reign over you, Luke 19. 27. These mine
enemies that would not I should reign over them, bring them hither, and slay
them before me.

Thirdly, the blood of the righteous, that have contended for the faith of the
everlasting Gospel, once given to the Saints; (that keep the Commandment of
God, and the faith of Jesus, Rev. 14. 12.) cries from heaven for vengeance
this day against you, who now walk in the steps of the high Priest, and
Pharisees of old, who killed the Lord Jesus, and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, and please not God, and are contrary to all men, forbidding us
to preach the Gospel to the Nations, that they may be saved, to fill up their
sin always, for the wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost, 1 Thessalonians.
2. 15, 16.

But if you have hardened your hearts through the love of money, which is the
root of all your evil; Yet good Lord open the understanding of the multitude
of the people, (that you have so long deceived by your pretended holiness, and
humane learning) that remain in mystical Babylon; yea, and give them a true
knowledge to depart from them, and not be partakers of sin, denying the Lord
Jesus the Christ: Yea, and the good Lord convince them, that they have been in
the number of them that have persecuted the Lord Jesus in his members (that
have contended for the faith of Jesus Christ) though they did ignorantly,
through unbelief: so that they may trembling cry out, What shall we do?

Oh let thy good Spirit direct them ^ to repent of their dead works, and be
baptized every one of them in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ for remission
of their sins; yea, and give them the gift of thy holy Spirit, that they may
willingly forsake their spiritual Egypt, the pleasures and profits of this
world: And choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season: yea, and esteem the reproach for Christ,
to be greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt; knowing there is a
reward of glory said up for them in the highest heavens, Heb. 11. 26.

M. Whittle. I read in the Scriptures but of two Testaments:

The first was made by the circumcised people of Israel, and ratified with the
blood of Calves and Goats, etc. And Moses sprinkled both the Book, and all the
people, saying, This is the blood of the Covenant that God has enjoined you,
Exodus 24. 6, 7, 8. compared with Heb. 10. 19, 20. This Testament was to
continue, and to be observed by the circumcised people in their generation,
without any alteration, either by addition or dimunition under the penalty of
a curse, until the time of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10. Namely, until Christ the
substance of all the shadows was come, and crucified, Ephess. 2. 14, 15.

2. The second, or New Testament, ratified with the blood of the Lord Jesus,
with all the Promises, Ordinances, Privileges, and the Inheritance therein
bequeathed, (the Testator Jesus being dead) is now in force to believers in
Jesus the Christ dipped, and is to remain till Christ comes again to
restore all things. And no man or powers (under the penalty of Anath^ma
Maranatha) may add to it, or detract from it, lest they dis-annull this last
Testament, Rev. 22. 18, 19.

These things being thus premised, you may, (God enlightening you) easily
discern the vanity of that distinction that is now in use amongst you of the
English Ministry, by which you deceive your simple hearers; namely, that there
is one promise belongs to the gathering of a Church, and another promise
belongs to a Church gathered: First, they say, Abraham was called and
circumcised, and then his seed after him was to be circumcised. So say they,
when God calls his Church from Jews and Heathen, they must first believe and
repent before they are baptized: But when the Church is gathered, then (say
they) the promise belongs to the believer, and his seed, and the seed or
infants of believers are to be baptized.

Now that you may see the vanity of this distinction; Moses, that was
faithful in all his house, as a servant, lays down the subject matter who
should worship God in Israel, and keep the Passe-over, and the Ordinances
thereof; namely, the circumcised Israelites. Hence the Covenant of circumcision
was given at once to Abraham, and all borne in his house, and bought with his
money of any stranger which was not of his seed: Every male amongst them must
be circumcised the eighth day, or else they must be cut off from the people;
the Covenant was broken. And it is said of Abraham, that he circumcised
himself and Ismael his son, and all borne in his house, and bought with his
money the selfsame day that God commanded him, Genesis 17. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14. So Genesis 17. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27.

And, If a stranger will keep the Passover to the Lord, let all his Males be
circumcised, and then let them come near and keep it: For no uncircumcised
person shall ea^e thereof, Exodus 12. 48. So that there was not on^ way for the
admittance of the father, and another for the seed, but one way for both; and
it was to be a token in their flesh for an everlasting Covenant: namely, that
(...) keeping the Law, should have the Land of Canaan for an everlasting
possession, Genesis 17. 8, 13.

But when Israel changed this subject matter; she is called a rebellious house,
because she brought in strangers uncircumcised in flesh, and uncircumcised in
heart to eat of his bread, and pollute his Sanctuary. And God charge them to
have broken his Covenant, Ezekiel. 44. 6, 7. compared with Genesis 17. 14. Exodus 12.
48. So the Lord Jesus that was faithful in all his House, as a Son, which
house, are we believers in Jesus Christ dipped, Heb. 3. 6. lays down, how
his Church should be gathered out of all Nations: namely, by preaching the
everlasting Gospel: and who shall be baptized; namely, every creature in every
Nation that believes in Jesus Christ, and repents of his dead works, seeing
the New Testament holds but one Lord Jesus Christ, one Gospel-faith, and one
Baptism: So that a believer in Jesus Christ dipped, is the subject matter to
worship God in his spiritual house of the New Testament; and no man under the
penalty of a curse, might alter it, Gal. 1. 8, 9.

And as the Prophet was not to show any of the Israelites that had broken the
Covenant, in admitting strangers uncircumcised in flesh to come into his
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 44. 6, 7. until they were ashamed of their abominations: But
if they were ashamed of all they had done, then they were to show them the
form of the house, and the fashion thereof, the going out thereof, and the
coming in thereof, etc. Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11.

Neither can you expect (O you that are of the English Ministry,) that the
Lord Jesus (...) show you the beauty of his spiritual House, and the catring
in there at, and the O^d(...) thereof, [So long as (contrary to your Covenant
to oppose all Popery and Popish In(...) and to see a Reformation agreeable to
the Word of God) you join with the Apostate (...) the Priest, and the Council
of the 66 Bishops, in the days of cyprian; yet in their time, and a long
season after they held baptizing of infants as an arbitrary thing; until it
was after ratified by ^ Decree in the time of Pope Innocentius 3. under the
penalty of E^communication for all N^^^nall Chruches under the Popes
Jurisdiction; to observe: Namely, that baptism of infan^s of believers should
succeed circumcision. And by this Act of Fidus, and the Council of 66 Bishops,
and the Decree of Innocentius the third; the National Churches have ^roden the
holy C^^^^^ believers in Jesus Christ dipped under foot, ne^re 42 months;
which, reckoning a day (...) year, may amount to near 1260 years, Rev. 11. 2.]
unless the Lord of his free mercy open your (...) with the eye salve of his
Spirit, and make you ashamed of all your Traditions of infant baptism, whereby
you have enrighted a wrong subject to the Promises, Ordinances, Priviled g^^
and Inheritance of the Spiritual house of the New Testament. And when the Lord
by his good Spirit shall convince you of all the evil you have done in
Persecuting Christ in his Members, (...) contend for the Gospel faith: and
especially for oppos^^g the Lord Jesus in his Kingly and P^^ph^ticall Offices
in all his outward administrations in admitting of Members into the spiritual
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus: Namely, by repentance from dead works, confession
of faith (...) Jesus Christ, and baptism; which are the three first principles
of the Doctrine of Christ, which all the members of the Churches of Judea,
which were in Christ, took up and practiced before they were added to the
spiritual house in breaking of bread and prayer, Heb. ^. ^. Act. 2. 41. So
that you trembling, cry out, What shall we do? The holy Spirit, (by Peter that
sp^^^eth) will tell you: Repent, and be dipped every one of you in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the
gift of the holy Spirit: Then so many of (...) as shall gladly receive his
word, shall be dipped, and shall be added to the Congregation of believers in
Jesus the Christ, to continue in the Doctrine we have received from the
Apostles, (...) in Sain^s fellow-ship (that keep the Commandment of God, and
the faith of Jesus, Rev. 14. ^^. and in breaking of bread and prayer, Act. 2.
41. 42.) and have a right to all the Promises, (...) ledges, and Inheritance,
that Jesus Christ, according to his New Testament, has purchased (...) you
that obey his Gospel, Heb. 5. 8.

Yours, who is adjudged as Heretics by you; but because he refuses to keep
the Traditions of the Elders: but will rather observe the Commandment of
Christ, (as the Pharisees of old upbraided Christ's own Disciples, Matthew. 15.
2.) yet prays, that God would open your understandings, that you might
understand the New Y^stament, Christ has ratified with his own blood, that
ye might not sin against his mercies, and his members; lest you stay your
own souls. Francis Cornewell.

FINIS.

