THE VOICE of WISDOM, UTTERED Forth against Antichrists folly and deceits, and
the freeness of Gods Love to the Creature, and the effects of his
Righteousness in his people truly discovered.

1 Concerning the Light of Christ within. 2 Of Perfection in this Life. 3 Of
Justification, how it is known. 4 Of the Scriptures, and the use of them.
And this is in Answer to a Book, falsely Titled, The Quakers folly made
manifest to all men. Given forth by Tho. Danson, a Priest at Sandwich in Kent,
who having begun his Book with a Lie, he has added to it many false
Principles, and Doctrines in his Book, touching these things aforesaid; which
Principles are generally held forth by the Priests in England: But are here
plainly confuted, and the cause of the Innocent (whom he has falsely accused)
cleared, according to the Scriptures of Truth.

By a Friend to them that Regard true Instruction, and a witness of Christ's
Righteousness, George Whitehead.

Behold, he travelleth with Iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought
forth falsehood; he made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch
which he made, Psalm. 7.14, 15. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull
and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

Reader,
IN the fear of the Lord, according to the movings of his Spirit, it was upon
me, to give forth this following Treatise, as being occasioned by reason of Th.
Dansons imperfect and confused Relation (Title the Quakers folly made manifest
to all men) which he has given forth, chiefly against Sam. Fisher, Geo.
Whitehead, and Richard Hubberthorn, touching three Disputations which they had
with the said Priest, about certain weighty matters of Religion; about which
now, to clear himself of his false doctrines, and confusions, he was manifest
in at the disputes, he has further both wronged them and the truth, sometimes
in laying down things in their names which they never spoke, and oftentimes
diminishing from their words, and making false constructions of them; as also,
he has added to his former false doctrins, absurdities, and self
contradictions both in his said Relation, and in a pretended Answer, he has
given to R. Hubberthorns Book, titled, The Difference of that call of God to
the Ministry, etc. And besides, this Priest has wrested several Scriptures by
his false meanings, and interpretations; and therein is the said Priests
principles (concerning the light within, perfection, and justification) which
generally are maintained by the Priests of England, answered, and clearly
confuted by the truth; and the innocent cleared from the lies, and false
aspersions published by the said Thomas Danson, in his said Relation and
Answer. And this my answer is given forth for the truth sake, in love to the
simple hearted, that they may be instructed, and their doubts resolved, which
being read in simplicity, with a single eye toward God, and his way, something
may be added to the readers understanding: and here he may see, that the pit
which the wicked has dug for others, he is fallen into himself, Prove. 26:
27. Eccles: 10: 8.

And Reader, I advise thee, let no secret prejudice nor envy lodge in thy heart
against us, but mind the gift of God in thee, which brings out of strife, and
hard thoughts into the meekness and lowlines of mind; and then thou may the
better understand the truth, and see the difference betwixt us, who witness of
the life of Christ in us, and the Priests and Professors of the world, who are
out of Christ's life, and then try all things, and hold fast that which is good,
1 These: 5:21:

G. W.

THE VOICE OF WISDOM, AND TRUTH Uttered, etc.
THe Wisdom and discerning which the Lord God has revealed by his Spirit in
his people (called Quakers) stands over all the folly of the World, and over
all the subtilty and deceits of the Wisemen and Merchants of Babylon; who by
their subtilty and deceits have perverted the simple, and made Merchandise of
souls, as these Priests do, who have been fighting with their Inventions
against us and the Truth, which we are raised up to vindicate, by the power and
spirit which has discovered unto us their deceits and subtilty, and whereby we
have overcome them hitherto, when they have made war against us both in words
and writings; because that greater is he that is in us, (who makes war for us)
then he that is in the world ruling in these false Teachers; and where we are
here charged with folly, That shall lie upon his and their heads (who have
falsely charged us therewith) as those that are guilty; as the proud, covetous,
heady, high-mindedmen, and the fierce despisers were whom the Apostle charged
with these things, 2 Timothy 3.9. And we see that these proud and covetous
Priests, their folly is so far already made manifest, that they can proceed no
further in their subtilty against the Truth then they have done; but their
folly will be manifest, for I find that this Priest, Tho. Danson, has brought
no stronger Arguments against what we profess then many of his Brethren in
iniquity have done heretofore; but in many things the very same, only he has
added more to his and their iniquities, in spreading his false Doctrines, and
false Accusations abroad, and in laying down several things in our Names which
were never held forth by us, called Quakers: But blessed be the Lord our God,
who has endued us with power and wisdom from on high, that such subtle Foxes
cannot hide themselves in all their holes and dens, from that eye which the
Lord has opened in us, and which he is opening in many thousands, who shall
see the shame and nakedness of these who have caused people to err in the
times of ignorance and darkness, which the Lord God is redeeming his people out
of, into his mavelous light and wisdom which all they shall have right unto,
who are mindful of his appearance in his light and power, who hearken to his
counsel, as those that are willing to be led by him.

And now to thee Tho. Danson, who falsely have called thy self a Minister of the
Gospel (as hereafter will appear) and who has laid false things to the charge
of the Innocent, as is also here made manifest: Where in thy Epistle to the
Reader, thou say, Had thou considered the likelihood of the Quakers
Printing, which would necessitate thine, thou think thou should have waved
any discourse with them, but Repentance is now too late, etc. So then it
appears thou wast not willing to have thy deeds brought to light, nor thy
Doctrines to public view, but wast afraid to be made manifest as many of thy
Brethren have been, and are; and it appears then, that what thou have done in
thy disputing with us is to be repented of, but now Repentance is too late, as
thou confessest; and thou say, Thou chose rather to out-word us, which is
the reason why thy Answers are oftentimes so large and laxe. So here thou have
resolved in thy own will to out-word us, but thy words shall be thy burden,
and thou have here discovered what spirit thou art of, who with thy multitude
of words, which darkens counsel, and perverts the simple, have gone about to
manage deceit, and those things which are to be repented of; which are not of
the truth, and it is well, if Repentance be not too late for thee, as thou
say; but if thou had been in that Spirit which the righteous are led by,
thou would have used fewer words, and to more purpose, and more seasonable
then thou have; for in striving in thy will to outword men, thou have shown thy
self one of them whose lips the Lord will cut off, whose tongue speaks proud
things, who have said, With our tongue we will prevail, our lips are our own,
who is Lord over us? Psalm. 12.3, 4. And also in thy Narrative upon thy agreeing
to dispute with us; In a loose or disorderly Discourse) which falsely thou have
charged us with) which thou wast resolved to speak to us in, (as thou have
confessed) That the Devil might be beat at his own weapon, and outshot in his
own bow, etc.

Ans. To which I answer, Then its evident that thou have taken up the Devils
bow to shoot in, and have shot in the Devils bow, as hereafter appears; was
ever the like? Did ever any of the Gospel Ministers seek to out-shoot the Devil
in his own bow? Nay, The true Ministers made war against the Devil, with the
sword of the Spirit, and with the weapons of God which were mighty through
Christ, to the casting down of strong holds, and spiritual wickedness in high
places, 2 Cor. 10.4. Ephesians. 6.11, 12. So they did not shoot in the Devils bow, as
this Priest has done: And truly its no marvel that these Priests, and their
Hearers are so sinful as they are, and plead so much for fin, against
perfection and freedom from sin in this life, as they do; seeing that the
Priests are but shooting in the Devils bow yet, whereby they can never slay the
Devil, nor cast down wickedness, but still he being alive in them, his work
(which is fin) remains in them, and they are in his work, and while they shoot
the Devils bow, they shoot against the truth, and against such as are in it, as
the wicked do, who shoot their arrows, even bitter words against the righteous.

And now omitting many absurdities, and unsavory words, and impertinent matters
in this said Tho. Danson the Priest his Book, which are not worth the
mentioning: I shall in short Answer some of his Principles and Doctrines;
whereon the stress of his whole matter depends; together with some lies he
has shot out of Devils bow against us, in laying down his own words in our
names, and answering his own words which he counts ours, which we never spoke.

I. Concerning the Light of Christ.
THomas Danson the Priest says, The Lights mentioned, Viz. Natural, and
Supernatural Light, are two, and though all have the one, yet but few have the
other.

Answ. The Life of Christ is the light of men, and that is not natural, but
spiritual; and he is the true light which inlightens every man that comes into
the World, John 1.9. so if they be come into the World, they are enlightened by
Christ; which light brings salvation to them that love it, and condemnation to
them that hate it; and thou might as well count the life of Christ natural, as
count it so, for it is the Life that was in Christ, which lights every man in
the World; John 1.4, 9.

Tho. Danson. And where thou have charged R. Hubberthorn with saying, That the
true Light has not come over, and comprehended thee.

Answ. That Is false; he said no such thing, for I was present, and heard what
he said; for the Light has comprehended thee, but thou art not come into it,
nor have comprehended it; for darkness comprehends not the Light, though the
Light shines in darkness, John 1.5.

Tho. Danson also has charged us with consenting that the knowledge of the
Gospel is vouchsafed by Christ to every man.

Answ. No such thing did we consent to, as that every man had the knowledge of
the Gospel, but that there were some in darkness, and yet that which might be
known of God was manifest in them, Romans 1.19. So their ignorance of the Gospel
does not argue that they had not that Light in them that was able to bring them
to know the Gospel (which is the power of God) but rather that they disobeyed
the Light of God in them, and liked not to retain God in their knowledge, Romans
1.28. And as for that of Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his
Statutes and Judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation, and
as for his judgments they have not known them: So then this makes for what I
said, for that may be shown or given to people which they know not, and then
the light of Christ (which was before these statutes and judgments were given
to Israel,) is given to many who know not the Mystery of it, because they abide
not in the paths of it, Job 24.13. And this Priest in saying, That by the
words, statutes and judgments are meant the supernatural light or knowledge of
the Gospel; here he has confuted himself, for if these statutes and judgments
were the knowledge of the Gospel, why did Israel not know them, who had them?
And if these Statutes and Judgments recorded in the Scriptures which Israel
had (which many others had not) were the knowledge of the Gospel; then he might
as well say, That the Scribes and Pharisees who had them, and read these these
Statutes in the Scriptures, had the knowledge of the Gospel, when as on the
contrary they knew not Christ nor the Gospel, which is but one (though his
Kingdom was in them) and him has God afforded a light to the Nations, and an
Ensign to the people, and the Nations of them that are saved shall walk in his
light, both of Jews and Gentiles, who are enlightened by him without exception,
Isai. 42.6. and 49.6. Rev. 21.24.

Tho. Danson says, As for that Scripture, Romans 2.15. it is spoken of the natural
light, for it is opposed to the knowledge of the Jews; and the words are not the
Law, but the works or effects of the Law, written in their hearts.

Answ. Nay, that is false, it is spoken of the work of the Law; which Law was
written in the Gentiles hearts, and this Law was spiritual, and not a natural
Light, as this Priest says, and the nature by which these Gentiles did those
things contained in the Law, was according to the Law; here is no natural Light
spoken of in that Scripture, Romans 2.15. which makes for us, that they that were
not Jews, but Gentiles also had the Law of God, which is spiritual, written in
their hearts, whether they were excused or accused?

Tho. Danson, Christ was not to be a Light to them, till his coming in the
flesh.

Answ. What then was Christ's presence in the flesh among all the Gentiles whom
he did inlighten? what darkness is this? seeing his out goings have bin from of
old as said the Prophet, and he is the foundation of many Generations, and Rock
of Ages, Mica. 5.2.

And if this Priests words were true, what became of all these Gentiles that
died before the days of Christ in the flesh? were they condemned because they
had no Light of Christ given them, (dare he say) or because they disobeyed the
Light which they had?

Thomas Danson brings the 2 Cor. 4.6. to prove that there are some to whom the
light of the Gospel does not shine, and Matthew. 13:11: and Luke 10:21: that it
was given to the disciples to know the Mysteries of the kingdom, not to others.

Ans. Here he has perverted that of 2 Cor. 4.6. for it does not say that the
light of the Gospel does not shine unto them, but that the God of the world
has blinded the minds of them who believe not, least the light of the
Glorious Gospel should shine unto them; which if the light were not in them,
how could he seek to hinder it from shining to them? for that is his end (who
blindes the minds of the people) to keep them from seeing the Light, that it
might not shine unto them; but he cannot hinder the light from inlightening
people, though he and his ministers seek to keep people in blindness, from
seeing it in them, and from believing in it; yet it does shine in their
darkness: And as to that of Matthew. 13.11. The cause why it was not given to
some to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom, was because they closed their eyes
against the light, Matthew. 13.15. which manifests, that it sometimes opened
them: whereby they might have known those Mysteries, which were hid from the
prudent of the world, who did shut their eyes against the light in them, as
thou have done, who contendest against it is being in them, who see it not; and
as for the minds of some being alienated from the life of God, that proves
nothing against the light of Christ being in them, but for it; for if their
minds were estranged from it, then it was in them, Ephesians. 4.18.

Tho. Danson has denied that Christ dyed for all; Counting the phraise, (page
6.) Christ Inlightens every man: (Indefinite, as he does the other: Christ
tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.6.

A. Let the Scripture it self stand a witness against this Priests false
Doctrine and meannings he adds to the Scriptures; for the Scripture says
Christ died for all, and tasted death for every man, and that Christ is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
world, 2 Cor: 5:15: Heb: 2:9:1 Ioh: 2:2: But this Priest says Christ dyed for
a certain number, only for those that were converts and Believers. So whether
should we believe the Scripture, or Thomas Danson, who so flatly contradict
one another, and where the Scripture says Christ inlightens every man that
comes into the world, Joh: 1:9: this Priest says, The meaning of those words
cannot be as the letter of them does import.

Again (the Priest has contradicted himself in page: 8: he says) I do not
pretend to power, to give meanings to Scripture, by adding any thing to the
Scripture which is not in it, but to find what already is, by causing the
Scriptures with the Cherubins to face one another.

Ans. That's false, for thou have given meanings which are not in the
Scriptures, and so art to be reproved for adding to thewords of the Lord, Pro.
30.6. in thy giving such meanings as the letter does not import (as thou
confessest) and so being unestablished in the light, thou wrestest the
Scriptures to thy own destruction, not seeing the difference of the states and
conditions, which the Scriptures are spoken to; so thou would make the
Scriptures disagree with themselves; in thy saying thou must reconcile the
Scripture to it self: and telling of causing them to fate one another when as
the Scripture cannot be broken, Joh. 10.35. And before ever thou, or any of you
understand the Scriptures aright, the light which gave them forth, you must
come to feel, and own in your selves, which will reprove your deceits, and vain
imaginations, and appears to convince you thereof: and to condemn you for your
perverting the Scriptures, and making a trade of them, and selling your falls
meanings for money to the people, though many of the hearts of you priests are
so hardened and your consciences so seared through your covetuosness, pride and
deceit, that you know not the appearance of the Light of Christ in your selves;
though it does often appear and break forth upon the unjust to condemn them, so
that you not knowing the light in your selves, by your dark spirits and earthly
minds you contend against it in others; and you shut up the Kingdom of God in
people, as the Pharisees did, who shut up the Kingdom of God against men, and
would neither enter in themselves, nor suffer others to enter: and so your
preaching and praying for all to come to Christ and be saved is of none effect,
for its out of the faith, while you do not believe that all are are enlightened
by Christ, nor that Christ dyed for all men, for you do but flatter and mock
the people, whilst you persuade them to lay hold on that salvation which you
do not believe that ever they may atttain to. And what do you preach to in
people which must receive the word, and lay hold upon the Gospel, if they all
be not enlightened by Christ? And what is it that must Reveal Christ in them
who are in darkness, and blindness, if there be not a light in them which
inlightens their darkness, and discovers their blindness to them before they
can see out of obscurity, or see their light shining out of darkness?

II. Of the doctrine of Perfection in this life, which is opposed by the
Ministers of Antichrist.
THomas Danson says; page 9. Your Doctrine of Perfection is against the tenor
of the Scripture (and to prove it, he has given his meanings) and brings that
of Job 9.20. If I said I am Perfect, my mouth shall prove me perverse, ( page
10.) Phil. 3.12. and 1 John 2.2. when he appears we shall be like him (to wit
Christ) and Heb. 9. ult: And he says, (p. 11.) the perfection Paul denies, is
the state of the Resurrection which is to be without sin, etc.

Answ. Here he has wronged the Scriptures, for there is no Scripture that
says that perfection is against the tenor of the Scriptures, for God
commanded Perfection, Genesis 17.1. Deuteronomy. 18.13. The Prophets of the Lord Preached
Perfection, that they might have their sins taken away and be washed from all
their filthiness, and do no iniquity: (which was a perfect freedom from sin)
Psalm: 37: 37: Psalm: 119: 1, 2, 3: Ezekiel: 36: 25: And Christ commanded his to be
perfect as their heavenly father is perfect, and the Apostles preached
perfection and wisdom among them that were perfect, and preached to present
every man perfect, and said, be Perfect, be of one mind, see Matthew: 5: 48: 1
Cor: 2: 6: 2 Cor: 13: 11: Colos: 1: 28: And Paul denied not the State of the
Resurrection as this Priest has accused him; for he said if ye be risen with
Christ, mind those things which are above; And Paul denied not freedom from
sin as he has accused him; for Paul said, Now being made free from sin, and
become the servants to God, Rom: 6: 18: 22: And in that Phil: 3: 15: he says,
Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded: And that of Job 9: 20,
21: proves not that Job was not without fin, when God had delivered him out of
that Affliction wherein he said, If I say I am perfect, my mouth shall prove me
perverse, though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul? I would despise
my life: But after this, Job was Girded up in the power of God, and his
Righteousness and Innocence did shine with the Lord, and he was perfect and
feared God. And the Saints witnessed Christ's appearance in them without fin
unto Salvation, for they were saved from sin by Christ; and John speaking of
Christ, said as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4: 17: So they did not
put cleansing from sin, nor perfection a far off, as these Priests do who are
Ignorant of that birth which is born of God, which whosoever is born of,
sins not; neither can the wicked one touch him: so then he has not power to
lead him into sin, because he is born of God, and is kept by the power of God,
1 John: 3: 9: chap: 5: 18: which before that state of freedom be witnessed,
there is a time of Pain in travel, and of suffering in Temptations and Trials,
which these blind Guides not seeing, would lay sin to the charge of Gods
Elect, who is born of God, and has overcome the wicked one; so away with the
Priests false meanings which are for sin and Imperfection in this life, for
they are quite against the Tenor of the Scriptures.

T. Danson says, p. 12. A Believers person with his works are accepted with
God, though his works be not perfect.

Answ. Here he would have the believers like the Priests, who sin in the best
of their performances as they confess; but to confute his error herein, I say
the believers works are wrought in God, and God has wrought all their works in
them, Isai. 26.12. So these works of God which true believers witness are
perfect, and the believers have ceased from their own works which were
imperfect, and are come into Gods works which are perfect.

Thomas Danson says, p. 13. Let me hear what answer you can give to that
Scripture which has run much in my mind against this Doctrine, There is not a
just man upon earth that does good, and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. We say
indeed that no such just man as Solomon speaks of is to be found on earth, but
in heaven.

Answ. The Conversation of the Saints is in Heaven, Ephesians. 2.6. Phil. 3.20. and
they are redeemed from the earth, and from the vanity where Solomon saw all
things in the days of his vanity; in which state all were sinners, and there
is a just man that perishes in his righteousness, Eccles. 7.15. but there is a
just man that walks in his Integrity, Prove. 20.7. And he that does
righteousness is righteous even as Christ is righteous, 1 John 3.7.

Thomas Danson, We are one body with them in Heaven, and have the same title
with them in possession, p. 14. and 38.

Answ. This confutes his former words, for they that are one body with them in
Heaven, are Members of the body of Christ, which is perfect, and its members
complete, Col. 2.10. Ephesians. 3.15. to the end.

III. Concerning Justification.
WHereas S. Fisher spoke of our good Works (as they are wrought in the Spirit)
being a meritorious (or deserving) cause of Justification; this Priest has
made much ado about it to prove that S. F. is a rank Papist, and to prove it,
he (the Priest) says, Our good works are but imperfectly good; and Isai. 64.6.
All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.

Answ. Samuel Fisher never affirmed that imperfect works, and the righteousness
which is as filthy rags, do deserve Justification, as this Priest has wronged
him and the truth; but good works, which are the fulfilling of the Law, which
is wrought in us by Christ, (as he has wrought all our works in us, and all
his works are perfect) these are discerning Justification, for they are
justified as being ordained of God, Ephesians. 2.10. and see thou. how Faith
wrought with his works, and by works was Faith made perfect, Jam. 2.22.

And this Priest has in page 15. confessed, That good works, which are the
fulfilling of the Law deserve salvation, and that the desert of obedience
arises from the dignity of the Subject by which it is performed. So then this
makes for what S. F. declared, for here it appears then that obedience to God
is deserving, and upon true obedience there is promises given. And further I
say, that without the Spirit and power of Christ to lead the creature, there is
no obedience that can be performed, either deserving, or acceptable to the Lord
God; so that still these works which are deserving a promise of God, are the
works of Christ Jesus in us, and through us; so his spirit and power which is
the cause of these works, is that which justifies in them.

And page 16. Where Justification within by the Spirit of God was proved by 1
Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified,
but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our
God: To this the Priest has given his meanings to prove that we are not
justified by the Spirit or righteousness of Christ within; in these words, Viz.
Priest. I might say, that perhaps the clause should be referred to
sanctification, as if the order of the words had been, but ye are sanctified by
the Spirit of our God, (and he brings his transposition for it) from Mat. 7.6.
Give not that which is holy to dogs, neither cast your pearls before swine,
least they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you; (where
says he) turn again, and rent you, is to be joined to the dogs; or else
justified by the Spirit, may be meant of the Spirits application: I mean, the
third Person in the Trinity, not of the work of grace, whereof we are the
subject.

Answ. Here you may see how he has given two meanings to one place, and what
folly has proceeded from a Teacher, as in his instancing Dogs and Swine, for
his matter of Justification, as he did at the dispute with us, speaking of
Justification being Referred to the name of the Lord, and not to the spirit,
from the 1 Cor: 6: 11: as his instancing the Dogs returning to Rent, and not
the Swine (when as the Swine are not only known to trample under foot, but
also to rent and tear) and here he would divide the spirit of God from the name
of Jesus, when as his name and spirit are one; his name is called the word of
God, and the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, are one, Rev: 19: 13: and 1 John:
5: 7: And where does he prove, that Justified by the Spirit (which he
ignorantly calls the third Person in the Trinity) is not the work of Grace?
here he would divide the Grace of God from the Spirit, was there ever such
confusion? for the Saints were Justified freely by his Grace, which was one
with the Spirit.

Priest: (page 16.) For the Apostle assents the holiness of man's nature as a
work of the Spirit, conforming it to the Law, to be the meritorious cause of
our freedom from sin.

Answ. And yet he has denied Good works of obedience to be a deserving cause
of Justification (see his confusion:) what, is not Justification a freedom
from sin? See Act: 13: 39: And where does he prove that the holiness of man's
nature is a meritorious cause of freedom from sin? seeing it is the same
Spirit which frees man from sin, and brings him and his nature into
conformity to the Law of Righteousness, through its Sanctifying, and
Justifying him from the transgression of the Law.

Thomas Danson says, ( page 17.) from Romans 8.4, 5. It imports the end for
which God sent Christ, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us: not in our own persons, but in Christ; his righteousness Imputed to us, as
if it had been inherent in our selves.

Answ. Here again he has perverted the Scripture by his false meaning, as if
the Apostle had meant quite another thing then he spoke, when as if the Apostle
had not meant the Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in their own persons, he
would not have said fulfilled in us; neither would he have counted Christ's
righteousness Inherent in themselves, if he had not counted it in them (as this
Priest does) and the Apostle needed not speak of the Righteousness of the Law
being to be fulfilled in Christ, (as if it had not been fulfilled in Christ)
but that it might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after
the spirit, Romans 8.4. so away with these false meanings, this Priest has given.

And to S. Fishers speaking of degrees among believers, as in 1 John 2.13, 14.
This Priest Danson says, I suppose that you mean that some of these have a
mixture of sin with their Grace.

Answ. This is a false supposition, for the Grace of God which the Saints have
is pure, and not mixed with sin; for the mixture of sin is in that which goes
from the Grace.

Thomas Danson says ( page 18.) to S. F. you maintained that our Justification
was by personal fulfilling of the Law, and now you Grant some persons to be
Justified, who never did fulfill it personally.

Answ. In both these sentences he has wronged S. Fisher: for that which he
vindicated was what the Apostle witnessed, that was the Righteousness of the
Law, being fulfilled by the spirit in the persons of believers, without which
work of the spirit in them, they were not Justified.

Thomas Danson (page 19.) says: And Conscience in the Saints being but in part
cleansed, as a witness it testifies falsehood to them also: in that their
estate is bad, when it is good.

Answ. See the folly and confusion this man is in, who would lay fals-hood and
badnesse to the charge of the Saints Consciences, and their good estate, as one
that calls good evil, Isa. 5.20. but the Consciences of the Saints witnessed
truth to them, and not falsehood, for they witnessed Sanctification throughout,
in body, soul, and spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. and, holiness perfected in the fear
of God.

Thomas Danson says (page 21.) As Christ was made sin for us, so are we the
Righteousness of God in him: but the former was by Imputation, not Inherence;
and therefore so the other.

Answ. This proves nothing against being Justified by Christ's Righteousness
within; but rather against him that has perverted that Scripture, 2 Cor: 5:
21: for if our being made the Righteousness of God in Christ, be but like
Christ's being made sin for us, (as this Priest Imagins) then he might as well
say, that we shall have no Righteousness of Christ in us, neither must we do
Righteousness at all; for Christ was made sin for us who knew no sin, (neither
can he sin) that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, in whom
their is no sin: so that men are not made the Righteousness of God in Christ,
while in their sins, but as they are translated into Christ through death,
being baptized into the death of Christ, by putting off the body of the sins
of the flesh; for Gods Righteousness is pure without sin, and so are the
believers made his Righteousness, See Rom: 6:4, 5, 6, 7: Col: 2:11, 12: 1 John:
3:5, 6.

Priest, And to prove two Righteousnesses of Christ, this said Priest says, do
you think that the Righteousness, which the Apostle calls his own was not
Christ's?

Answ. See this man's ignorance of Christ's Righteousness which the Apostle
desired to have, and not his own, Phil: 3:9: Now he that counts the Apostles
own Righteousness, (which he denied to have) Christ's Righteousness, he might
as well say that the Apostle desired not to have Christ's Righteousness, which
is but one; but herein his folly is discovered.

And whereas at our dispute, Thomas Danson denied that the Saints were
Justified by that Christ that was in them: now to excuse his matter, he says,
he will Answer me more punctually; and his Answer is, ( Priest page 22.) The
Scripture by Christ within us, understands not the person of Christ, but his
operations, the cause is put for the effect by a Metynomy; Compare Collos.
1.26. Christ in you, with Ephesians. 3.17. that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith, and therefore it follows not that we make two Christ's.

Answ. To deny that the Saints were Justified by that Christ within, is to
Preach two Christ's; seeing he has owned that Christ is in them. And to say
that the Scripture by Christ within us, understands his operations: what
darkness is this! where did ever the Apostle say that the operations or works
of Christ, are Christ? or put a Metonymy upon his words as thou have done? (who
falsely have called that a word too hard for my Capacity:) And Faith,
Repentance, Regeneration, are opperated (or wrought,) by Christ; but does the
Scripture say that Repentance is Christ, or Regeneration is Christ? this Priest
has made it appear that he neither rightly knows Christ, nor his works, who
discernes not the one from the other.

And again, he has confuted himself (the Priest in page 23. he says) The
Scripture speaks of two Christ's: Christ Personal, and Christ Mystical; if I
should say, not Christ Mystical, but Christ Personal is our Savior, would you
not speak wisely think you, to say, Oh! you make two Christ's; this distinction
you may find; and to prove a Christ Personal, he brings Colos. 2.8, 9. and
Christ Mistical, he brings 1 Cor: 12:12:

Answ. He has here perverted these Scriptures, in going about to prove two
Christ's, which before he denied; and in denying Christ Mystical to be our
Savior: for Christ is but one and the same for ever, who is the Mystery hid
from Ages and Generations, Christ in you the hope of Glory, Col: 1: 27: and ye
are saved by hope, Rom: 8: 24: And Christ says, I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one, etc. Joh: 17: 23: So now they that heard
Thomas Danson at the dispute, deny that he Preached Two Christ's, may now see
that he has preached two Christ's, and how therein the Truth has contradicted
him, and where this said Priest in George Whiteheads name says,

Priest; I will prove by the Scriptures, that we are Justified by our
Sanctification.

Answ. In this he has wronged Geo: Whitehead, as in several other things, for
the words were not so spoken by George Whitehead, but what if the words had
been so spoken? Christ is made to us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification
and Redemption, and by this Christ are we Justified, and no other, 1 Cor. 1.30.

IV. Concerning the Scriptures.
Priest, THomas Danson has gone about to prove the Scriptures the word of God,
and the rule of Faith and Life, (and in page 29. he says) their is no other
standing rule but the Scriptures.

Answ. The Word of God is in the heart of every one that believes in Christ,
and such are taught how to walk by that Word, or Anointing in them; and that is
their standing rule, and the Spirit of Truth leads them into all Truth; and
of this Word or Spirit, (which this Priest has showed his Ignorance of) the
Scriptures are a true declaration, but are not the Word, or Spirit, though
Words of God be Recorded in them; and if there be no other standing rule but
the Scriptures, as this said Priest ignorantly has affirmed, Then what was
their rule, who spoke forth the Scriptures? and what was the Gentiles rule, who
not having the Law, yet did those things contained in the Law? Rom: 2: 14: and
what must be their rule, who cannot read the Scriptures? they have souls to be
saved as well as others, and are not to be condemned because they cannot read
the Scriptures; but if they be disobedient to the light in them, which
manifests in them the righteous Law of God, then they are condemned: and do the
Priests believe that all that could not read the Scriptures without, were
without a rule, and were all condemned, seeing thus they have affirmed no other
standing rule but the Scriptures, which by the Scriptures they cannot prove.

Priest, Joh: 20: 30, 31: And many other signs truly did Jesus, in the
presence of his Disciples, which are not written in this book, but these are
written that ye might believe, etc. Suppose that we had the signs which are
not faithfully Recorded in writing; yet were they not our rule, because God did
not give order for them, but has assured us, as much as is sufficient to
create, and preserve faith in the Gospel, which we have.

Answ. So then, he having owned no other standing rule of Faith and Life, but
the Scriptures, in these his words, he intendes these Scriptures that are upon
Record, are sufficient to create and preserve Faith in the Gospel; which how
false this is, its easy to see, for faith is the gift of God, not created and
preserved by the Scriptures (though they were written to be believed) but by
Christ the author of faith, and this is the work of God, that ye believe in
him whom God has sent, Joh: 6: 29: And again, this Priest in his affirming no
other rule but what we have Recorded in Scripture, if the fignes that Christ
did, were all faithfully Recorded (which are not) he has plainly contradicted
himself, in page 44. in his saying, that those things that were not written
might have been useful, if they had been written, for they were done for the
very same end, with those which are left us, etc. so then many things that are
not written in Scripture might have been as useful, as that which is written in
the Scriptures, if they had been Recorded; See the confusion of these Priests,
that profess the Scriptures, which are Recorded to be the word of God; and the
only rule of Faith and Life; and how therein they deny the leading of the
Spirit of Truth, and its sufficiency.

Priest, says, As for your participation of the Infallible Spirit (if that
were granted) that inferres not a participation of the Spirits infallibility,
page 32.

Answ. This tends to divide the Spirit from its infallibility, as if such as
partake of the Spirit, do not partake of its infallibility, was there ever such
folly as this? seeing that the Spirit of Truth leads them that partake of it,
into all Truth, which is infallible.

Priest. As for our want of infallibility, it is no valid plea against our
Ministry, page 33. and another such a like Doctrine he has laid down in page
46. that the Spirit of God may accompany a Ministry, and the Minister not have
the Spirit, and to prove these he has brought Acts 20.17. also of your own
selves shall men arise speaking perverse things, etc. and Matthew. 23.2, 3. the
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, etc.

Answ. His falsehood here Appears plainly, for they that want infallibility,
and have not the Spirit of Christ, they are out of the Truth, and are fallible,
and their Ministry is not of the Spirit, seeing they speak not from the Spirit,
but from their own hearts, which are deceitful, where they want infallibility;
so out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks: And how can ye being
evil speak good things? Matthew. 12.34. and they that ran, and the Lord sent them
not, they profited not the people at all, Jer. 23. and the Scribes and
Pharisees, and them that spoke perverse things against the Apostles, the Spirit
did not then accompany what they ministered; they being out of the Spirit.

Here follows something in answer to what the said Thomas Danson has replied
to Richard Hubberthornes Paper, Tituled, the difference of that call of God to
the Ministry, etc.
PRiest says, None of my people can set to their seal that my Ministry has
brought them to a perfect man. It Is readily granted, Nor was the Ministry
intended for that end, (page 35.)

Answ. This is false Doctrine, for the true Ministry, was for the perfecting of
the Saints, till all come into the unity of the Faith, and the knowledge of the
Son of God unto a perfect man, Ephesians. 4: 11, 12, 13. So that Ministry of theirs
which is not for the perfecting, is a false Ministry.

Priest. My words were, that the Gospel is an external light as that of the sun.

Answ: That also is false, for the Gospel is the power of God, which is
invisible, Rom: 1: 16: 20: and not external as the light of the Sun: for that
is created, but the Gospel is Eternal.

Priest. That I denied, that the Saints were justified by that Christ that was
in them: To which he replies to Rich. Hub. Thou love lying, rather then to
speak righteousness, Psalm. 52.3.

Ans. Rich. Hub. has not belyed thee at all, for when I asked thee whether the
Saints were justified by that Christ that was in them, yea or nay, thou
answeredst no, as many heard thee; so seek not to blind people with covering
thy errors, as now thou would in pretending that it is but one and the same
Christ that justifies and sanctifies, wherein thou have flatly confuted thy
self; for if it be the same Christ that justifies and sanctifies, then its but
one and the same righteousness which effects both these, in and for the
Saints: And see how again, thou have contradicted thy self in owning but one
Christ, when in page 23. thou have plainly affirmed two Christ's, Christ
personal, and Christ mystical, and so have showed thy self to be of Antichrist,
for the Saints preached but one Christ which was in them, their hope, and he it
is, whose fullness is through all, filling all things; so he that preaches
another Gospel or Christ, then the Saints preached, let him be accursed, Gal.
1.9.

Priest. The righteousness which God works in us, is but finite, as well as
other effects, p. 39.

Ans. And yet this said Priest in p. 37. has owned that the righteousness
whereof Christ is the subject, and that whereof he is the efficient, are of one
species (or kind;) see his confusion; then I say the righteousness which God
effects in us, is not finite but infinite; for Christ is Gods righteousness,
and Christ is formed in us, Gal. 4.19. and so that righteousness which God
works in us by his Spirit, its of the same kind and nature with that which
works it, for the Saints are made partakers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
which this Priest being ignorant of, he confutes himself, and such would divide
the justifying righteousness from being in the Saints, and would make that
righteousness in them but finite, when as Christ his infinite righteousness,
and the Saints, are in one another, in one Covenant; and he that sanctifies,
and they that are sanctified are one, Heb. 2.11. and whatsoever God does, it
shall be for ever, Eccles. 3.14. then Gods righteousness in us, is not finite,
but infinite.

In page 40 and 41. (the Priest says) I affirmed, and do among those that hear
the Gospel, salvation is offered, to more then to whom it is intended: I should
rather think our preaching is to more purpose, because we know not who are
elected, for the ignorance of that gives us a ground to hope well of any man.

Ans. Here people may see the Priests Ignorance concerning Salvation, and how
their hope is grounded upon their Ignorance; but Christ is Gods salvation to
the ends of the earth, offered to all men, with an intent that they might
believe and be saved; and for them that are condemned, it is not because
Salvation was not intended of God for them, but because that when Salvation was
offered and intended to them, they believed not in it, as a promise of entering
into Gods rest may be left unto a people, and yet they not enter into the rest
because of their unbelief, Heb. 4. And men are not condemned, for want of
having a saving light given them, or because God has before purposed their
destruction, and thereupon deprived them of saving grace, (as the Priests
imagine) but this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and
men loved darkness rather then the light, John 3.19. And Christ came not to
condemn the world, but to save the world; so that these Priests who are
ignorant of the elect, and have their hope of any man's welfare grounded upon
that Ignorance, their hope is a false and a blind hope, for how can they hope
well of any man, when they know not who are elected, and do not believe that
salvation is intended, as free for all men? so herein have the Priests largely
made manifest their blindness, and their blind hope, and their preaching and
praying for people to be of none effect; for if salvation be not free, or not
intended for all, to what purpose is the Priests bidding all their Hearers lay
hold upon Christ, and putting them all into a hope, for that which they say was
never intended for many of them? but herein is their ignorance and blind hope,
which they strive to beget people into plainly manifested; for the true hope is
not grounded upon Ignorance, but in that spirit whereby the precious is
discerned from the vile, and the sheep known from the goats, by the true
Shepherds and Ministers.

Priest: That the Spirit was not wont to be effectual without the Letter, or
that he wrought upon the souls of men, in and by the Letter of the Word, and I
gave you that instance, Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
Word of God.

Ans. He might as well have said, That the Apostle Paul's Ministry was not wont
to be effectual, as to say, That the Spirit was not not wont to be effectual
without the Letter; for Paul was not a Minister of the Letter (or Writing) but
of the Spirit, or of the thing declared of, 2 Cor. 3: 6. and as for that of
Rom: 10: 17: that hearing comes by the Word of God, that is against this said
Priests principle, for there is a difference between the Word and the Letter;
The Word lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet: 1:23. so does not the Letter; and
the Spirit was wont to be effectual among the Saints, Patriarcks and Prophets,
before the Letter was written or given forth; and the Spirit or Word was
effectual among the Gentiles, who had not the Law or Letter of it, (outwardly)
so how Ignorant these Priests are of the Spirits efficacy, all that know it may
easily judge, and how would they ever convince the Turks or Heathens of Christ
with their preaching, if the Spirit be not effectual without the Letter?

Priest. That the works of Christ in some respect are not perfect, I spoke
these words in reference to sanctification, which I affirmed to be imperfect in
this life, p. 44.

Ans. Here he has falsely charged the works of Christ with imperfection, for
all the works of God are perfect: And by one offering God has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10: 14: And Christ perfecteth the work
of sanctification in them that believe, as Christ said; Sanctify them through
thy truth, thy word is truth, and the glory which thou gave me, I have given
them that they may be one, even as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one, see John 17.17, 21, 22, 23: and the Apostle
witnessed to a sanctification throughout in body, soul and spirit, 2 Cor. 7: 1:
1 These: 5: 23: and Christ is come thoroughly to purge the floor, so that his
work of Sanctification is not imperfect, as this Priest has falsely affirmed,
but perfect:

Priest: Not every gift of God is perfect, page 44:

Ans: Here has the Spirit of Antichrist appeared, which has not only accused
the Saints, and the work of Christ with imperfection in this life, but has so
accused some gift of God with not being perfect, when as every good and perfect
gift comes from God, Jam. 1.17. Then what gift of God is it that he esteems not
perfect?

Pr. The Gospel gives life upon imperfect obedience.

Answ. And yet before, he denied our good works of obedience to be a deserving
cause of Justification, when now were his words owned for truth, then imperfect
obedience is so far deserving, that the Gospel gives life upon it, (where is
the rank Papist now) but here also he is in Error; for the Gospel gives life
upon believing in the light, which is the work of God; and the work of God is
perfect, says Christ, He that believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall
he live.

Pr. To prove Tho. Rumseys false doctrine, which was, That we preach a doctrine
of Devils, in saying, that men may be free from sin in this life; (this Priest
says) David was not free, from the being of sin, but a sad instance of the
power of it in real Saints, and yet he was a pattern to New Testament Saints,
Zech. 12.8.

Answ. That Scripture, Zechariah 12.8. does prove both Tho. Rumseys, and Thomas
Dansons doctrines false; for the words of that Scripture are these, In that day
shall the Lord defend the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and he that is feeble among
them at that day, shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as
the Angel of the Lord, before them: So then if David was made a pattern to New
Testament-Saints, and the house of David be as God, yea as the Angel of the
Lord; then was David and the New Testament Saints freed from sin, for in God is
no sin, and then real Saints had not the power of sin remaining in them, as
Tho. Rumsey and Tho. Danson has accused them to their own shame, in counting
that a Doctrine of Devils, which was the Saints Doctrine, who witnessed a
washing from all filthiness, Ezekiel. 36.25. And Paul witnessed to a freedom from
sin, Romans 6.18, 22. and for calling this Doctrine a doctrine of devils, God
will call Tho. Rumsey and Tho. Danson to an account, and they will never be
clear from the guilt of their blasphemy herein without Repentance; and I
believe that all people that fear the Lord that see this, will see their
doctrine to be a doctrine of Devils, in their pleading for sin, and counting
that to be a doctrine of Devils which they that were of God owned, and which
all must come to witness, who ever come to be saved, for there is no unclean
thing must enter into Christ's Kingdom; therefore people must either expect
freedom from sin in this life, or never, for it was the unbeleevers that died
in their sins, John 8.21.24. and there is no hope in the grave, but as the tree
falls, so it lies, and every one shall be rewarded according to their deeds
done in the body; and the soul that sins it shall die; but blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord, for their works shall follow them; and they that die
in Christ, die in him in whom there is no sin.

And now Tho. Danson, whereas thou have made much ado in thy lying Narrative,
about a man that accused a Minister, for saying that Sam. Fisher had received a
Pension from the Pope at Rome, and thy cavil is, about the man's being mistaken
concerning the Minister: To which I say, if thou were not a man that rejoycest
in iniquity, thou would never have so far rejoiced in that man's weakness, as
to publish that thing again, since the man confessed his mistake and weakness
in laying it upon the wrong party; which if thou would as well confess thy
Errors as he did his, there were the better hope of thee, that thou would
forsake thy errors and lies, and thine and thy hearers lightness and
profaneness was plainly then made appear to your shame. And whereas thou
confessest, That it was the Minister of Staple; Viz. Mr. Robert Wilkinson (as
thou call him) that so accused Samuel Fisher (behind his back) with
receiving a Pension from the Pope, and thou go about to maintain this
accusation against Samuel Fisher, in thy saying its as probably true, etc.

Now that accusation against Sam. Fisher do I return back again upon thee, and
that Priest of Staple, as an invented lie, and a slander of your own; and God
will judge you for it, and Samuel Fisher, and all who know his innocence and
freedom from having any fellowship with the Pope, or his corrupt ways, may
witness against thee, and the Priest of Staple, to be liars and slanderers (in
this thing mentioned) so to be in the work of your Father the Devil: And here
it is evident thou have shot in the Devils bow, as I told thee before,
(according to thy own words) and in the latter end of thy matter thou tellest a
Story to move the Reader to laughter (as thou say) yea thou have largely
manifested thy folly, and thy light spirit who would move people to madness,
Eccles. 2.2. And that thou art one of the false Prophets, who by their lies and
lightness made the people light and vain; and where thou have several times
spoken to us, as if we were put to silence, or our mouths stopped at the dispute
with thee; it appears herein thou would make people believe, as if thou put
us to silence with thy Arguments, but thou may remember it was otherwise;
for several times when I, or Richard Hubberthorn should have spoken, the
Magistrates and others of thy hearers made such a howling, and a hideous noise,
(whose iniquities thou partookst of, in joining in thy lightness with them)
that we could not be heard speak; and other times with thy lightness, thou
stirred up lightness in them; and at the first days dispute with thee, when I
began to answer thee, after Sam. Fisher had spoken to thee, thou offeredst to
go away several times, because I spoke; And at the latter days dispute, when
thou wast ensnared whilst I spoke to thee, some of the Magistrates threatened to
break up the meeting, if I would not lay down the Dispute, and let another take
it.

Priest. And whereas thou accusest Samuel Fisher with being silent, and
thereupon interpretest his silence to be consent to the horrid Arrian blasphemy.

Answ. The same false accusing Spirit in this Priest, would have accused Christ
with being guilty of blasphemy, when he was silent, and opened not his mouth,
before his accusers, the Jews and chief Priests. And as for the rest of Tho.
Dansons torn confused language, and several more lies, and false accusations in
his Book and Narrative (which I could further make manifest) I let them pass as
things not worth answering, but to be trampled under feet by them that are in
the light, which discovers all such blind Watchmen and Shepherds that cannot
understand, whose nakedness and shame the Lord God is discovering to the
simple-hearted; and if Thomas Danson, or any of his brethren in iniquity,
proceed to broach their lies, confusion, and slanders against the truth, or
against us who own it, as in his pride and enmity he has done in his confused
Book, they may truly expect that the Truth will further make manifest their
folly and deceit.

And now that they that desire any further to see more of Thomas Dansons
Doctrines, which he affirmed at the Disputes with us; to the matter of which
Doctrines this foregoing Treatise contains an Answer, and which are Answered
and Confuted in Richard Hubberthornes book, Titled, (The difference of that
Call of God to the Ministry, etc.) they may see and consider his false
doctrines as follows; and see how unfit, he is to be counted a Minister of
Christ, and how unlikely he is to convert any to Christ, while he preaches
such Doctrines.

1. Priest. Tho. Danson Affirmed, That it is nonsense to say, that a man is
made a Minister by the gift of grace.

2. That he pretends to no infallibility in Ministry.

3. That every individual man was not enlightened by Christ.

4. That the Gospel is an external light, and not invisible.

5. That Christ being the propitiation for the sins of the whole world (as
John said) 1 John 2.2. is meant only the world of believers.

6. That they must reconcile the Scriptures to themselves.

7. That the law of the Spirit of life in Christ, was not the law of the Spirit
in the Saints.

8. That there were two Righteousnesses of Christ; the one without the Saints
to justify them, and the other within the Saints, that did sanctify them.

9. That the Saints were not justified by that Christ within them (and since
that he has affirmed two Christ's) Christ personal, and Christ Mystical.

10. That David, when he was guilty of adultery and murder, was not in a
condemned estate, but in a justified estate.

11. And concerning them in Heb. 12. who were come unto the spirits of just men
made perfect (the said Priest) said it was meant, that they were in Heaven, and
not upon earth.

12. That, that which fitted men for the inheritance, (among the Saints) did
not entitle them to the inheritance.

13. That we cannot contain an infinite Righteousness in us.

14. That God offers salvation to all men, but he intends it but to a few.

15. That a Minister of the Gospel does not know who are elected.

16. That the sword of the Spirit is Ineffectuall without the Letter.

17. That there was no Scripture written, but what is extant, and in the Bible.

18. That the Letter does ante-cede, and go before the Spirit in all that
walked in the Spirit.

19. That Christ chose a Devil to be one of his Ministers, etc.

20. That the Spirit of God may accompany a Ministry, and the Minister not
have the Spirit.

And several other such like false Doctrines did the said Priest affirm, which
the true Ministers never did, which manifests his want of the Spirit of truth,
and the infallibility of it; so that all, that know the spirit of truth, may
see him to be fallible.

And indeed, its no marvel, that England has so long been in darkness, and
people have long wanted satisfaction to their souls; seeing their Teachers are
such as feed themselves, and not the flock; and take money and hire of the
people for their preaching, contrary to the example of the true Ministers; and
not only so, but they preach such false doctrines, as this Priest has done
for hire: and truly, long may the people be destroyed for want of knowledge,
while they follow such Shepherds as cannot understand the things pertaining to
Salvation, for they being such as rebel against the light, not abideing in the
path of it, nor knowing the way of it, Job 24.13. they contend against its
being in the rebellious: And they being such covetous men as have eyes full of
adultery, that cannot cease from sin; they plead for sin againsts Christ's
justifying Righteousness, and perfection, made manifest in the Saints on
earth, 2 Pet. 2.14.

And so they being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and his works in his
people, which are perfect, they go about to establish Imperfection; and so many
are always learning among them, and laden with sins and iniquities, and
never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, nor know freedom from the
sin which does burden their souls, so long as they look for help among such
miserable Comforters as these Shepherds are, that plead for sin, and
Imperfection in this Life.

But now is the Lord manifesting his glory, and causing his light to break
forth as the morning, that the darkness may be expelled, and the clouds of
ignorance removed from off the understandings of many; that they may be
delivered from the mouths of such Shepherds as have made a prey upon them, and
escape out of the snares. And now is the star risen in Jacob, and the seed
coming forth, that shall smite the false Prophets, and Diviners, and rule over
the Nations: And they that come forth from among this perverse generation of
the wicked, and wait upon the Lord for his life, to arise and rule, shall see
the salvation of our God, who is the God of our salvation, who pleads our
Cause, indueth us with wisdom, and fights for us; to him be glory for ever
and ever. Let all flesh fear before him, and the spirits of all flesh submit to
him; and every tongue confess to his glory, who is abasing the pride of man,
and staining the glory of all flesh, that he himself may reign, and his own
Seed may have the pre-eminence, and reign over Babylon, and over all her
confused crew, whose habitation is in darkness and confusion, though they join
hand in hand in war against the Truth: the Lamb shall overcome them, and
overthrow their habitation.

Blessed are they that wait, and with patience follow the Lamb through the
war; for they shall reign with him in Glory, and shine in his Kingdom for
ever and ever, Amen. Allelujah.

G. W.

THE END.

