UPON THE REBUILDING the CITY, The Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, AND THE
Noble Company of Bachelors Dining with Him, May 5th 1669.
NOr could Prometheus, when he would have stole
From jealous Jupiter a living cole
To animate his well dissembled clay,
Either prevail, or go unplagu'd away,
Nor when proud Nature to recruit the earth
And brave Heaven, brought forth Giants at each birth,
(Those stalking Mountains, sons of slime and mud
The Relics of the universal Flood)
Setting them all to work, as soon as born
Then when their Highnesses, did not think scorn
To tread the Mortar, and were Masons made,
And Bricklayers -- the only thriving Trade,
Though they designed, with high and pointed Towers
To pierce and stab those clouds, whose mighty showers
Had drowned their Fathers, and to climb so high,
Till they picked Stars (like Cowslips) from the sky,
Could they prevent their foolish Babels fall,
But were turned canting, wandering Gypsies all.
Nor shall thou better speed (proud Rome) not Thou,
Though thou have carried Empire on thy brow,
And with thy Canons made all Monarchs quake
As thunder does the trembling Mountains shake:
No, though thy head, thy lofty head thou raise
To try thy horned strength with Cynthia's.
No (...) Father be the Prince of The Air*
And w^^^ thee does his vast Dominion share;
No, though thy Eagles wings thou stretch as wide
As Sol his beams, or Neptune does his Tide;
No, though thy greedy cruel breed be nursed
With the same milk thy Founder sucked at first;
And though thy zeal (Ah, cursed zeal!) aspire
To raise thy Pope, great Pyramids of fire,
From burned Cities; yet thy self (proud Dame)
Who burnt with Sodoms lust, shall with her flame.
Where are thy Fauxes in their dark disguise,
Incendiary Priests, and subtle Spies,
Who when our Londons fiery trial came,
Like Salamanders feasted in the flame,
And cursed the hands that first should lay a Brick
Toward the rebuilding that grand Heretic;
Who when great Greshams spicy nest consumed
(Though the immortal founder stood perfumed
In the rich Incense) hugged themselves to see
Our Monarchs martyred in Effigy.
Now let them stare and startle at the sight,
And Bark as Curs do at the Moons fair light:
Let them not boast their Charles la Grand, la Boon,
Great Britain can outshine them both in One,
A Prince of far more gracious intents
Then all thy Urbans, Clements, Innocents,
Upon whose head shall stand a Tripple Crown,
When thy grand Tyrants shall be tumbled down.
Still on our Thames shall noble Barges ride,
When Tyber to a Ditch shall shrink her pride.
Our Lions still are Rampant, and our Rose
Yields her friends sweetness, prickles to our foes:
Our Citizens shall feast in their Guild Hall,
And eat Geese -- Patrons of thy Capital.
Justice and Mercy now shall guard her store,
And her Mock-Giants she shall need no more.
The Exchange that Royal Infant, shortly will
Her own and foreign Language speak with skill;
And on that Acre the Noon S^n shall see
All his long Travels in Epitomie:
We have our Newgate and old Tyburn too,
Ready to serve their Turns who turn to you.
Kind Heaven and all the Elements conspire
(And such conspiracy's we may desire)
To make our City fairer, stronger, higher,
The Sun gets up each morn at peep of day
To oversee the Work, and late does stay
Before he lets the Laborers retreat,
As if he undertook the work by th'Great.
The Earth gives clay, the water moistens it;
The gentle Air tempers, and makes it fit,
And then the fire, as if it meant to make
Full satisfaction, and revenges take
Upon it self, (though in a smothered way
As modest Thieves their injuries repay)
Works in the Brick-kilne, works till it grow sick,
And fainting dies, leaving on every Brick
And every Tyle a lasting Blush* as who
Would say, for former Mischiefs this I do.
Nor does the Sun alone the Work over see,
But there is One as vigilant as he,
A Pious, Loyal, Wise, Just May'r, a Lord
(...) Zerubbabel with awful sword
(...) the Trowel, whose sweet voice has powers
(As Orpheus had to raise his T^eban Towers)
To make the teeming bowels of the earth
Shoot up new Buildings by an easy birth.
He guards the Sab^aths with (...) holy care,
And blesses all the Week by that Days praye'r;
His Magistracy lies not in his Train,
His stately Steed, his Scarlet, or his Chain;
He, and his Sword in Velvet fast asleep,
But watchful, God's peace and the Kings to keep;
With a strict hand the Balance he does hold,
Trying the Cause how weighty, not the Gold:
As he with Virtue meets, or with Offense,
So do his looks or smiles, or frowns dispense;
His smoother Chine carrying as grave a grace,
As the Diocesans well bearded face.
Boast on (old Beldame Rome) and brag -- Thou have
Thousands of Sons and Daughters pure and chaste,
Yet thou shall find for all their ^^ngle Lives,
But little Virgin Honey in their ^ives:
Those thievish Drones thy Friars without wings,
Creep to thy Nuns, and leave behind their stings.
Thou have thy Joan's as well as Popes -- Fame says,
Thy Innocents have their Olimp^^^^
But London which the Nuptia^ Band allows,
And hates to lock her Virgins u^ in Vows,
Can glory in her Bachelor Lord May'r,
Chaste as the Dove, though of the Ravens Hair:
The Widow City is his Spouse -- and He
Cares for her Children and great Family;
Nor does he stand (although he lies) alone
(He were a Phoenix if he were but One)
But as the Moon, when she her progress goes,
The Court of Stars, as her Attendants shows:
So when Beloved Turner please to call,
Great Troops of Batchelors adorn his Hall;
None male content, and yet M^^e Virgins all)
On May's fifth day (Oh, it was a wondrous sight!)
Three hundred Virgins, Virgins day and night;
Virgins in Breeches, Virgins all as true,
As she for whom Saint George the Dragon slew;
Some hoary old, some young, but all were chaste
Either above, or underneath the wast;
None of them had they been in Scottish School,
Had grunted in the Penitential Stool;
None, had they lived in times of Commutation,
Had paid a stone to Paul's for Fornication.
None from an Ordeal Trial need to fly
That Purgatory fire of Chastity;
None free of Creswel College, not a Man
Need fear to meet a Nurse or some Trappan;
None of them all, (for ought the Poet knows)
Wears (though another Hair) another Nose.
My Lord himself, and all his Guests, I think
In the same Cup, might without danger drink;
Yet none, (if called lawfully) but can
Beget a Son, may prove an Ald^rm^n.
These Sons of Peace, and Sons of Mars, if Charles
Please to take notice of his Neighbors snarls
Came not to show their Valor in his Hall,
(...) Custard, batter Pasty Wall:
^
(...) their Teeth or Kn^^^s were sharpest set:
To take the Red-coat-Lobst^^s by the back
And with bold hands, their clattering Armor crack;
But their chief errand was ^o pray he would
Command their Persons a^^ accept their Gold.
And if their Votes and m^^e were current, He
Should their Perpetual Dictator be.
But if the scarlet Sphere m^st turn about
(Though turning round makes giddy heads I doubt)
Yet his Exemplar Government shall stand,
And teach Successors how they should command.
A Virgin Queen, and Bachelor Lord Mayor,
To England are as prosperous as rare,
She made the City love the Court, and He
The Court the City by his Loyalty.
He a wise Imitator of his King,
Finds Moderation is a Healing thing.
Oh, if our Churches Ove^^^^^s would yield
And let poor Laborers come forth and build,
Such as Untempred Mortar dare not use,
Nor for Foundations, straw and stubble choose;
Though every stone across they do not lay,
But some work one, and some another way,
Our New Jerusalem should (...) behold
Sion in glory, though it wanted Gold.
Hard upon Hard, no lasting work will make,
Nor can one Flint another kindly break:
But Moderation is a Cement sure,
It Is that which makes the Universe endure:
That makes our Climate prove a temperate Zone
Betwixt the Torrid, and the Frigid One.
If we all build up Paternoster Row,
We may let Ave-Mary-Corner go;
Black and White Friars did together stand,
And may again, if Wisdom might command,
If not, I Will say no more, but this will swear,
Bedlam and Bishopsgate near Neighbors are.
Printed in the Year 1669.


