A Seasonable and Christian Caution Against the Provoking Sin of PRIDE and
other manifest Evils, and of the JUDGMENTS threatened because thereof,
Compassionately tendered to the Inhabitants of LONDON, and elsewhere Concerned,
as a Warning to REPENTANCE.
I. MY Soul with many others having been often bowed down under a deep sense
and burden of the Impenitence, hardness of Heart, Unsensibleness, Pride and
Presumption abounding in this City of London and Nation of England; and being
sensible the great God is thereby highly offended, and provoked to Anger, and
that even the Nation is in great Danger, deeply to suffer by the Sins of the
People, and the great abuse of the Mercies of God: I Considered what Method I
might use to persuade this People (professing Christianity and the Holy
Scriptures to be their Rule of Life, etc.) to be ashamed of this Reigning Sin
of Pride; whereupon in the Sense of the Love of God, and in great compassion to
this City and Nation, I said in my Heart (as the Matter truly opened) Let us
try them with the Holy Scripture Testimonies, and let none be angry nor
offended thereat, but take warning and speedily Repent; For if they will not
hear Moses and the Prophets, nor regard the Commands or Testimonies of Christ
Jesus, or his Holy Apostles (when duly applied) Neither will they hear if one
should rise from the Dead to warn them.

Pray Consider.
1. It is the wicked that is so proud that he seeks not after God. Psalm. 10.
4. And what then will be the Judgment of such? The Lord will Cut off them that
are turned back from him, and those that have not sought the Lord nor enquired
after him. Zeph. 1. 4, 5, 6. 2. Who is King over the Children of Pride, but the
Wicked one, the Devil, the Old Crooked Serpent, (Figuratively called Leviathan,
Job 41. 25. Isa. 27. 1.) to be sure the Children of Pride are none of God's
Children, nor Christ's Subjects or Followers, but averse to his Example of
Humility and Self-denial. 3. The high look of man shall be humbled, and the
loftiness of men shall be abased, for the day of the Lord of Hosts is upon all
the Proud and haughty, and upon all that is exalted, and it shall be made low:
Isa. 2. 11. 12. 4. For behold the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and
all the Proud, yea all that do wickedly shall be as Stubble, and the day that
comes shall burn them up says the Lord of Hosts. Mal. 4. 1. 5. When Pride
comes then comes shame, but with the lowly is Wisdom. Prove. 11. 2. Pride
goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall. Pro. 16. 18. The
Lord will destroy the house of the Proud man, Pro. 15. 25. The Pride of a man
shall bring him Low, but the humble in Spirit shall enjoy Glory, Pro. 29. 23.
6. The Lord of Hosts has decreed this to stain the Pride of all Glory, and to
bring to contempt, all them that be Glorious in the Earth. Isa. 23. 9. Woe to
the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim, for his glorious Beauty shall
be a fading Flower, which is upon the head of the Valley of them that be fat,
and are overcome with Wine. Isa. 28. 1. They shall be trodden under foot even
the Crown of the Pride of the Drunkards of Ephraim. ver. 3.
Now pray observe what an apparent Emblem and Mark of the Crown of Pride is
now your Women's lofty Head-Tire, their strange Towering and Extravagant Dresses
upon their Heads, and how Immodest vain and Antic, thereby many even
overtopping the Men? And what a doting, vain and foolish Humor it is in any men
to delight to see their Wives or Children go in such vain, Immodest and
Indecent Dresses, and what ill Examples are even many of the Priests and
Ministers Wives and Children therein? And what a sad Reproach and Scandal to
Religion and the Christian Profession to see Assemblies for Religious Worship,
so much filled with abominable Pride in Attire, as with those high Towering
Dresses, Extravagant and Excessive Wigs, more for Pride of Ornament than
Service or Necessity. And what a foolish and Effeminate Humor it is in any to
affect such Extravagancy and Excess in Apparel and vain Ornaments; and how
greatly unbecoming Religious Assemblies, pretending Worship, Fasting, Prayer,
Humiliation, and Repentance.

And for any to excuse their Pride and Immodesty in Apparel, either by
pretending that Pride is not in the Apparel, but in the Heart, or that they may
wear their Proud and Vain Garbs (their Immodest Lofty and Towering Dresses) and
yet not be Proud in Heart: Herein they wrong their own Consciences, Flatter and
deceive themselves in their Pride and Folly; let them but seriously look into,
impartially search and Examine their own Hearts and Consciences with the Light
of Christ therein, and they will easily see how that frequently their Minds,
Affections, and Hearts have been busied and taken up to Imitate and get into
the Vain Fashion, Modes and Habits of Courts and Gentry, Invented in France and
other Places. And what a shame and disgrace it is for English Protestants so
much to affect the French Vain and Immodest Fashions and Habits, or to be such
Slaves to the Pride of France, when they would be Loath to be Slaves to their
Power: Oh! take heed how you provoke the great God by your Pride and Excess,
and do not Flatter your selves. The root of all your Pride in Habit is in your
Hearts; and from Within, Even out of the Heart Proceed evil thoughts
Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness, Wickedness, Deceit,
Uncleanness, a Wicked Eye, Backbiting, Pride and Foolishness, Mark. 7. 20, 21,
22, 23. Therefore it is a false Excuse and contrary to Christ's Doctrine for any
to say, that Pride or Foolishness is not in their Hearts, when it is apparent
and notorious in their Habits and foolish Attire.

II. PRide in Root and Branch, in Heart and Habit with its Immodesty, Vanity
and Foolishness in Apparel, and the evil Example thereof, is altogether and
expressly forbidden of God and his Christ, and directly contrary to the Holy
Scriptures.

1st. How can it consist either with our Christian Profession or Modesty, for
any professed Christians to imitate Jezebel who Painted her Face, and Tired her
Head? 2 Kings 9. 30. or to Resemble the strange Woman in Harlots Attire? Prove.
7. 10. a remarkable Character, and distinct from that of Modest Women fearing
God.

2d. That of Isaiah 3. Chap. Is very remarkable how highly God was displeased
with the Haughtiness and Pride of the Daughter of Zion, among his People Israel
of old, with their Vanity and Pride in Apparel etc. that he both Threatened, and
brought severe Judgments upon them, to their great debasement, contempt and
distress; in so much that the Lord said unto Jerusalem, Thy men shall fall by
the Sword, and thy strength in the Battle. Ver. 8. 25.

Then shall her Gates mourn and Lament; and she being desolate shall sit upon
the ground. ver. 26. Their Pride and Rebellion was the cause of such their
Calamity and Debasement: Because the Daughters of Zion are Haughty, etc. ver.
16. And when the Prophet foretold God's Judgment upon Jerusalem, and how he
would distress Ariel, and what heaviness and sorrow should be: He also said,
Thou shall be brought down, etc. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of Hosts
with Thunder and with Earthquakes, etc. Isa. 29. Oh why are such Ominous
Signs, and such eminent Threatening Visits from the Lord of Hosts, (even in our
days) no more taken notice of, considered or laid to Heart by many?

3d. Tremble, O Earth (Oh Inhabitants of the Earth) at the presence of the Lord
God: Fear and tremble Oh! all Proud flesh at the presence of the God of Jacob;
Oh be abased and humbled before the Great and Terrible God, cast off thy costly
Ornaments, and Proud Attire, and sit down in the Dust; Mourn and Lament, and
Bewail thy self, and Repent as in Dust and Ashes, because of thy abominable
Pride; many and great Provocations against the Lord of Hosts, whose terrible
day approaches. When the Lord threatened to Cut off Idolaters and backsliders
that turned back from the Lord, and those that have not sought the Lord nor
inquired after him. Zeph. 1. 4, 5, 6. He also Threatened, saying, And it shall
be in the day of the Lord's Sacrifice, that I will visit the Princes and the
Kings Children, and all such as are Clothed with strange Apparel, Zeph. 1. 8.
And was there ever any Age or Nation that exceeded this of Our's in Strangeness
and folly in Apparel?

4th. And when Jerusalem and the Daughter of Zion were Warned of their
Calamities, Misery and Destruction, because of their Pride, Wickedness and
Abominations, it was declared unto them. And when thou shall be destroyed what
will thou do? Though thou Cloathest thy self with Scarlet, though thou deckest
thee with Ornaments of Gold, though thou Paintest thy Face with Colors, yet
shall thou Trim thy self in vain, etc. Jer. 4. 30.

5th. And now seriously consider the Holy Apostles Exhortation and Counsel in
this Case. 1 Timothy 2. 9, 10. In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in
modest Apparel, with shame-facedness and Sobriety, not with broidered Hair, or
Gold or Pearls, or costly Array, But which Becomes Women Professing Godliness
with good Works. The like also, in 1 Pet* 3 3, 4, 5. Whose Adorning let it not
be that outward adorning of Plaiting the Hair, wearing of Gold, or putting on
of Apparel, But let it be the hidden man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great Price. For after this manner in the old Time, the holy
Women also who trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection unto
their own Husbands. They did not Adorn themselves with high Heads and Towering
Dresses, nor with Spotted or Painted Faces, nor with Foolish or Immodest
Attire; which things among professed Christians are no small Scandal and Reproach
to Religion and Christianity, but against the Honor and Interest thereof, and
to the great dishonor of God, and his dear Son Jesus Christ: for which all
such kind of Christians (as are thus guilty of this Horrible Souls sinking sin
of Pride) are accountable.

And you that are Parents be Examples of Humility and Christianity, and bring
up your Children in the Nurture, Instruction and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians.
6. 4. and not in Pride and Vanity* in Apparel, nor in Music and Dancing to
expose them to Lightness, Wantonness, Temptation and Ruin, as too too many do;
for which they are greatly chargeable with the sins of their Children, and have
a heavy Account to give to the Righteous God, for being accessory to their
Ruin and Destruction.

Oh Inhabitants of London and England, who are concerned in this provoking sin
of Pride, Excess, and Foolishness, return to the Light of Christ, his Grace and
Truth in you, and humble your selves under the mighty hand of God, and break
off your Sins by true and unfeigned Repentance, that you may find mercy in
Christ Jesus, and for his sake; That God in Compassion may turn away his
Wrath, and avert his Judgments threatened and impending over these Nations.

From a real Friend to our Nation, and the Souls of all People. G. W.

LICENSED July the 18. 1693.

Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1693.


