JOSHUA'S RESOLUTION; Or the DUTIES of Houshold-Governours, Discoursed of, and
fairly stated; Their Failures therein mildly considered, and without favor or
affection impartially weighed.

The Subject suited to the Capacities of Tamworth Auditory, and Preached there,
and elsewhere,

By John Wagstaffe, A. M.

And Rector of Little Wenlock, in Shropshire.

In Sep. (...). says King Solomon in his Proverbs, chapter 24.26. He will be
befriended (not frowned on) that declares the Truth.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Snowden; And are to be sold by Henry Mortlack at the
Phaenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1684.

THE Epistle Dedicatory: To Religious, Conscientious Governors, of all Ranks
and Degrees among us, etc.
To the Meanest, as well as to the Greatest.
NO Present too great for so worthy Patrons, (and in particular to my own, and
that Loyal one, where it was first Preached) yet, such as I have, with all
heartiness I humbly present to you, you who experimentally know how far easier
it is to obey, than command. Tho it be a Parents Prerogative to command his
Children, yet it is duty in him to obey a Father or a Magistrate, place't in
Authority over him, tho it be a Magistrates Privilege to control, and call to
account, all under his Jurisdiction, yet it is his bounden Duty to obey
Sovereignty, and Kingly Government; and tho it be the b^st Jewel, and the very
Diadem of a Crowned King to command his Subjects, yet it is his Interest, and
greatest Happiness to obey his Maker and Creator, that most glorious Majesty of
Earth and Heaven Prove. 8.15.
, that you may easily observe, that no Mortal, no not the greatest Grandee, but
a Deity himself 21.1.
that is exempted (one time or other) from obeying and serving as well as
commanding and ruling; Therefore what is offered you in these following sheets,
it is to pleasure (Friends) the befrienders of Godliness and Christianity, of
Protestantism and Unity Phil. 2.
, and not at all to pretend to inform the Nation of any thing that it knows
not, but to remember them that are in it, that they do what they know. It is
true, the Land abounds in Knowledge, I wish I could say the same, for the
honor of it, that it did so too in practice, then we should be as happy Joh.
13.17.
, and as flourishing as now we begin to be declining, and contemptible, but
that poor England may redeem its lost Reputation, let each of us discharge
those particular Duties that are incumbent on us; and every single person take
their own parts that are allotted them; and that their own Consciences carve
out for them, and not to entrench upon another right, that all of us may act
and do like Rational men that have Immortal Souls to save, like the true
Professors of Christianity, like those that do heartily protest against
Rebellion and Popery, Faction and Phanaticism, Enthusiasm and Atheism; nay,
against Irreligion, and all manner of Profaneness whatsoever, and not to look
one way, and with all might and main to row another; for we had not been
hitherto spared, if kind Providence had not stepped in between, and watched over
us for good, safeguarded us one time after another, from those apparent dangers
wherewith we were compassed, that we our selves do now plain enough see; we had
ere now been engaged, imbroil'd in another Civil War, our Hands and Garments by
this time, to have been dyed in each others Blood, which would have been small
Credit to Christians, or to our English Nation *.

But if after all, there be only a show of Sanctity, a mere shadow and
Mock-pageantry of Piety, and that the Substance and Glory is wanting, viz. (the
practice) have we not still great cause greatly to fear (that under the color
of Religion, which it utterly disowns) of having the old abhorred Tragedy
shamed upon us afresh, if it were not for the prudent Conduct and Mercifulness
of one of the most indulgent Princes that did ever sway a Royal Sceptor, that I
hope will yet vanquish the bitterest of his Enemies, by the wonders of his
kindness and forbearance Prove. 19.11, 12.
, that ha^ been hitherto already stretched out to a miracle, that if we at any
time miscarry, it will soon be found, detected, to be our disservice,
untowardness, disobedience, ingratitude to Powers. Ordained of God Romans 13.1.
, (to God-like Clemency and Authority) therefore if we still persist in our
disingenuity, inhumanity, to put him upon any thing which his Kingly Conscience
cannot yield to Romans 14.23.
; and for all that, what do we do more by our Jealousies and Whispers Prove.
16.28, 29, 30.
, but still continue to trespass, dun and harrass the Lords Anointed 1 Samuel
24.6.
? and then what do we do less but dare Majesty it self at length to punish us,
and provoke him to that which he is loath to undertake, viz. (our Ruin) yet if
we perish, ( if we perish Esther 4.
) whom have we to blame but our selves?

And to me it is as clear as noonday Light, that the wickedness,
ungovernableness, hate and haughtiness of the Peoples Spirits does strangely
portend, if not timely prevented, our misery and downfall, which that so
dreadful a storm Jonah 1.
may be diverted, and rather lighten on the Protestant Foes, I am not shy in
owning my self one of that Loyal Praying number 3.10
(tho Prayers and Tears, by some, are made light of already;) That is, an
humble Petitioner at the Footstool of Heaven, where it is no crime to be a
Supplicant, tho one of the meanest, yet willingly would be one of the Humblest,
Truest Servants

To the GREAT JEHOVAH, And to all his Vicegerents here below, (To the Pater
Patriae, and Pater Familias,) To the Governors of Kingdoms, And to the
Governors of Families. JOHN WAGSTAFFE.

Joshua's Resolution, etc.
Joshua 24.14. Now therefore, fear the Lord, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth, and put away the Gods, which your Fathers served on the other side of
the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the Lord.

Joshua 24.15. And if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this
day whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your fathers served, that were
on the otherside of the flood, or the Gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye
dwell: But as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord.

Joshua 24.16. And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should
forsake the Lord, to serve other Gods; Amen, Amen.


THE Text is too long for a single Sermon, therefore mostly to enlarge on that
comprehensive passage; But as for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord; as
if he had said, As for others, let them do what they will, the vain obstinate
world do as they think good, but as for his particular part, and his whole
house, he had undertaken for them, to serve the Lord; a rare, but yet an
excellent Copy set before us; therefore let Masters and their Families
endeavor to the utmost to transcribe it into their practice; to be religious,
devout and godly, to serve the Lord, the great Jehovah, and not the world,
themselves, or the like, which is the best way of expressing our thankfulness
for the many Deliverances, that the King and Kingdom has been blessed withal, by
our Homage and Obeisance to the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth; which does
include the same to all that are placed in Authority under him, our Loyalty and
Service to them; so that observe, 1. Here Is a Resolution to be religious and
virtuous, 2. By whom? Jos. 23.14.
; nay, by a Commander, the Chief General of the Israelites Forces, for himself,
and his Family; not for the Army, or the Nation, or the Country in general, or
for any part of it in particular, as the Amorites, or the Perizzites, for the
Canaanites, or Hittites, or for the Gergesites, the Hivites; or the Jebusites,
etc Ver. 11.
. 3. But Thirdly; 4. To whom in the last place?


I do now expect that you will look for it, that I should inform you in what
particulars the Service of the Lord should be expressed in, tho none be expressed
in the Text. Besides, the people five or six times over in the same Chapter
confirm the same, promise and protest to serve the Lord Ver. 16, 18, 21, 22, 24.
, but did not particularize in what; only in general against sinning,
Superstition, and Idolatry Ver. 19, 20.
, which we mostly ought to level our displeasure against; at which we will make
some attempt before we have done.

But with the first, What we should do as to serving of God? All of you know,
it is well if you did it, that you your selves, your second selves, your
Children, your Servants, should serve the Lord; As old Father Abraham set you
long ago a pattern as to himself and his household Genesis 18.19.
. And that pious Joshua did the same, and that we should do so too; not only to
lay down Precepts, to give them good Rules, but first of all, to give them a
good Example, and not to rest there, but take care of them afterward, to Read
to them, to hear them Read, to Catechize (Catechize) instruct, to pray with,
and for them; to Preach to them, direct them, and the like, etc. I mean,
frequently to mind them of their Duty, and earnestly press them to it, and as
eagerly to put them on it: But these things I shall not stand to insist on, tho
of great consequence, they are so commonly known, yet the Lord knows, too
seldom practiced; tho in the New Testament you are told, he is worse than an
Infidel that does not take care of his Family and Kindred 1 Timothy 5.8.
. Now, if provision for persons bodies be so necessary and reasonable, what is
then due, and of absolute necessity for the good and welfare, for the well
being, and well doing of our precious long-lived Souls, the others being only
the shells and carcasses, at best but the Cabinets and Lodgings for these, if
the breach of the former; if the over-looking of the Body be so censured and
condemned for worse than Heathenism, what (What) will then the neglect of the
other be, the Soul, but termed the highest ingratitude, the most notorious
Crime imaginable, the most capital offense that a man can possibly be guilty
of, a kind of spiritual unnaturalness and inhumanity, of butchery and Soul
murder, that few, or none would willingly be taxt withal, totally ruining the
better part of you and yours, and that for ever, and ever?

Therefore train up your Children in the way that you would have them to go,
and they will not depart from it when they are old Prove. 2.6.
. And Servants, be not men-pleasers only, but such as know that you have a
Master in Heaven, that sees all, and will first or last call you unto an
Account Ephesians. 6.6, 7, 8.
.

And again, How shall a young Man cleanse his ways, but by taking heed unto
God's Word, and walking accordingly Psalm. 119.9.
?

And lastly, To you that are Old; it is the Lords service only that crowns your
gray hairs, and hoary heads with glory Prove. 16.31.
.

But now you Governors of Families, if you cannot by threats, or promises, by
kindnesses, or punishments, reclaim those about you, and under your Roof, or
Charge, will it be much amiss if you follow godly David's practice, Verse 7.
as it is in Psalm. 101. not to suffer a Liar, by naming one, I conclude it
comprehends all; a Swearer, a Drunkard, a Fornicator, an Adulterer, no not a
Purloiner, a Bate-breeder, a Talebearer, a Libeller, a State-mender, that goes
out of his own sphere, an Evil-doer, to lodge within your doors 1 John 4.10, 11.
, so as to countenance or encourage them; but such either reform and change,
or, as you have opportunity, to dismiss and banish out of your presence and
society, company or custody.

Having now gone so far toward the explaining this phrase of serving the Lord,
I will further unravel my meaning.

Tho it is true, one says it is this, to be of this Party and Faction, another,
it is that, to be of that Side and Interest; a third declares, it is neither; a
fourth cannot tell what it is, is at a loss, and so far to seek upon the
account of the former, and so onwards to many more.

Now, notwithstanding all these variety of different Opinions, of thwarting,
clashing, and jarringly contradicting one another, it is probable it may seem
to some somewhat hard to direct you to keep the Mean and Midway amongst these
faulty Extremes; but (with God's Assistance) I Will venture to state the case,
and it may, I hope, please and convince, or at least all Parties, 1 These. 4.11.
the most querulous gainsayers shall have nothing material to object against
it; whilst I am minding my own business, 1 Timothy 2.15.
and from the very bottom of my Soul studying to be quiet and peaceable; whilst
I am employed in my Calling As ye may see in the Gentleman and Lady's Calling,
Which is worth the frequent perusing and practicing.
, for there is none that are, or should be without 1 Cor. 7.24.
; whilst I am innocently diverting my self in company; whilst profitably
discoursing, having my conversation in Heaven Phil. 3.20.
; whilst I am boasting what the Lord has done for my poor Soul Psalm. 66.16.
, that I am not given up to my self, to run with the vile world, to all excess
of Riot; to be taken with the Vanities, Fopperies, Follys of an abused Age; how
he has rescued me as a Firebrand out of the Jaws of Death and Hell; whilst I am
instructing the Ignorant, reclaiming the Extravagant, and advising the Runagate
and Prodigal in my Family to return, I am serving the Lord; whilst I am letting
them know, what pleasure I have in being truly Religious, what secret Raptures,
ravishing Transports, unknown Pastimes and Ecstasies of Joys I have in doing the
will of my heavenly Father; it is such a pious Feast, and delightful Banquet,
that the greatest Epicurean knows not of Luke 14.
.

That I would not be hired off by the wealth of the Indies, though a large
bribe, to do as I have Done, or to be as vain, simple, and foolish, as the
world, to be as earthly, sensual, and Devilish, as they that are in it. Jam.
3.15.
I am serving the Lord while visiting the Widow and Fatherless, relieving and
comforting of them Jam. 1.27.
, whilst reaching out mine hand, and administering to the necessities of the
weak, sick and needy, whether in Soul or body Whilst I am Sympathizing and
strongly phancying my self in their deplorable circumstances, and then calling
to mind my own happy Condition; I cannot choose but be cheerful, Bless and Adore
my God it is not so with me, whilst I am setting my hand to the Plow or to the
Needle. Prove. 31.
Doing good Offices at home for them; Catering for my self, the family, any
body toward clothing the naked, feeding the hungry, nay giving but a Cup of
cold water to the thirsty, a poor business, yet sufficient If I have no better
Mat. 10.42.
. (Now no Divine or humane Law with us, that I know of, forbids or restrains
any of us from doing any of these things.) And lastly to instance in no more,
whilst I am giving a good Example to all that are round about me that either
converse with me, know me or hear of me, and do as I would be done by Luke 16.
Luke 17.10.
; and when I have done all Col. 3.11.
(as if I had done nothing at all) to look for salvation through the Merits
only and Intercession of a mighty Savior and the blessed Spirit, and not by
my own worthless works and services. I am more truly serving my God, and doing
what he requires of me, then were I with my weak hands, with my feeble power
upholding a tottering Ark 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.
; though honestly meant, poor Vzzah's life dearly paid for it, or more plainly
thus, were I with my shoulders supporting a reeling Church unless
extraordinarily called thereto, which if otherwise, it is to suspect or Distrust
the Lords Ability, and that the Almighty God has need of our poor help.

But more particularly, whilst I am Doing the aforenamed things, I am as
sincerely serving and honoring my God, and doing that which is as well
pleasing to him, as if I was hearing a Well composed Sermon, that did hit my
humor in every punctillio, or as if I was in my study, or closet reading a
good book, or upon my bended knees Devoutly praying, or privately keeping a
voluntary Fast; tho these are excellent things in their places, and must by no
means be neglected (I Repeat it that I may not be mistaken, though these are
excellent things in their places, and must by no means be wholly neglected)
(and will not be by any Godly Person, yet truly the others are the main ones
that must be done, remembering too that these may not be left undone Mat. 23.23.
, for if Comparison, (are not too distastful) may but be admitted of. The very
Life and Soul, the visible Effects, and blessed fruits the very juice and
quintescence of all these, as of Praying, Reading, Hearing, Fasting, and the
like, are the former: As it is notably confirmed in Isaiahs prophesy chapter 58. at
large, from one end to the other, and let this one place suffice for many,
because it takes in all others.

But now to encourage you in so noble a service as Serving the Lord, that is an
easy service first Mat. 11.30.
; Not only easy but secondly pleasant Prove. 3.17.
. And 3. Not only pleasant, 1 Timothy 4.8.
but profitable. And lastly, Not only profitable, but honorable 1 Samuel 2.30.
. What would any of us desire more in any service? They are such special
Ingredients, and taking qualifications that would highly recommend to us any
Course of life besides. And now what strange ill humored Creatures are we that
are so averse, and obstinately bent against our own Interest, here and
happiness hereafter?

But to come to the other thing that was promised, Application; surely it is now
needless, yet for the sake of the meanest I Will make bold with the quickest of
Apprehension as formally to tell you the first use will be of Exhortation, the
next a mild way of reprehension, little expressed, but a great deal to be
understood, and the last a general and particular Direction or two.

First, To begin with the use of Exhortation, to exhort us to the service of
God, whether of Paul, Apollo, or Cephas or Christ, for I conjecture all these
kinds and perhaps many more that make up this flourishing Congregation; I do
not now call you to answer to those unhappy unchristian-like names, that you
have branded each other withal, and as if you delighted in what you have done,
taking a kind of a secret vaunting pride in being so termed, paying it off in
thinking and forecasting what you will do Jam. 4.
. But whatever your private sentiments may be of the transactions of the world
let me prevail with you in this one thing, it is no unreasonable request at all,
for then I should not Expect to speed, 1 Pet. 3.
that we all unanimously agree in this to serve the Lord [to serve the Lord]
And in that way too which he himself has appointed, yea in those very things
which I have instanced in before,

As for imposing, or so much as glancing on men's Consciences, they are such
nice delicate compositions, that they must be gently touched, very tenderly
dealt withal; it is done to my Hands by a more Able Pen called a Discourse on a
scrupulous conscience. Therefore to wave that; By my worthy Tutor Dr. Callamy.
My Design is only to strike at Men's sinful Actions and practices, and I pray
you, so forward and encourage me in so good a work, sa to bring home the blow.
If you will not for Gods sake, for the Churches, for the Kings, nor for the
Kingdoms, nor for Christ's sake, nor for your poor immortal Souls sake; yet out
of interest and advantage, for by and sinister ends, serve the Lord. And when
once you have tasted how good his Service is, Psalm. 34.
you will then out of more noble, generous principles, as I hinted to you
before, it being not only an easy, pleasant, profitable, but an honorable
service; so that if you love your selves, and, who is there that does not? then
thirst after your own real good and happiness; love God with all your Souls and
Minds, and serve him with all your strength and might; express it in your
Christian Charity, in your hearty love and service to one another, and to love
your Neighbor as your self Jam. 2.8. Non habet charitatem Dei qui Ecclesiae
non diligit Vnitatem. I met with this in that inoffensive Learned Author Dr.
Barrow on Unity.
; and as you do expect, and would fain have the like from him, and to the
utmost endeavor for Unity Ephesians. 4.
, to be of one mind, so great is the advantage of it, but if that is almost
impossible, and that offenses must, and will come, as the Savior of the World
informs you Luke 17.
; but give none, and then you will be sure to save your own Souls, having
charitable thoughts of all, construing every thing in the most favorable sense
that it is capable of 1 Cor. 13.7.
; and if there must needs be Emulations, and Contentions among you at any time,
let them be of the better stamp; strive which shall outstrip each other in the
ways of Piety, and real Holiness, and frequently offer to overcome one another
(which is the best sort of Conquest) by abundance of love and condescension, by
frequent acts of kindness, and repeated favors, to weary out your very Foes
with love, to load them with Gratuities and Courtesies, to do good Offices for
bad ones, and the like.

Thus to persevere, and hold out to the end, is in good earnest to serve the
Lord, our selves, our Families, all that we have to do withal, the place we are
in, the Neighborhood, the Country, the King, and the Kingdom.

But in the next place,

Now if miserableness and covetousness, 1 Pet. 2.13.
, if looking upon that to be duty which is none Jam. 2.9.
; as for Instance; If fondness to a Party, and disgust to a contrary
Persuasion; if hating and disdaining; if proud, humility, and fantastic
conceitedness; if throwing our selves upon the ground, like a Tennis-ball, with
a design to rebound so much the higher; if base Apostasy, and downright
Revolting; if notorious Hypocrisy, and famous Dissembling; if this be serving
of God, we have whole shoals of such Professors to produce daily.

If discontents and murmurings, if whining, and being on the complaining key,
if disobedience and untowardness to Superiors, in Office, Age, or Gift, to
Parents, Ministers, Magistrates, etc. if burlesquing and buffooning, if
miscalling and nick-naming, if raising false Reports, and spreading them for
true ones James 3.
, if lying and back biting, if blasting men's Credit, and plundering them of
what is more dear to them than their lives, their good Names; if censuring,
casting darts and firebrands at one another, as Solomon's Proverbs phraseth it
Pro. 26.18, 19, 20.
; if this be serving God, we have enough of this Tribe and counterfeit Stamp to
present you withal.

If scandalous Reflections, and boldly speaking evil of Dignities 2 Pet. 2^
Jude.
; if inveighing, and letting fly at the Government after a strange rate, and
saying as it is in the Book of Ecclesiastes Chapter 7. and 10.
, What is the cause why former times were better than these, we do not do
wisely in so doing, as that place informs you; yet if all this be serving of
God, (as it is matter of fact,) there is many, too too many do this to some
purpose, that do, or should know better.

And those too that are pleased to style themselves the only true Protestant
Christians, tho they act clear contrary thereto, they will think me surely
never the worse Friend, or greater Enemy Gal. 4.
for speaking the Truth; but to reprieve your dying Fame, transgress, sin no
more in this kind, or any other; be no more superstitious, lest a worse thing
befall you John 5.14.
than ever you dreamt of yet, by losing of both worlds, the present Canaan in
possession, and the eternal one in reversion Deuteronomy. 30.19, 20.
.

But again, to direct my Discourse to those, who in their Judgment are for
Church Discipline, but in their practice against it, which truly does the
greatest disservice, more by far than the most enraged of our Enemies. Now if
prodigality and intemperance, if rioting and drunkenness, if dallying and
fornicating, if cursing and banning, if swaggering and swearing, hectoring and
rallying at those that are not of their Judgment in every nicety and punctilio
(and when did we ever see two faces so alike, but that they might be
distinguished by a Mole, feature, a look, or the like?) If this be serving of
God, there are those that do it with a witness, thinking themselves too the
best Loyalists; but ah poor deluded Souls! it is neither to God nor their
Sovereign.

Those that are bad to themselves, cannot be good to their great Lord and
Master. Take away the wicked from before the King (says King Solomon Pro.
16.12, 13, 14, 15.
) and his Throne shall be established (for ever) in Righteousness. Prove. 25.5.
So that it is our sins that do most prejudice our Dread Sovereign, and do
undermine his Government, shake his Kingdom; and unless we be truly penitent,
it is well if we and our most glorious King do not perish 1 Samuel 12.25.
, which the Lord long preserve Him and all his that are truly Loyal (whatever
Convictions may be upon their Spirits, to leave that to God and themselves.)
But how can it be imagined they that are false hearted, treacherous, and
disloyal to their own Souls, that they should be either true or constant to God
in Heaven, or to Man on Earth? How can it be possibly expected, that they that
carelessly destroy their own lives, should take care of, and charily preserve
Him, His, or any others.

Therefore instead of condemning Providence for being too exact and severe with
the poor Church of England, or with the King or Kingdom at any time. Let Us
strive to be religious, that is the only way to appease it, to be successful and
prosperous Prove. 11.11.
, and most serviceable to all three. It Is Righteousness that (that great
Politician Solomon says) exalts a Nation. Prove. 14.34.
. It Is our backsliding and revoltings that is the downfall and overthrow of any
people. It Is sin (sin) that makes breaches in our poor Protestant walls,
overturns our bulwarks, and most fortified places; so that I need not apologize
to such for my plain dealing, when calm and sober as they are. Now, they will
scarce forgive themselves, but sadly bewail, these their former miscarriages,
as their imbecility and weakness, as their great frailty, and inexcusable
folly, taking these rebukes and buffettings as the highest expressions of the
greatest friendship, and the heartiest kindness Prove. 9.8. Pro. 27.5, 6.
. For every one can act the part of a Sycophant, to sooth and cajole; but few,
or none that of a faithful friend, or true Minister of the Gospel: to blame,
reprove, as there is occasion 1 Timothy 5.20, 21.


Besides, such knowing that the distressed Church of England, (as to its
Doctrine) in her lowest ebb, will not dispense with such oblique, crooked
practices, (this her Sons and Daughters well enough know.)

If our Practices could but reach our Principles, oh what manner of persons
should we then be in all holy conversation and godliness! There would then be
more difference betwixt them and too many others, as there is betwixt the
glorious Sun at noon day in all its bright shining luster, and the poor
Glowworm that is crawling up the ditch bank, that mostly sparkles and glitters
in the darkest night; this is the happiness of ours, that is by Law enthroned,
I hope so firmly fixed, that the Gates of Hell may never prevail against it Mat.
16.18.
; though it is true, there is none without its spots and flaws, yet those that
entirely love her, will never cease praying for her peace and welfare Ps. 122.
: But by our sins, oh my particular friends! we are very unkind, nay cruel to
her, that we insensibly stab, give the deepest wounds to our Religion and
Christian Profession Gal. 2.14.
, that are almost incurable, by our irregular, unaccountable lives; so that for
the future, let the innocence of our lives be the Churches best Scutcheon, and
greatest glory, the sweetness, obligingness of our conversation win upon
Proselite, dissatisfied Brethren Romans 15.2.
, Heathens, Runagates, and the like, to gain a Soul, Souls: And if one be of
more worth than a world 1 Cor. 9, 29,
, what value shall we then put upon thousands, that will amount to more than
ten thousand Kingdoms or Worlds; therefore let such a spirit of Godliness,
Condescension, Moderation Mal. 16.26.
, Brotherly Love See what the Reverend Bishop Wilkinson says on that subject,
recommended by the very much admired Dr. Tillotson.
, Christian Piety, Honesty, Charity, Sobriety, so fill our veins, as to run
through all our actions, yea through all the Stages of our life, and so
brightly shine forth upon all the bystanders, as to influence them to do the
same.

But again thirdly; If the worshipping Stocks and Stones, being formed, hammered
out into a God, or a Saint, which is no less than Idolatry; if perjury or
forswearing, which the Land ought to mourn for 1 These. 4.9, 10.
; if Treasons or Conspiracies, Jer. 23.
which are almost as common with some as drinking to one another; if Murders
and Massacres against those that will not be guilty of the same things; if
unwearied Plotting and Counter-plotting to help forward a bad Cause; if
deposing of Kings, overturning of Kingdoms, may pass for Reformation; if doing
these things themselves, when traced to the head, yet now and then confidently
fathering the same on others.

Now if all this be an Ordinance of God, and doing God good service, there are
those that do it to the life.

I am not so meal mouthed as to be afraid of naming of them Luke 12.4, 5.
, but to do Justice to a Jew, Greek, or a Turk Lev. 19.15.
. Tho Popery had got the whip hand of Presbytery, Deuteronomy. 1.17.
and was ready to out-top the Reformed Episcopacy, which God forbid, Prove. 24.
(God forbid.) yet a true English Christian like Spirit Romans 10.12, 13.
, will soon tell you they are the Roman Factors, the Popes Priests and Jesuits,
his Vassals and Hackney Agents Luke 12.9.
.

Or by those that fain would be so, or the most genuine construction that can
be put upon it, that act, and formally do the same things, tho they know it
not. If this be serving of God, there is no doubt but they outdo us all, and
according to their old, Stale State Tenets, Beloved Principles, Wedded
Politics, they think they merit Heaven by it, consecrating the very
Instruments for so holy (or rather horrid) employ. But the Lord preserve us
from so much as being tainted with so bloody, blasphemous, lying, Idolatrous
Look into Dr. Stillingfleet's works, the Protestant Champion against Idolatry
on^ the one hand, and Superstition on the other.
, scandalous and tyrannical Religion, that is, for Lording it over men's
Consciences, as well as Lives and Estates.

Now contrary to all these, which the Church strictly enjoins, and which the
well constituted Laws of the Nation does approve of, and highly recommend to
us, and which God himself does absolutely command, are these that follow, which
without hyperbolizing, and more gentilely straining, are the best and strongest
Bulwarks to Protestanism, and the best of Religions, if crowned Loyalty, and
most renowned Fidelity; if upright Honesty. Psalm. 15.
, and unshaken Piety; if excellent Sobriety, and admirable Charity; if
courteous Affability, and friendly Correspondency; if the deepest unfeigned
Humility, and bountiful cheerful Liberality Gal. 6.10.
; if universal Charity, and a true generous Spirit of Christianity, 1 Cor. 13.
is that which passes current with all men for the Service of God, how have
all, or at least most of us swerved, warpt, and strangely digress'd from it,
yea gone a whoring after our own Inventions Psalm. 106.38.
?

Again, if thinking well of every body, and speaking so too, so far as Truth
will bear us out, or otherwise to be silent Titus 3.
; for Christian Love will cover a multitude of sins and misdemeanors 1 Pet.
4.8.
. if bearing and forbearing, if real patience and long suffering, if forgiving
and forgetting, if good turns for bad ones, if sincerely loving Enemies 1 These.
5.15. Matthew. 5. Matthew. 18.
, the Dissenters, nay the very Papists, their Persons, tho not their
Principles, instead of downright hating them; if heartily pr^ying for their
Conversion, instead of their Confusion; if readily blessing of them, instead of
cursing them; and at last gasp with the famous Martyr St. Stephen, on our knees
to beg of the Lord not to lay it to their charge Acts 7.60.
; tho at the same time they were killing, butchering, and stoning of us to
death; if this be to serve the Lord, as really it is, and that all of you know
it too in the highest Instances; if of Self denial, and Mortification, which
far exceeds all Ecclesiastical Censures, Popish Pennances, or Pilgrimages to
seal the Lord's Service with our Blood, which is so very precious to us, that
we are loath to part with the least drop of it, unless it be in the defense and
quarrel of our lusts, or for our dearly beloved passions; so that we may cull
out of the thinnest, or if you please, out of the fullest Congregation, those
that are Doers of thy Word, O Lord, and do thus serve thee to their lives end,
and they would scarce be mist; much more would it be so, should we search into
Foreign Countries, how few, or none, would then be met withal of so choice a
number? nay, it is well in some measure, instead of meeting with Proselites,
and Professors to Protestanism, if they were not Rengeadoes, a kind of Heaven
Traitors, to serve the Lord as Christ's own Disciples did, that instead of
owning, and boldly confessing him, sneakingly to desert and forsake him, yea
basely, cowardly to abandon and forswear him Math. 26.70, 72, 74.
. Nay, who is there among many, among all these that we have taken notice of,
that are but devoutly praying and praising God, Luke 6.21.
praying to the Almighty to amend and rectify what is amiss amongst us, and at
the same time to praise him 1 Timothy 2.
; that it is no worse with us, whose sins do so abound, superabound, so loudly
call, cry for vengeance speedily to be executed upon us. He has born long, he
will not bear always Genesis 6.
, yet we have not as yet forborne sinning, but the more incenst him by our
daring Crimes, and repeated Provocations 1 John 5.19.
, as if we would defy Heaven it self to punish us; tho he is long lifting up
his hand, yet upon that very account, it will at last fall the more heavy upon
us.

If you think this now too high a Charge, it is well if the best of us all can
come forth, one single person, and say, that he has done this or the other
duty, or abstained from this or the other sin, so as to become a new Man, that
was a bad one before, because he sees God is angry with his People, or the
Nation, and threatening them very sorely; and that a dismal Cloud is hanging,
hovering over our heads by a twined Thread only, that if it be once suffered to
pour forth its Vials of Wrath and Fury upon us, as if it were Fire and
Brimstone, to humane appearance, it would consume us, and our posterity, if not
feasonably prevented by a real Reformation.

There Is no question at all now to be made but many of us would, do, dare talk
for our Religion, and, if need were, could fight for God, the Country, the King
and Kingdom; but tho we name all these, yet it would be with most at last
found, to their lasting disgrace, and eternal infamy, that it was mostly for
their near and dear selves; for, where are these? in what corner of the World
are they to be met withal, that would cheerfully suffer and die for it, that
with their Weapons in their hands, could lay them and their Lives at the
footstool of Heaven, and say as they profess, so for to do, daily, thy Will,
thy (Will,) not ours, be done? Christianity asserts it, I wish and pray, that
my heart and yours, when it comes to it, may say so too. For St. Paul to
Timothy, a man of sufferings, in that known place 2 Timothy 3.12, 13.
, tells us positively, All that will live godly must suffer persecution. That
all of us must expect to be buffetted, either in the act, or in the intention,
or in both, as there is occasion; or as we are called to it, but upon no
pretense whatsoever, to run headlong upon it; yet at last how many more will
be found Martyrs to their lusts and Phancies, to their unruly humors, and
untoward passions, than to their God, their Savior, to their King or Country.
You may easily gather by what has been already tendered you, I do not at all
intend to befriend any Party or Faction; I had rather my faltering Tongue
should cleave to the roof of my Mouth Psalm. 137.
, than so for to do; my design is only to press on you uncounterfeit Piety, and
real Holiness, Christian Loyalty, and ready Obedience, whatever comes on it;
that I would have you not to be biased, to flag, or be turned aside at any
thing, but to weather-beat, and to endure the brunt and shock of the most
threatening dangers Ephesians. 8.6.
; for had I so much as a thought to become a popular Preacher, to be the Worlds
Jam. 4.4.
Minion or Favorite, and to serve my self, instead of serving my God Gal. 1.10.
, I would go another way to work Psalm. 82.6, 7.
, to keep at as great a distance as might be from men's sins, or sore places. As
to give you but a taste Mat. 24.23.24.
, like a fair spoken Jesuit in Masquerade, that has his full Commission to act
any part, whether Atheist, Fanatic, or Papist; that makes nothing at all of
wresting the most Sacred Records, so as to force them to speak as he would have
them; 1. As first to one Club rendezvous of boon Companions, I would comply
with them as far as I could; And by my Example I would encourage them to take
their swing, to eat, drink, play Exodus 32.
, and be merry 1 Luke 12.9, 20.
, and do whatever they had a mind to 1 Cor. 15.32.
, tho one does not know what a day may bring forth, and that to morrow one may
die for it Pro, 27.1.
.

2. Again, to another select number and Tribe, I would hearten them on, to take
not their Christian Jam. 1.26.
, but the Libertines Liberty, and tell them of luscious promises, fine pleasing
things to tickle their effeminate fancies; and if this did not sound well, I
would in Scripture Language claw their itching Ears, 2 Timothy 4.
by crying, Peace, peace; tho sudden destruction was ready to befall them 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
; yet I would flatter them, that tho they were perverse and froward, peevish
and passionate, self willed and headstrong in private, in their Families, if
it did not come to the worlds knowledge, I would not boggle, seriously to tell
and tantalize 'em too, that whatever they did, they were God's Jewels Mal. 3.17.
, the Heirs of Promise Heb. 1.6.
, yea the very Darlings of Heaven, tho to their unspeakable sorrow, and amazing
disappointment, Jer. 5.2.
they would find the bottomless Pit to be the only place of their Inheritance, Mat.
23.14.
and the Lot and Portion of Hypocrites to be their Doom. Mat. 24.51.


3. But again, especially to a third gang and parcel, that I should expect the
greatest Harvest from, that style themselves the most Christian-like people,
tho the most carnal and diabolical 1 Timothy 4.
, both in their Principles and Practices, I would Saint 'em, and pretend to
inroll them in Heavens Calendar, bearing them in hand, as if it did lie in my
power to set them at Christ's left and right hand, if they would but unking
Kingdoms, and set the World it self in a combustion Act. 17.6.6.
, and on a flame, and then would have them with Pilate, wash their hands in
innocence Mat. 27.24.
, wipe their mouths too, and say, What have they done that should so incense
all Parties against them, I would further strive to make them believe that they
did God good service thereby Joh. 16.2.
, that they should at last have a Coronation, instead of meeting with a
Damnation day Romans 13.2.
. If they would but, like the Evil one in the Gospel Mat. 13.24, 25, 28.
, sow Weeds and Tares in the Protestants Wheat, (not only in private
Assemblies, but in the Public ones, that are allowed by Authority,) and when
they had done that, to bundle them up Wheat and Chaff, all of us together,
especially the most remarkable opposers, as the most combustible matter,
fittest for the Papists Bonfire, or to take that easy plausible way, as to
throw Bones of Contention amongst us, and then glory in it Phil. 3.18.19.
, (which some I am afraid already have effectually done) making us to bite,
tear, devour one another Gal. 5.14.
, without so much as putting to their helping hand, and then such shall be said
to do God good service, tho they were immediately employed in Satan's Drudgery.

Thus, thus would I do, were I to serve my self, or the vain World, tho not so
bluntly as I have done it here, for this was done designedly to let you see
through the thin Vail that was drawn over a little to disguise and varnish it
dele, ovee but remembering, (remembering,) that I am a Servant of the high God,
therefore as Heaven's Ambassador, I bespeak you, beseech you in his most
glorious Name, having to do with a better Play Master than such Bragadosia's, or
mere puffs of Wind can pretend to, promise me, or any other, do roundly, not
mincingly tell you over again by way of general direction.

3. In the last place; If you do not repent, you shall all likewise perish
Luke. 13.3.
. It is not enough that you have Abraham Matthew. 3.
, Isaac and Jacob for your Father; I mean no more by it than this, tho you be
born of Christian Parents, and bear so honorable a Name of being Protestants,
and would continue so from one Generation to another, yet that will not serve
turn, tho you be of the Church of England, of Rome, of Geneva, or of the
Brotherhood, or of separate Congregations Gal. 3. Col. 3.
, it will be no acceptable service at all 1 Cor. 7.19.
, unless you do the enjoined Will of your Father in Heaven, be Israelites
without guile in deed and in truth.

And that you may be thoroughly known whatever Names you may go by, it is
demanded from the Church-Party to see their Faith by their good works Jam. 2.
, of all others to know the Tree by its Fruit Matthew. 7.
; this takes most, tho both Scripture expressions, and the sense partly the
same; the former to see their Principles by their Practices, the latter to know
their lives by their fruit bearing, I mean, by their upright, honest,
conscientious living. Therefore this is known for a great truth, to be the
Lords Livery, wherever it is worn throughout the parts of Europe, Cease to do
evil, learn to do well Isa. 1.16, 17.
. If you will be styled the Lord's Servants, a great deal is coucht under those
two short Sentences; as to the particulars, I refer you to what has been
already offered to you; but if you would have it over again in other words,
look in the Prophet Micah Mich. 6.8.
; What does the Lord require of you, but to do Justice, love Mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God? That is in short, let Sobriety and Temperance be practiced
on your selves, Righteousness and Justice to your Neighbor, Piety and
Godliness to your Maker, and you will find Luke 13.13.
, that you are not then to be found in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in
Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envy, etc. but imitate the Lord
Jesus, as he has already given us an Example.

I can only now touch on things, and as it were, dart Truths at random; yet as
you have it in the first Book of Samuel 1 Samuel 17.
, a stone being slung by a contemptible Stripling, what effect it had. Now
God's Spirit, and your own Conscience levelling this and the other Truth, that
it may hit the white, the mark, sink down into the heart, and kill a Goliath, a
Gigantick sin, whatever you may term me for throwing my poor Mite into the
Treasury and Corban of the Lord's Service. Mark 12.
I Will not go on in reparteeing as to call you uncircumcised Christians, whilst
I am upon serving England's living God, but accost you with all the respect and
tenderness that the Subject is able to bear. I Will treat you, yea address my
self to you, not as you are the poor despicable Subjects of a great Prince, but
as if ye were so many Grandees and Monarchs of several little Worlds and
Countries, which was the first Original of Families, as you may see at large in
the Old Testament; every Head of a Family, being a kind of a petty God or King;
and still in many respects you are so within your Precincts and Provinces,
within your own proper Stations and Boundaries, within your own Dominions and
Domestic Territories, if you do not forfeit your right and title thereto by a
false Religion, by Rebellion, Sacrilege, or the like, which is cried out
against as much as the deadly sin of Sorcery or Witchcraft 1 Samuel 15.23.
.

Therefore it is to you pious Parents, and worthy Governors of your Families,
tho you have never so mean thoughts of your selves, the more you are so for
being humble, meek, lowly, and submissive, that my suit is in the behalf of the
great Majesty, not only of Earth, but Heaven, that you and your houses would
resolve In what manner Dr. Calamy has done't, you may see on that Text, Romans
3.8. page 28, 29, 30, 31. it is with that confession, solemnity, protestation,
and nobleness of spirit, that it deserves to be ingrav'd in Letters of Gold, if
it would but excite all others to take up the same Christian alike resolution
in the behalf of God, the Church, the King, the present Government, the
Country, against either Popery or Fanaticism.
to serve the Lord; There (There) there you are so many petty Kings to control
and command according to your own private will and pleasure, and your dutiful
Children are as so many little Princes about you, and your trusty Servants are
as so many Lords, not Slaves, attending on you. Now is it not great pity that
such a glorious Equipage, heavenly Retinue, should be badly employed in Satan's
drudgery instead of the Lords honorable service; yea every poor man in his
weather-beaten Cottage, has as much Command and Authority there under his
thatcht Roof, and narrow Confines, as the Peer and Noble man has within his
spacious Manor, or Princely Palace.

Therefore all of you, I humbly beseech you, Rule well within your own Stations
and Territories, keep up their good Order and Kingly Government, and instruct
all under you, in Obedience and Duty, in Justice and Honesty, to your selves,
and others; and what you expect from them, to you, according to that golden
Rule, Doing as you would be done by; it does not repent me, tho this be the
second or third time: I have had it on this Subject, that you by your Examples
press it the more on them, by doing it, and continually practicing the same,
your selves to those above you; especially to those to whom you owe subjection,
to Kings and to all that are placed in Authority under them, and then this will
be to the honor of God, to the Advancement of your Religion, to the Well being
of your selves, to the promoting of your Families, to the Benefit of your
Neighbors, to the Glory of our Nation, and at last to your own Eternal
Salvation. And till you have done all this in your own houses, be not under any
pretense whatsoever drawn out to the reforming, and new-modelling of Nations:
It is too great a work for every Mechanic or single Statesman to undertake,
such grand matters are for the whole Nation to consult on, or at least for
their Representatives imbodyed into one; For what says the wise man, that great
States man of all others, King Solomon by name, That in the multitude of
Counselors there is (much) safety Prove. 11.14.
. So that now for you that are present, tho many, yet scarce the thousandth Man
of them that are in His Majesty's Dominion: Therefore it behooves you, instead
of mending and new molding of Kingdoms, let your Eyes be turned within doors;
begin at home, and you will find such need of repairs there, that you will not
easily be tempted to look abroad for want of better Employment, as the Lord
knows all of us too frequently are. Grant that the Nation is bad, very bad, but
do not you make it worse by being so too. Nay further, admit of it, that it not
only has a Mote, but a very great Beam in its Eye, that it is not at all
sensible of it, and almost blinded with it, that it begins to be frantic and
raving, with its pricking pain; what then, shall we like Quacks and
Mountebanks, long to be meddling and tampering with it? No, no! I hope we are
all of us so ingenuous, and I do not at all doubt of it, but that we will
freely acknowledge that there is something, tho it be never so little in our own
Eyes, that each single person in the Kingdom would be pleased to pluck out that
which is in their own, or in their Families; and when we come to see clearly,
by that time there will not be so much as the least Speck, Iota, in the Eye of
the Nation left.

To conclude; We have hitherto been too preposterously employed, and begun
undiscreetly, very odly at the wrong end, as if we would Tile the House, or
Thatch it with Straw or Stubble, and then daub up the Walls with our untemper'd
Mortar, and not only so, but to hang it too in the fleeting Air by Geometry,
before we have so much as laid the very foundation, the first corner Stone. The
New Testament tells you, this is not like a Master Builder Luke 14.
. We may hold up these light shingles, or whiffling straws, that the wind blows
to and fro up in our hands, or support them for a short time, with the strong
blasts of our foul mouths, but in time weary of the Employ, and slavish
Service, they will at last, (if not timely taken down,) fall like heavy Slates,
upon our heads, and dash us, ours, our Religion, our threatened Church, our
tottering State, our poor King, and poorer Kingdom, into a thousand piece-meals
Nahum.
, making all our Habitations empty, void and waste, which the Lord in his mercy
prevent, and grant that we and our Houses may forth with serve the Lord, in
that manner that may be most acceptable to him, that he, and his Church, has
appointed, to his Glory, and to our own Salvation: The Lord grant so great a
blessing to the whole Nation, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

