THE Grave and Learned Speech OF SERJEANT-VVILDE, (Journeyman-Judge to the
House of Commons) made at a Conference with the Lords, the twelv'th of Aug.
1648. concerning the bayling of Major ROLPHE, who endeavored to murder the
KING.

Auf ye 31 printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted, 1648.

The Speech it self.
I Am commanded by the House of Commons to desire your Lordships concurrence
with them for the bayling of Major Rolphe, now prisoner in the Gate House,
which they conceive (and would have your Lordships believe) is an act not more
of favor than of justice: Whether you consider (as we do) the quality of his
person, or the Crime whereof he is accused: For by his imprisonment, not only
his body is in great danger to be poisoned with the hellish smoke of Tobacco
(wherein only deboish't drunkards delight) but his righteous-Soule also (like
Lotts in Sodom) is vexed with the horrid blasphemous oaths, and drinking of
healths of the dam-me. Cavalieres, who for their Rebellion and Treason against
the State, are there justly imprisoned. And surely, my Lords, in reason he
ought to be bayled; whether you look upon him as a man, and a Soldier, whose
life ought not to be neglected, or as a new-Christian, of whose precious Soul
there ought to be a due regard; both which (to say truth he has ventred for
the good of the Re-publique and the preservation of all us who have the honor
to sit here this day, for the good of our Vtopia: And who can tell, if he
should come to a legall-tryall, how many of us he might accuse as abettors of
the intended Act? But it may be objected, That the world takes notice of the
Crime, and that therefore (though we know that some of your Lordships are of
our mind even in this particular) it would be scandalous to bail a man for
Treason against the person of the King: But (my Lords) I will as quickly remove
that objection, as I did that of counterfeiting the great-Seale of England, and
that briefly and in few words. If no King, then no Treason: And no doubt if
those Principles be true which we have borrowed of the infallible chair (as
the children of Israel did the Egyptians jewels.) It is evident, that the
person whom this worthy Gentleman is supposed would have murdered by poison or
pistol (it is no matter whether) is no King; especially being contrived while
our votes for no Addresses to him were in force. Diverse of the learned beyond
the Sea (and some on this side too though not book learned) hold; That if a
King be Excommunicate, he is no longer a King, and that it is lawful (at
least it is not Treason) to take him away. And if so (the validity of such
Excommunication being from a forreigne-power, and less inspired) Then a
fortiori; if by us, and our Assembly, that have undoubted (though till now
unknown) power and right: he that was an unprofitable King, be for just causes
(of which we are the sole Judges) divested of all power, (by the sense of the
two Houses) Then, I say, he is no King: But We conjunctly are King of
England; (as Master Prynne and Master Parker by many learned, polite, and
prolixe Treatises (seen and allowed by Master Saint-John our Solicitor) have
been more then sufficiently proved: How else could we have hanged Yeomans and
Bourcher, who would have delivered up our City of Bristoll: Or beheaded the two
Hothams, who (upon second foolish conscientious Considerations) would have
restored the Town of Hull to the pretended owner: Or Carew, who would have
delivered up Plymouth to the enemy: Or executed Tomkins and Challoner, who
would have set on foot the Commission of Array, in London: Or to trusse up
Burleigh (not the least of my services) who would have rescued the King from
Carisbrook-prison: Or (to pass by many others) Kniveton, who came with the
Kings-Writt to adjourn the Term: all whose Designs were only intentional,
none acted: The least of which we neither could nor durst have perpetrated had
not the regall-Power resided in Us; and if in Us, then certainly in none other:
It being as mcuh against common reason to think, that in regalitie; the King
and Parliament both have power, as to say that Monarchy and Anarchy are, or can
be, simul and semel in one Kingdom. And this I speak as a Lawyer, being so by
inheritance, my Father (though not of so public a Spirit) being so before
me. Yet he never was a Judge, as I have been both at Winchester and
Canterbury as your Lordships, well know. And why may not I be heir to my
fathers Law, as well as the Citizens sons of London (though they have no
skill in their fathers trade or Profession) be made free by their fathers Copy.

Besides (My Lords) against this Gentleman there is a bare accusation, or
impeachment, and that only by two prisoners, whose testimonies in all
circumstances agree not; for I am sure there is great difference in their hand
writings (a point worthy your Lordships consideration) But suppose they agreed
both in circumstance and substance; shall the testimony of two such men
condemn so well deserving a man for a few foolish supposed Treasonable words,
or intentions, and but against a titular King? for we are King in effect; we
Judges of the Law, he our prisoner.

Let us not (My Lords) give way to such a credulity. It may concern both your
Lordships and us very much to be well advised before we resolve any thing to
be Treason* acted against his person. If what, not only two but two thousand
(and I may say twenty thousand more) do daily and hourly say (and would
swear) concerning us, should be believed: Lord what should become of us? many
thousands men and women, now being bold to say: That all we of this
righteous, blessed, and reforming Parliament are Rebels, and Traitors: Nay
that we are no Parliament, but a Junto of Factious, ambitious, selfe-seeking,
and covetous men; whereof more then the one half sit there illegally, and
keep honester men out of their places. That all our Votes, Orders, and
Ordinances (which are an unreasonable number) are against reason, and the
known Laws of the Realm: And shall we therefore believe them? if we do,
then our own Consciences (which we have extended as far as may be would
condemn us.

And now (My Lords) if we neither do, nor may with safety believe so many
witnesses against our selves (though we know the matter true) why should we
believe only two against a man who, for ought I know, is as honest as any of
us? Nay (My Lords) I will go further yet and affirm; That if a Jury of 12. men
should condemn him; yet in point of discretion, and reason of state, we may
and ought not only to bail this virtuous Gentleman, but also to release and
set him free.

And for this we have a president within the memory of man, and it was of an
honorable Gentleman, and a true Nathaniel (whose father sits among you) who
was by a Council of War condemned to die as a Coward, for surrendering up of a
Town which was thought tenable, and yet he was set at liberty and lives;
Vivit, imo vivit, and in Senatum venit, as it was very eloquently urged in as
honest a man's case by Tully, who (though no bencher of the inner Temple)
understood the Laws of England as well as my self. And I dare be bold to
say, that there were more than two witnesses, to prove his guilt of the fact;
and those of better quality then these, and that they which found him
culpable, were men of as much honesty, and more judgment, then our ordinary
Jurors, who for the most part (except some such as I found at Canterbury, where
they would find me nothing but an Ignoramus) will give their verdict, as we
the Judges in our wisdoms (Whatsoever the Law is) shall direct them. And
lastly that those Judges were as honest men as any which we shall (now) send
to judge this Gentleman; if we should (which were injurious) suffer him to be
tried.

Moreover, if that noble gentleman before mentioned, were justly condemned,
then his setting at liberty and pardon was unjust (Unless by us having
potestatem vitae and necis) but de facto he was set at liberty, pardoned, and
lives in as much honor and reputation as ever he did. And it must be
presumed that the two houses (who are infallible in their judgments) did not
err in so doing. And if the King, when a King, and as a King by the judgment
of the Law can do no wrong, much less can we being 500. Kings, and have all
the power he had, and more.

But may some say, (and no doubt but some will be so malicious) why should
Major Rolfe be so much troubled at the smell of Tobacco having all other good
accommodations, he being a man of so mean an education and occupation till
within these few years that we imploid men of all sorts, Trades and opinions
in the forming of our Armies, and for reformation of Religion; and since bred
up in the Wars which might have enured him to so much hardness as that the
smell of Tobacco should no more have offended him now, then that of
Shooe-makers wax, or Leather new come from the Curriers did then.

My Lords; It is true he was by his profession a Shooe-makers Apprentice, and
so was his master Philpit too, who was a while a Captain, but for his lives
security went away at the first battle, which had he not done he might by
this time have been a Collonell, as well as his man a Major. But my Lords
what is that to the purpose? we know that Tobacco is naught, though the King
never take any; His foot must not be now measured by the old last. And as the
old proverb tells us; honors change manners. Was not Cato taken from the plow
to the Senate? and yet it was never objected to him as any point worthy
reproach, and some of us (who are not of the greatest rank of gentry, nor very
great Clearks) have read (or at least heard) of a King, whose father was a
Potter for which cause he did all his life time after, eat his meat in
earthen dishes, and is no more dishonor to him, then to some pure seraphicall
Members of our house to have been Weavers, and Vinegar-men. And therefore we
hope, and desire, notwithstanding these objections, or any thing else that is,
or can, or shall be said, or proved against him. That (if your Lordships will
not think fit to reward him for his meritorious intententions) yet that you
will concur with the house of Commons to bail him; which if your Lordships
shall not assent to, we doubt not but we know where to have a Justice of
peace, and Quor. that will. And for the time to come we hope that the same
providence which has hitherto beyond all humane expectation kept us in our
several stations, will so unite our hearts that we shall sit all together in
a blessed Union, in our house, and save much of that Labor which has hitherto
been spent in Conference.

FINIS.

