To the Honorable the House of Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Francis Wicker, the wife of Robert Wicker,
Shows,
THat about two years since, one Hanna the wife of Ambrose Tarrant being
arraigned for poisoning of Alice Tarrant her said husbands mother, at the
Assizes holden for the County of Surry was condemned for the same, and had
judgment for death accordingly. And being in the Cart to be carried to
execution, Rich. Wright, Cornelius Cook, and Tho. Hudson, Justices of the
Peace for the said County, sending a note to the Sheriff to make stay of the
party condemned, and thereby undertaking to save him harmless, she was
thereupon stayed; and afterward a Reprieve was obtained to make stay of
execution, by Mr. Sergeant Green Judge in Commission till the next Assizes:
which being done, Mr. Wright (one of the Justices aforesaid,) forthwith used
all means for her enlargement, and for that purpose, gave unto Thomas Devenish
the Keeper of the Jail five pound; and having by these indirect means, not
only reprieved her life, and obtained her liberty, but did likewise give her
free access to his own house, where they were very intimate together. That
since she has often threatened the death of your Petitioner, she being the
daughter of the impoysoned woman, and to that purpose lay in wait by a wood
side near Rigate with a pistol, thinking to have met with your Petitioner
coming to London, and so to have executed her bloody purpose: but she then by
Gods mercy missing of her intent did afterward plot a new and secret mischief
to take your Petitioners life, and by the combination and confederacy of the
said Mr. Wright upon a pretended robbery sworn against your Petitioner, she
was sent to prison there to remain without Bail or Mainprise, at which time
there was diverse in the Jail dyed of the plague, they thinking your Petitioner
could not have escaped. Nevertheless by this means your Petitioners sister and
three children lost their lives by coming to visit her.

And further in pursuance of this their covetous and wicked practice, Mr.
Wright gave warrant and express command to Thomas White Constable of Headly,
to bring your Petitioners father Andrew Tarrant up to London either dead or
alive, and said he would make him dispose of his estate, and being brought up
to Town, was enforced to live with the said Hanna and her husband, where
within foureteen days he dyed. And further to make your Petitioner most
miserable, and themselves more infamous: Thomas White Constable of Headly
aforesaid, was expressly commanded by Mr. Wright to detain your Petitioners key
of her house, which he did accordingly, and forthwith brought it to Mr. Wright,
who suddenly after gave it to the said Ambrose Tarrant, who thereupon entered
her house at Headly, and so took all she had away, to the value of eighty
pounds in goods of her own, besides three hundred pounds in bonds, which was
left to your Petitioner by her said father in lieu of her marriage portion.

She therefore in this her sad and deplorable condition, humbly prays that
the sentence of death may be executed upon the said Hanna according to the Law
(and for that there was no prosecution upon the aforesaid accusation of
Robbery) that restitution may be made for the goods so unjustly taken from your
Petitioner, and that the said Mr. Wright and other his confederates may be
brought before this High and Honorable Court to answer the premises, and that
your Petitioner may have such further relief therein as to your grave Wisdoms
shall seem meet,

And she as in all duty bound will daily pray for the happy success of this
High and Honorable Court.

