A Plea for the MINISTRY, OR Certain Propositions asserted out of the
Scriptures concerning the Ministry.

As concerning Its Continuance. Ordination. Work. Maintenance.


With the Answers of diverse Objections that occur.

By WILLIAM WICKINS Pastor of Andrew Hubbard, London.

2 CORINTHIANS. 3.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Our sufficiency is of God, who also has
made us able Ministers of the new Testament, not of the Letter but of the
Spirit, for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives life, but if the
ministration of death, written and engraven in stones, was glorious, so that
the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the
glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done away, how shall not the
ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? For if the ministration of
condemnation be glorious, much more does the ministration of righteousness
exceed in glory, for even that which was made glorious had no glory in this
respect, by reason of the glory that excels, for if that which was done away
was glorious, much more that which remains is glorious. LONDON, Printed by A.
M. for Thomas Underhill and William Raybould, at the Blew Anchor, and at the
Unicorn in Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

A Plea for the MINISTRY.
PROP. I. That there is a Ministerial Office in the Church of Christ, to
continue to the end of the World.
Proof. 1.
1 TIMOTHY 3.1. This is a true saying, If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he
desires a good work.
IT is not useless the Preface of the Apostle, This is a true saying. It is
used once before, (...).
but about a weighty business, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying (the
same phrase) and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners, etc. By the rule of contraries, an untrue and
unfaithful saying, that there is no such office to be desired, a saying worthy
of no acceptance. Again, the office of a Bishop; (...).
it is spoken of that good office bad Judas had, and into which another was to
succeed, Acts 1.20. And his Bishopric let another take; (...).
as bad as he was, his Office was to be supplied by another, which was
Ministerial, Acts 1.17. (...).
For he was numbered with us and had obtained part of this Ministry. And the
Elders ordained by the Apostles have the same name given them, Acts 20.28. Take
heed therefore to your selves and to all the flock, over the which the holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God. They are said to be
over the flock, it is Scripture Language, (...).
for though it be rendered as it may, in which, (...).
yet the preposition (...) carries as much? yet we would not be understood of
Lordship, the Apostle is against it, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. The Elders which are
among you I exhort, etc. v.2. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking
the oversight thereof, etc. v.3. neither as being Lords over Gods heritage.
(...).
But that none might too eagerly catch at the translation, let the Elder here
have but his right, and write it, in which, if you please. Again, they were
such as were to feed the flock. (...).
I will pass by the full signification of the word, least I cause jealousy,
which before I desired to give no occasion to, yet to feed the flock every one
must needs confess to be a Metaphor taken from the Shepherd, and Christ
himself is styled, the great Shepherd of our souls, 1 Pet. 5.4. When the chief
Shepherd shall come. (...).
Further they are wished to take heed to all the flock: Surely all these denote
an Officer, this Officer is called an Overseer or Bishop, the word being as
before.

2. Matthew. 28.20. And lo I am with you always unto the end of the world. He
speaks to his eleven Disciples, elsewhere termed Apostles, v.16. Then the
cleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain where Jesus had
appointed them. v.17. And when they saw him, they worshipped him, but some
doubted. v.18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them, All power is given me in
heaven and in earth. v.19. Go ye therefore, to wit, the eleven Disciples, whom
he calls Apostles, Luke 6.13. And when it was day he called unto him his
disciples, and of them he chose twelve whom he also called Apostles, one of the
twelve, to wit, Judas, was gone unto his own place. Again, their work is to
teach and baptize, (...).
v.19, 20. Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of
the Father, etc. And here you have the promise, And lo, I am with you always
even unto the end of the world, Amen. It may be worth while to observe the
connection, Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you,
(...)
and lo I am with you. The special notice Christ would that they should take
of it. (...)
Lo I am with you. They did take great notice of his going from them, and they
knew he would not return till the end of the world, but he would that they take
as much notice of his presence with them in their Ministerial work, (...).
Lo I am with you. Once more take notice how it is ratified, Amen, let them be
whose words they will, Christ's or the Spirits, it witnesses and seals the
truth.

But if any would reply to that expression, to the end of the world, because it
may be rendered to the end of the age. Consider, 1. the phrase is used, Matthew.
13.39. The enemy that sowed them is the devil, the harvest is the end of the
world, the reapers are the Angels, v.40. As therefore the tears are gathered
and burnt in the fire, so shall it be in the end of the world. v.49. So shall
it be in the end of the world, the Angels shall come forth and sever the wicked
from among the just. Matthew. 24.9. Tell us when shall these things be, and what
shall be the sign of thy coming and of the end of the world: in all which
places it undeniably reaches beyond a present age, to the end. If any hold be
taken of the last by any, let them make all the Symptoms given by Christ
appliable to that present age. 2. It here expounds or further declares the
precedent words rendered always, how they are in the original we have given
you in the Margin.
Lastly, the work here injoined, to which the promise is annexed, is perpetual
to the end, to Preach and Baptize.

3. Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we
all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a pefect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.
Particular Officers are here designed, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, and all is for the work of the
Ministry. And the continuance is clear, (...)
v.13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness
of Christ: and when all this, the Saints perfected, the Church edified to a
fullness, and we all come to compleatnes? but in the end, when as the Apostle
says, the Church shall be presented to Christ, without spot or wrinkle, Ephesians.
5.27.

If it be said, that Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists be ceased, We answer,
there are yet pastors and teachers, the others laid the foundation and had
office and gifts accordingly, these do build thereupon, but if we will take
away them also, then we must conclude, which we cannot with any reason, that we
are all come to a perfect man, and to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

PROP. II. That no man ought to assume this office unto himself, uncalled.
Proof.
HEbr. 5.4. And no man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of
God. (...).
No man may do it, can do it, without sin, and an undue usurping of honor.
1. This honor: what if we say honorable Office, for it is plain the Apostle
speaks of an office, (...).
and that ministerial, for man in things pertaining to God, (...).
as he phrases it, v.1. Again, 1 Aaron was called of God. v.4. As was Aaron. 2
Christ glorified not himself. v.5. So also Christ glorified not himself to be
made an high Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I
begotten thee. 3 For whom is it then meet to honor himself by putting himself
into an honorable office, for man in things appertaining to God, uncalled.


Yea, but the Apostle speaks of the High Priesthood as Leviticall in Aaron, and
according to the order of Melchizedech in Christ.

A. 1 That principally he does, 2 That by proportion it must extend to all
Ministerial officers. Per analogiam.
For first they are for men in things appertaining to God, and shall every one
that will consecrate himself, though he be of the lowest of the people, or that
are least esteemed in the Church, as the Apostle terms it? he says of them,
and that in things appertaining to men, that they should be set to judge (1
Cor. 6.4. If then ye have judgments of things pertaining to this life) set
them to judge, (...).
who are least esteemed in the Church. Secondly it is an honor. Thirdly an
office, both these are not to be taken but given.



PROP. III. That an external mediate calling by men, is necessary in the
ordinary state of the Church.
Proof.
1. THerefore did the Apostles ordain Elders in every Church, Acts 14.23. And
when they had (...), See D. Seamon of ordination, p. 10 etc.
ordained them (...).
Elders in every c Church. 2. And therefore was Titus left at Creet, e (...),
the phrase (...) and (...) so used in the New Testament.
Tit. 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should set in
order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City as I had
appointed thee. We need not fear that any will assert these to be civil Elders,
since that Titus was left by Paul to ordain them, but Elders here in the Church
are to be ordained by Titus as in order to the setting of things in order that
were wanting. Yea this is done not according to the Prudence of Titus, but the
appointment of Paul, and therefore it is, (...).
as I have appointed thee. All which had been superfluous, if an external
mediate call by man were not requisite. For what may be said pro or con
concerning the word, That thou may ordain in the original, (...).
I refer to that solid Piece of the Learned Author Dr Seaman in his Treatise of
Ordination p. 6. 3. And therefore also are rules left on record to note out fit
persons for this office, 1 Timothy 3.2, etc. A Bishop then must be, etc. not for
any only to judge himself by, but thereby to be judged, ver. 14, 15. These
things write I unto thee that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy
self in the house of God. These things must needs refer to what is immediately
before, to wit, (...).
the qualifications of such as are to be made Deacons or Bishops. 4. A Caveat
given, that hands be laid on no man suddenly, 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly
on no man, (...)
which Timothy had no need to be warned in, had an internal call from God been
sufficient.

PROP. IV. That in calling to the Ministry, Ordination is to be used by Prayer,
Fasting and Imposition of Hands.
Proof.
FIrst, For Fasting and Prayer. 1. Acts 14.23. And when they had ordained them
Elders in every Church, (...).
and had prayed with fasting, etc. And there is not any ground of quarrel
about this, by reason of the manner of delivering the words, because 2. the
very weightinesse of the work it self presses so much on us. Secondly, For
Imposition of Hands, the place a little above, 1 Timothy 5.22. and the Imposition
of Hands in this place, is the more to be considered, because it is given in
among the standing rules for a man of God to proceed by in the Church, and the
connection it has with that that follows, viz. Neither be partakers of other
men's sins, Keep thy self pure. It was used in the time of the old Law, and
likewise in the Apostles time, accompanied with the bestowing of the gifts of
the Spirit: yet likewise we find it to extend it self further, as in this
place, so 1 Timothy 4.14. where is spoken of the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery, and Act. 13.2. Paul and Barnabas being to be separated to the work
whereunto God had called them, they fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, and sent them away: so that notwithstanding whatever may seem to be urged
against it as ceremonial in the law, or as being accompanied with gifts now
ceased, yet by those later Scriptures it may well be looked upon as a solemn
Apostolical rite fit to be used in setting one apart to the work of the
Ministry.

PROP. V. That this Ordination all along the new Testament, was performed by
men in the Ministry.
Proof.
AS Acts 14.23. And when they had ordained them Elders, etc. There needs no
great contest about the word [they] the context seriously looked upon will give
light sufficient, ver. 20. And the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe,
that is, Paul with Barnabas, and when they had preached the Gospel; (they two)
to that city, and had taught many, they returned again to Lystra and Iconium
and Antioch (the same they) confirming the souls of the disciples, and
exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that we must through much
tribulation enter into the kingdom of God. And when they had ordained them
Elders in every Church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the
Lord on whom they believed. And after they had passed through Pisidia, they
came to Pamphilia, and when they had preached the word in Perga, they went down
unto Attalia, and thence sailed to Antioch, from whence they had been
recommended to the grace of God, for the work which they fulfilled. Of which
work this is part, that they ordained Elders in every Church. 2 of Timothy it
is clear, as before, 1 Timothy 5.22. 3 of Titus it is as manifest, Tit. 1 5. And
as for the ordaining of Ministers by the people, at least without Elders, Sine
Presbyteris.
there is not the least in the whole new Testament, which I conceive were not
amiss for those to consider, who in another case stand much upon it. There is
no precept, there is no example, as likewise by them that would come up to
Scripture-rule in all things.

PROP. VI. That unto them which are called to the office of the Ministry,
belongs the care of souls, the preaching of the word, the administration of the
Seals, and that of office, as Ministers of the Gospel.
Proof.
HEb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your souls, as they that must give account. They watch for your
souls, the good of them, (...).
and as those that are charged with them, as they that must give account, which
is the direct work of those that are spoken of ver. 7. Remember them that have
the rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of God: Spoken it by way
of preaching it, and upon this ground is the Apostles injunction or
exhortation, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves,
(...).
for, etc. which must needs infer more then a mere watching over one another
of charity, ex charitate, otherwise nothing is here required but a mutual and
brotherly submission one to another, which is clear against the Apostles scope.
2.1 Tim. 3.2. A Bishop must be apt to teach, (...).
which infers more then a remote ability, and yet implies his ability in
reference to his work, which is in ver. 1. called a good work. 3.1. Cor. 4.1.
(...).
The Ministers of Christ are styled Stewards of the mysteries of God: Let a man
so account of us as the Ministers of Christ and Stewards of the mysteries of
God. Mat. 28.19, 20. They are to teach and baptize, (...).
Go teach and baptize all Nations, being the eleven Disciples or Apostles, as
we have touched above.

PROP. VII. That these Ministers laboring in the word and doctrine, ought to
be maintained by the Church of God.
Proof.
1 COr. 9.7. Who goes a warfare any time at his own charges? who planteth a
vineyard and eats not the fruit thereof? or who feeds a flock and eats
not of the milk of the flock? ver. 8. Say I these things as a man, or says not
the Law the same also? v.9. For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall
not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn: does God take care
for Oxen? v.10. Or says he it altogether for our sakes, for our sakes no doubt
this is written, that he that ploweth should plow in hope, and that he that
thresheth in hope should be partaker of his hope, ver. 11. If we have sown unto
you spiritual things is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things?
v. 13. Do you not know that they which minister about holy things, live of the
things of the Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? v.14. Even so has the Lord ordained, (...) and.
that they which preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel.

Yea, but Paul labored with his hands.

A.
1. But so did not other of the Apostles. 2. That then he had power to forbear,
ver. 6. Or I only and Barnabas, (...).
have not we power to forbear working? 3. That it was upon special reason why
he did so for the present occasion. Probic and nunc.
AS 1. That he might not abuse his power in the Gospel, by being chargeable
where it could not be without oppression, v. 18. What is my reward then?
verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I make the Gospel of Christ without
charge, (...).
that I abuse not my power in the Gospel. And that he speaks of an oppressive
charge is clear, 2 Corinthians 11.9. And when I was present with you, and wanted, I
was chargeable to no man: For that which was lacking to me, the brethren which
came from Macedonia supplied, and in all things I have kept my self from being
burdensome to you, (...).
and so will I keep my self. 2. That upon this occasion of living on the
Gospel, the Gospel it self might not be hindered, v. 12. If others be partakers
of this power over you, are not we rather: Nevertheless we have not used this
power, (...).
but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ.

Yea, but he puts his example as a pattern to Elders, Act. 20.34. Yea, you your
selves know, that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them
that were with me. v.35. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring,
you ought to support the weak.

A.
1. The Apostle does not build with one hand and pull down with another, he
acquaints the Church at Corinth of that power which they that preach the Gospel
have to live upon the Gospel: and we cannot imagine that from these he takes it
away, especially since he had said, even so has the Lord ordained; it is
expressly then jure diuiuo, that they that preach the Gospel should live of the
Gospel. 2. Therefore it must needs follow, that by propounding his own example
he would take them from the abuse of that power, that they should not be
oppressively burdensome, which he always avoided, (...).
which is further hinted in those words, that so laboring ye ought to support
the weak.
FINIS.

