ENGLANDS SORROWS turned into JOY. A SERMON Preached the 28th. of June, 1660.
Being a Public Thanksgiving, for the Restoration of his Excellent Majesty,
Charles II. Of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the
Faith, etc. To His Crowns and Kingdoms, and us (His Subjects) to our Ancient
Rights, Liberties, and Laws. By John Whynnell, Minister of the Gospel at
Askerswell in the County of Dorset.

Prove. 29. 2. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People Rejoice.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for H. Brom at the Gun in Ivie-lane, 1661.

depiction of Charles II or Charles Stuart framed by a heart, with three crowns
above, and two entwined cornucopias below Carol' Secund' D G Mag: Bri: Fra: et
Hib: Rex:



TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL GEORGE FULFORD, Esquire; One of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace, and Quorum, for the County of Dorset.
SIR,
THE experience that I have had of your former many favors, makes me bold to
Ask, and confident to Obtain, this one more from you, viz. To shelter this
poor following Sermon under your Name.

I have not so high an esteem of it, as to think it worthy your Acceptance (if
so, I should have presented it to you as a Gift) but so mean, as that it needs
your Countenance.

It was the advice of St. Augustine, that in places where, and times when
Errors do abound, all men should write, that had any (though but the least)
faculty (which makes some Apology for me) that so amongst many Books all sorts
of people might meet with some, to convince them of their Errors, and
establish them in the Truth. Humanum est errare. And these evil times in which
we have lately lived, involved many into Errors: Some with reference to the
Word of God; some with respect to the Works (if I may so say) of God. It Is to
the latter of these that I direct this Discourse, to persuade them, that Gods
works of Mercy, are Works of Mercy, however they are misconstrued, and
mis-judged by some, who measure Gods feet of providence, by the last of their
own Interests.

By the experience Sir, in this latter and evil Age, we have all found this to
be a Truth, that let Times be never so bad, some will account them good, and
cry them up for Glorious Times. And be times never so good, some will account
them evil, and suffering times. Some will account Mercies Miseries, and
Miseries Mercies.

Every man, and party, judges Gods dispensations according as they do favor
his, or their own private interests. There is ('it is known) a sort of people
amongst us, that never would, nor never will be contented. No, not with any
Government in Church or State.

The Reason is, because they are so addicted to Changes, and affected with
Novelties. As if nothing could be true, if not new: nothing good, and the
right, but that which suits with their Humors. Et hinc illae lachrymae, etc.
From this root of bitterness, have sprung up many things that have troubled
us. Hence first sprung those many Dislikes of Disputes, and Contentions about
Forms of Church and State Government: Which Contentions, though they were but
as Sparks at first, yet in a little while, after they had sulterd in
Contentious Breasts, grew to Flames, and at last Flamed high.

(...). And fired the Church and State; And what followed?

-- Discordia demens Intravit coelos, superosque ad bella coegit. Who were the
Incendiaries, Isidore will tell us, Qui dissentionem animarum fecerunt. Isidor.
lib. Etimol.
And what followed, we can tell by woeful experience. Nostine igitur quod omne
quod Boethius de Philosoph. consolatione. lib. 4.
est, tamdiu manner, and subsistere, quamdiu sit unum: sed interire, atque
dissolvi pariter, quam de unum esse desierit. For, as another says, Nulla
quantumvis minima natio, potest ab adversariis per deleri, Veget. lib. 3. c. 10.
nisi propriis discordiis seipsa consumpserit. And therefore Tyresius, when he
was asked by Scipio why Numantia aut prius invicta, aut postea evicta:
Answered, Concordia victoriam, discordia exitium Paulus Diacon. Hist. lib. 4.
adfert. Many will color their Seditions with this, and that; and most times,
In Nomine Domini incipit hoc malum. But Aristotle will tell us the True Reason
of it, Minores ut fiant aequales seditionem Arist. lib. polit. 5.
faciunt: aequales ut fiant majores seditionem faciunt and ipsi.

We have all of us, or at least may see the evil of these things. The issue of
them was almost Destruction, and would have been nothing less.

-- In foelix pereat:
Nihil relinquent bella tum vastis ager
Squalebat arvis, subditatectis face
Altus sepultas obruet gentes cinis.
Senec. in Hercule furente Traged. 1.
Had not God in mercy done great things for us. Yet many can scarce account
this a mercy, cannot be satisfied, contented, nor quiet; the same Humors do
work again. But for my part, I am of Cassiodorus his Principle, Cogi debet ut
sit quietus, qui Cassiod. lib. 1. Epist. 1.
suo vitio renuit esse pacificus. Least such Sanballats and Tobiahs,
discontented Spirits, Enemies to the Peace of Jerusalem, should revive our old
miseries, and renew our former Griefs, and turn our Singing, into Sighing, our
Mirth, into Mourning, our Rejoycings, into Lamentations.

But methinks it is high time for wise men (at least such as would be accounted
honest men) though formerly they had unavisedly given their helping hands to
make themselves, and the Nation miserable, to be far from favoring the least
thought of so doing any more: And to begin to see the folly of their actings,
and seriously to lay to heart the sad Consequences that followed thereupon, as
Anarchy in State, Heresy in Church, nay brought Destruction it self even to
our very doors, which they, when they would with all their hearts, could not
with all their might, prevent. And to own and to acknowledge Gods mercy, who
did prevent our utter destruction, and set us in Statu quo Prius; gave us our
Judges as at first, and our Counselors as at the beginning. Restored us our
Ancient Rights, Liberties, Laws and Religion: Our former Peace, Prosperity,
Honor, etc.

And laying aside their own private interests, should have respect to the
public. And should endeavor to quiet; and satisfy themselves and others;
bless God for this Mercy: and live together in Love, Unity and Concord. This
will conduce both to our Peace and Prosperity. For, Si membra regni partesque
inter se consentiunt, P. Ae. mil. lib. 3.
and constabunt, corpus universum salubre erit -- Concordia enim aureum and
adamantinum vitae vinculum est. -- Omnia in pace, vita and festivitate tenet:
And to our profit too; for as Micipsa, a dying King, said to his Sons,
Concordia res parvae crescunt. And as the Poet says, Velle Sal. de Bello.
Jugurth.
and nolle ambobus idem sociataque lato men's aevo, ac parvis dives concordia
rebus. As for others, who are neither wise, honest, nor peaceable, my Tongue
has not, my Pen shall not, have any thing to do with.

I cannot, nor care not, to please the humors of all men, nor do I expect to
do it. Veritas odium parit.

I expect a multiplicity of censures, But I am assured of this, that
Vnprejudiced persons will not censure evil of me; as for others, I may say,
Mala de me judicant sed mali. I cannot see wherein I have given just occasion
of offense to any Man, or Party. They cannot (nay the most Discontented amongst
us) but confess, that Gods works (yea, now let us call them Miracles) wrought
amongst us of late, are Miracles of Mercy.

Is not that a mercy that bushes all wars, turns our swords into plough-shares;
and our spears into pruning hooks: Yea, a Miraracle of Mercy, that in a moment
almost brings peace into a Land without bloodshed, when we were all ready to
sheath the sword in one another bowels? That brought order out of a Chaos,
confusion it self; that baffled all the sophistical Arguments of subtle
obstinate Schismatics and Heretics amongst us in a moment; and makes them
begin to look toward Repentance; that established the Magistrate on the
Throne, the Minister in the Pulpit; freed us from Tyranny and Oppression, and
that by no Wisdom, Strength, or Valor of our own. As for the manner of
handling of this Subject, I speak it, Bona fide, I do it without any prejudice
to any person or party; meddling with no persons, nor parties, any farther then
necessity enforced: that we might see the depth of our miseries, and so the
greatness of Gods mercy in delivering of us.

But, whatever others censure of me, may be this is it that I pass upon my
self, that I have acted presumptuously, in answering the requests of some
worthy friends in reference to the publishing of this Sermon: yet Christianly,
in giving so public Thanks for so public a Mercy, in which I had my share.

And now, into your hands, Honored Sir, (whose affectionate Loyalty to the
Kings Majesty, and entire love to your Country, I have had assurance of some
years past, partly by your frequent condoling, and bewailing the Afflictions of
the ONE, and Confusions of the OTHER: And partly by your earnest and unwearied
expectations, to see the things that are (through mercy) come to pass amongst
us in these days;) I do commit this ensuing Sermon: Not doubting but that you
do thankfully embrace, and heartily acknowledge the mercy it preaches: and in
your daily prayers do bless God for it.

And thus hoping that you will pass an Act of Grace on my presumption to
appear in public, under the shelter of your Name: And praying for the
continuance of the Peace and Prosperity of these Nations: And for your Worship,
that God would make you an eminently blessed Instrument in his, and your
Countries service whilst you live: and when you die, that you may die in the
Lord, rest from your Labors, and have your Works to follow you; I shall ever
remain.

Right Worshipful, Your most Humble, Faithful, and dutiful Servant, John
Whynnell.

ENGLANDS SORROWS Turned into JOY.
Psalms 126. 3. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are Glad.
THe Great God of Heaven and Earth, is always doing great and wonderful things
upon the Earth. Sometimes he does great things against his Church and People,
and then they are sad: Sometimes again, he does great things for his Church and
People, and then they are glad. Thus did he act in reference to these people,
this Church of the Jews.

1 He did great things against them, he invaded their Country, spoiled them by
War, beseiged their strong holds. Yea, he did that which the whole world set in
Battalia against them, and onsetting of them with the greatest fury and
violence, could not have done, had not he appeared an Adversary to them. He
broke down their Gates, rifled their City, put to flight their men of War, Jer.
ult. 7. which things their enemies thought impossible to have been done, Lam.
4. 12. The Kings of the Earth, and all the Inhabitants of the world would not
have believed that the Adversary and Enemy should have entered into the Gates of
Jerusalem: when Gods own people commit great sins against him, he does great
things against them. And when God does so, o then, then it is that their hearts
are sad.

How does the City sit Solitary, she weepeth sore in the night, her tears are
on her cheeks, Judah is gone into Lam. 1. 1, 2, 3.
Captivity, gone to Babylon, and there they mourn too. By the Rivers of Babylon
there we sat down, yea we wept, when we remembered Sion, we hanged our Harps
upon the Psalm. 137. 1, 2.
Willowes, in the midst thereof. Ay but God will not always * Miserum fuisse
felicem.
be wrathful with his people, he at last remembers mercy. Therefore

2. He does great things for his Church and People, and then they are glad.
Then they Sing and Rejoice. Take down their harpes from the Willowes, and Sing
again the Song of the Lord. Such things did the Lord do for these people. The
Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad.

This Psalm acquaints us with the joyful and blessed return of the Israel of
God, the Church of God, from her long, grievous, and wearisome captivity in
Babylon.

As for the Author of it, it is uncertain, if not unknown.

The occasion of it was this, a Proclamation from Cyrus King of Persia,
throughout all his Dominions, in which the captive Jews so journed, to give
them Liberty to return home again to Judea and Jerusalem, to build up their
City, and the house of God, and to set up the worship of God again therein, 2 Chronicles. 36. 22, 23. Now, in the first year of Cyrus King of Persia (that the
word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished) the
Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, that he made a Proclamation
throughout all his Kingdoms, and put it also in writing, saying, Thus says
Cyrus King of Persia, all the Kingdoms of the Earth has the Lord God given
me, and he has charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in
Judah: who is there among you of all his people? The Lord his God be with him,
and let him go up. So in the 1. Ezra. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Now upon this the
Jews begin to withdraw from all quarters of the heathen Lands, to set their
faces again toward Jerusalem, to return themselves to their own Country. Which
Decree, carrying so much of Grace and Favor in it, and being so Strange, so
New, and Unlooked for a thing, and the Consequences thereof being so great, and
so good to them, as Redemption from Slavery, Liberty to return and possess
their own proprieties again, to leave off serving Idols, to enjoy the true
Ordinances of God, Oh say they, we were as those that did dream. Their
Deliverance was so verse 1.
great, that they thought it was impossible it should be wrought out so soon:
'Twas news they could hardly believe, the thing so new, the change so sudden,
so great, so good, so full of Grace and Favor, they thought it could not be
true, but that it was only a Dream. That after so long Bondage of 70 years,
and a Deliverance scarce never talked of, that on a sudden there should be
granted to them such a gracious toleration, they could hardly give Credit unto
it; looked on it as a thing impossible almost in reason to be true. They
thought they had dreamed of Happiness, but enjoyed none; dreamed of a
Deliverance, but not likely to have any. Hence by the way we may note, That God
sometimes works such great things for his Church and Peoples good, that do put
their Faith to a stand, yea, even make it to stagger. They Note.
can hardly believe such things can be brought to pass for them. When as God
makes the inveterate Enemies of his people to be their Friends, and to do that
for his people, and against themselves (contrary to their own intentions) which
none else could do but themselves; makes them one to oppose the other, and draw
their Swords one against another. Makes (if men cannot) the very Angels march
against, fight with, and overcome Judges 8. 22. 2 Kings 19. 35.
their Enemies; make, the Sea to divide and give passage to his Israel, and yet
close again, and swallow up the Egyptians. When he makes the Sun to stand
still, Exodus 14.
and the Moon, in the Valley of Ajalon, to give light to his people to slay
their Enemies, and Hail-^ones to murder their Enemies for them, when he makes
Rivers to Josh. 10. 11, 12.
divide and to give way to them: And the Walls of Josh. 3. ult.
Cities to fall down at the very sight of his people, when he makes Heathens to
give them deliverance, and to build Josh. 6. 20.
up his house, etc. Oh this puts their Faith at a stand. When God preserves
Kings and Princes, though in the midst of their cruel Enemies, that do hunt
after their Souls to destroy them; and that in Oaks, when as Hosts could not
do it, nor walled Cities: And a people from ruin, though subjected by force to
their Enemies, to Atheists, Profane Selfe-seekers, and Heretics. Oh this
staggers the Faith of his people. We were as those that did Dream. But after a
little time they saw it was no Dream, but a real thing, a Deliverance wrought
out for them. Oh then what followed? Why, great Joy and Mirth, and Rejoicing in
the God of their Salvation. Which is expressed by these signs, Our Mouths verse
2.
were filled with laughter; our Tongues with singing. Though formerly their
mouths were filled with Complaints, and their tongues with Lamentations, and
could not sing the Song of the Lord: Yet now we Laugh, now we Sing, yea, Psalm.
137. 4.
our mouths are full of Laughter, of Songs, Songs of Praises and Deliverance.

After all this, now they conclude, Surely the Lord has done great things for
us, whereof we are glad. The Lord has done them, not we our selves, we were
not able to do it, thought scarce of it, had hardly any hopes of it: But though
we were not able, yet he was; though we could not, yet God did: Though we
thought not of our Deliverance, yet God had us still in his thoughts, and
reduced us from Captivity, he has done, etc. Whereof we are glad, our Hearts
and Souls are full of Joy and Rejoicing, and do glory in Gods Mercy.

In the words are two things considerable.

1 The afflicted Church, her free acknowledgement of Gods gracious acting
toward Her, in the removing the affliction She lay under, The Lord has done
great things for us, etc.

2 The effect, the sense and consideration of this, wrought on their Souls, and
that is gladness, (...) fuimus laetantes.
Whereof we are glad, we rejoice. Though formerly whilst we were afflicted,
and saw none taking our part, but all against us, we were full of Sorrow and
Sadness: Yet now seeing Gods gracious actings toward us, we are full of Joy
and Gladness.

That which I shall observe from these words, and insist on, is this.

Doct. That God in the midst of the Sorrows, and Sufferings of His Church and
People, in much Mercy usually does some great things for them, to glad, and
rejoice their Souls.

In the prosecution of this truth I shall speak to these 5. Things.

1 Show what were the Evils and Sufferings that this people lay under. 2 What
great things God did for them. 3 Prove that God usually does some great things
for his people in the midst of their Sufferings, to glad and rejoice their
Souls. 4 Show why he does it. 5 Apply it.
I. I will in brief hint to you, what Evils, and Sufferings this glorious
Church of the Jews did for so many years lie under. But what were they?

Answer, If you will see it at large, read over the book of the Lamentation of
Jeremy. There you will see the Lamentably miserable Estate of these people, set
out by one who had his share in their Sufferings, and writes that book to be
Sung as the Churches Lachrymae. I shall in a few words acquaint you with their
woeful Condition in 7 or 8 particulars.

1 They were disregarded and despised by all those that did formerly Love and
Honor them. In Her prosperity Jerusalem had many Lovers, and all Nations did
Honor Her. But now all Her Lovers had forsaken Her; Donec eris felix, multos
numerabis amicos.
those that did Honor Her before, were become such as did despise Her. Among
all her Lovers she has none to Comfort Her, all her friends have dealt
treacherously with Lam. 1. 2, 8.
Her, all that honored her despise her. All those Kings, Princes, Nations, and
People that did honor her before, now despise her.

2 She was given up into the hands, and unto the mercy of her implacable and
blood-thirsty Enemies. She that thought her self an over-match to any
Adversary, and feared no Enemy in the World, is now in her Enemies Hands: Her
Adversaries are the chief, Her Enemies prosper, the Adversary has spread out
his Hand upon all her pleasant things. If their Enemies would kill them, Lam.
1. 5. 10.
they might; if they would spare them, they might; they were at their Mercy.

3 They were brought to very sad Streights, and Exigences, to extreme want of
necessaries for Back and Belly. They who lived in plenty, fed like Princes,
were clothed in Scarlet, had neither bread to eat, nor clothes scarce to
cover their nakedness. They say to their Mothers, where is Corn and Wine? When
they Swooned as the Wounded in the Streets of the City, when their Soul was
powered out into their Mothers bosom. Lam. 2. 12.
Yea, the hands of pittyfull Women have Sodden their own Children, they were
their meat in the day of the destruction Lam. 4. 10.
of my people. They that did feed delicately, are desolate in the Streets, they
that were brought up in Scarlet, Embrace Dunghills. Lam. 4. 5.


4 Their Temple was burnt with fire, their Sanctuaries turned to the Ground,
their Solemn Feasts and Sabbaths were forgotten in Sion, their Altars cast off,
Vision did cease. He has violently taken away his Tabernacle, Lam. 2. 6, 7, 9.
he has destroyed his places of Asembly, the Lord has caused the Solemn
Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion -- the Lord has cast off his
Altar, he has abhorred his Sanctuary, and the Law is no more, her Prophets also
find no Vision from the Lord.

5 All their honor was thrown down in the dust, their King carried Captive,
their Princes slain, their Elders not favored, their Priests not respected,
their habitation laid wast, their strong holds thrown down.

The Lord has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, Lam. 2. 2.
-- he has thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the Daughter of Judah,
he has brought them down to the ground he has polluted the Kingdoms and
Princes thereof. -- He has swallowed up all her Palaces, he verse. 5.
has destroyed his strong holds: -- He has destroyed and broken her Bars, her
King and her Princes are among the verse. 9.
Gentiles. -- They respected not the persons of the Priests, they favored not
the Elders. Lam. 4. 16.


6 Their mighty Men of War were slain, their young men, and old men lay dead in
the Streets, Virgins fell by the sword, and as for the living of them, they
were still in Jeopardy of their lives. -- He slew all that were pleasant to the
eye in the Tabernacle of the Daughter of Zion. Lam. 2. 4, 21.
-- The young, and the old lie on the Ground in the Streets. My Virgins, and my
young Men are fallen by the Sword. -- They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in
Lam. 4. 18, 19.
our streets. -- Our Persecutors are swifter than Eagles, they pursued us upon
the Mountains, they laid wait for us in the Wilderness.

7 They were under the Dominion, Power and Rule of proud Servants; whom to
serve is the greatest Slavery in the world. And I think by this time English
men had no need to be told of it. We have found it a truth, by woeful
experience, Asperius nihil est humili, etc.

Servants have ruled over us: there is none that does deliver us out of their
hands. Lam. 5. 8.


8 Lastly, after all this, the remainder of them were carried away Captive into
foreign Lands and Countries, there to serve the Heathen.

Judah is gone into Captivity, because of affliction, and because Lam. 1. 3.
of great Servitude, She dwells among the Heathen, she finds no rest.

These were the Evils that these people suffered for 70 years, which caused,
and Increased in the Daughter Lam. 2. 5.
of Judah Mourning and Lamentations, made her Sighs to be many, and her heart
to faint. Thus you have seen Lam. 1. 22.
their Miseries and Sufferings. But

II. What were the great things that God did for them to glad and rejoice their
Souls? Certainly it was not a small matter that would rejoice this their
misery, it must needs be some great thing.

Ans. 1 God placed such a King over those Lands and Country's in which they
sojourned, that gave to them their own Land again; That gave them Livery and
Seizin of their own Possessions again, out of which Nebuchadnezzar drove them:
That gave them liberty to return to it, without any Let or Molestation, either
from the Masters they served, or the Tributary Princes under whose Dominion
they were. Gave them Liberty to go and build up the Cities of their God, the
House of God, and their own Houses. This did Cyrus (of whom God said, He was
his Servant, and should fulfill his Pleasure.) Now in the first year of Cyrus
King of Persia, Isa. 44. 28. 2. Chron. 36. 22, 23.
the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Cyrus King of Persia, that be made a
Proclamation throughout all his Kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,
Thus says Cyrus King of Persia, all the Kingdoms of the Earth has the Lord
God given me, and he has charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, which
is in Judah, who is there among, you of all his people the Lord his God be with
him, and let him go up. So in the 1 Ezra 1. 2, 3, 4. Now this was one great
thing, for poor Exiles to be sent home, poor Captives to be set at liberty.

2 He restored all the Riches, and Vessels of the house of God to them, that
Nebuchadnezzar took away. And Cyrus the King brought forth the Vessels of the
house of the Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth of Ezra. 1. 7, 8.
Jerusalem, and had put them in the house of his Gods even these did Cyrus King
of Persia bring forth by the hand of Mituredath the Treasurer, and numbered
them unto Sheshbuzzar the Prince of Judah. What their Enemies pillaged from
them, he restored. The plunderd Church enjoys her own again.

3 Least the Jews, when they set themselves to build the house of God, should
be judged by their Enemies to do that which they had no warrant for; He gave
them a Command to build the House of God, and set up his worship. Who is there
among you (says he) his God be with him, let him go up to Jerusalem which is
in Judah, and build the house of the Lord God of Israel. Ezra. 1. 3.


4 Not only gave them a Command to do it, but made a Decree for the building
of it. Which Decree might not be reversed, but succeeding Kings were bound to
put it in execution. -- The Lord stirred up the heart of Cyrus that he made a
Proclamation throughout all his Kingdom, and put it also in writing; saying,
thus says Cyrus, etc. Which caused Darius afterward to put it in Execution,
when as otherwise the building would have been left unfinished. And there was
found at Achmeta in the Palace, that is in the Province Ezra. 6. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8, etc.
of the Medes, a Roll, and therein was a Record thus written. In the first year
of Cyrus the King, the same Cyrus the King made a Decree concerning the house
of God at Jerusalem: Let that house be builded, etc. -- and let the expenses be
given out of the Kings house. And therefore he Commanded that the work might go
on.

And he allowed all necessary materials to it, yea, and offerings too.

5 Because he knew that they had many enemies that Crimen laesae Majestatis.
would venture hard but they would hinder it, Darius.
he made it Treason for any man to oppose them. Also I have made a Decree, that
whosoever shall alter this word, Ezra. 6. 11.
let him be pulld down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged
thereon, and his House be made a Dunghill for this.

6 Lastly. He reduced their Captivity, and placed them in their own Land again,
restored to them their Ancient Laws, Liberties and Rights, and liberty to enjoy
their own Religion. Now these were the great things that God did do for these
people. And these were great things indeed, enough to glad and rejoice their
Souls. But then

III. I am to prove, that God usually amidst the Sorrows and Sufferings of his
Church and People does some great things, to glad and rejoice their Souls.
Thus he has done for his Church throughout all ages. What great things did he
do for them in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in the Sea, in Candan? Yea, what great
things did he do for them at this time? This truth might be made good from many
Scripturall Instances and Evidences; but I shall omit them, and come nearer
home, even to experience, for proof of it: And unto him that expects proof of
it, I will say as Cleophas did to Jesus in another Case, Art thou only a
stranger in Israel, Luke 24. 18.
and have not known the things which are come to pass there in these days? So
say I, are you strangers in England, Sirs, that you have not known the great
things that God has done for us in these times? Have you not known the
affliction of this poor Land of late years? Have we not groaned under a bloody
Civil War? Has not the Sword a long while stuck in our Ribs? And a long while
been held over our Heads? Have we not been subjected to our Servants? And those
none of the best, but worst of men, who for to get Riches and Lam. 5. 8.
Honor, would attempt, yea, did attempt to rob God of his Honor, the Nation
of her Rights and Liberties, who attempted the horriddest wickednesses that
ever the earth heard of. Embrew'd their Sacrilegious Hands in the Sacred Blood
of their ROYAL SOVEREIGN: Attempted the Ruin of all the Royal Issue, and
would have perfected it, had not God taken them into his more immediate
tuition. Exiled our present most ROYAL and BLESSED SOVEREIGN, banished some,
and oppressed all the Nobility, the Elders of the Land, murdered their fellow
Subjects, ruined their Houses and Families, Nay, oppressed the whole Nation,
robbed it of her Rights, Privileges, and Laws. Overthrew the whole Constitution
of our Laws, and Government, and ruined our Famous Church. Yea, they attempted,
even the dethroning God himself. Some slighted, others wrested, others wholly
denied his truths: Some slighted, others changed, others wholly cast off his
Ordinances. Alas to what desperate height was their wickedness mounted, to
this, to threaten, yea Isa. 24. 5.
to endeavor the subversion of Magistracy; the ruin of the Ministry; the
robbing of the Church; the massacring of all Loyal, Sober, Conscientious and
Peaceably Principled Persons: Our Lives, and our Estates, our Religions, our
Laws, Liberties, and all were in danger, we were at the mercy of our Enemies.
Some imprisoned, others confined, most impoverished, all deformed and left
naked to their Swords. People knew not what to do, we were full of Thoughts,
Fears, and Doubts, knew not which way to turn or look, were all in a maze,
wondered what the issue of these things would be. Nothing but blood, ruin and
confusion could be expected from such cruel Oppressors, and merciless
Heretics. Trading was lost, poverty approaching, an utter devastation and
desolation threatened. Nay, and this was not all, the whole power was in these
men's hands; the Sword was (for they were armed and but few else) and therefore
the power, who could, yea, who dared to oppose them. Oh this was it that caused
many fears, much sorrow and sadness to possess our Souls, tears to sit on our
Cheeks. Lamentation to be heard in our Streets, Groans and Sighings to be
heard in the midst of Sion: None as yet appeared Lam. 5, 8.
to redeem and deliver us. But yet at length, when The set time was come, The
Lord himself did great things for Psalm. 102. 13.
us, as great as for any Nation under heaven. We will, yea, we must say, it is
the work of the Lord, as the Church does here. The Lord has done, etc. He has
done great things for the King, great things for the Parliament, for the
Nobility, for the Gentry, Clergy, Commonalty, for all of us. Oh it was God that
did wrest the Sword out of the hands of those usurping, wicked, bloody,
oppressing, Heretical, Jesuited Tyrants that had gotten it, when as we were
not able. Oh it was God that did divide them, and spoil them, it was God that
caught these cunning hunters in their own snares. 'Twas God that restored us
our Free-Parliament, and by them our lawful King, and with him all blessings
in Church and State. 'Twas God that preserved his Excellent Majesty in the time
of his affliction in this Land, and in other Countries, and restored him to us
his people. 'Twas God that Enstamped upon his Royal Person, the Image of
himself, Wisdom, Divinity, and Majesty; and placed him as a God, over us his
people. 'Twas God that has Crowned his Heart with Grace, and will Crown his
Head with Gold: God has enthroned himself in his heart, and has set him up in
the Throne of Glory in these Nations: which Throne, let it be as the Throne of
David, to many Generations; certainly this was of the Lords doing, to restore
his Excellent Majesty to us his people, and us to our Ancient Laws, Liberties,
and Government: So that a Foundation is laid for Righteousness in the Land, and
Religion in the Church: and God will, we believe, make his Majesty a Solomon,
to build his ruined Temple. These great things God has done for us, and he
has given us our lives for a prey, a Resurrection of our gasping dying
liberties; he has tumbled down bloody and deceitful men, he has given a
public check to Error and Heresy, which had spread it self throughout these
Nations. Yea, and that which is more to be admired, all this was done without
the least effusion of blood. So great a work done, and no blood shed, what more
admirable? so good a work done, and the Devil and his Instrument strive no more
against it, when as there were many thousands had combined together, and
resolved to spend their blood against his Majesty, our Laws and Religion; that
yet the work should be effected, so effectually, without scarce a drawn sword
in the quarrel; o we may conclude, The Lord has done great things for us, etc.
That a bleeding State should be stench'd, a wounded State cured, a tottering
State and Church upheld, a dying Church and State so revived Psalm. 118. 23.
in a moment, certainly it is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes,
we our selves could not do it; but though we could not, God has, Therefore are
our hearts glad. But then

IV. I come to show, why God does do such great things for his people in their
extremity and sufferings to glad their souls. There are reasons of diverse
sorts.

Some Respecting
1. Himself. 2. His own people. 3. The wicked.
And I might speak to many referring to each particular, but I shall content
my self with a few.

1. Respecting himself. I shall only instance in 2.

1. With respect to his own Honor and Name he does great things for their
Safety, Deliverance, and Comfort, that they might do something for his Honor.
Alas, should God leave his Church and people to the mercy of their Enemies,
they would soon destroy them, and leave no Church, no Christian on the earth!
This is that, that the Devil would have, and that wicked men aim at: Should a
Shepherd leave his flock to the mercy of Lions, Tigers, Wolves and Foxes?
Alas, he would soon have no flock remaining. So, should not God appear for his
people in their extremities and sufferings, and do great things for their
deliverance, Alas, the Devil, that Roaring Lion, and the wicked, those Sons of
Cruelty, would soon make away with them all. And then where would be his Honor
and Glory? It Is his Church and people that do maintain that (through his Grace)
on earth. Wicked men do blaspheme his Name, and dishonor him. Alas, should God
have left us to the mercy of those Schismatic, Heretical, and Atheistical
Tyrants that had got the mastery over these Nations by an unjust and forcible
Usurpation of the power into their hands, certainly we should have been wholly
destroyed, and that within a little space. They were now making provision for
it, as is too too notoriously known. The Villainies that a long while were
shrouded under the Cloak of Religion, and the cause of God, and the Liberty of
the Subject, now began to appear, and that to every one almost. And we may
guess by what they did, what they did intend to do.

Ex ungue leonem, etc. what would not they have done to the People, who
murdered their King? Who laid a force upon, yea, wholly denied us our
Parliaments; who Banished some, murdered others of their Fellow Subjects, and
Superiors, and miserably oppressed the whole Nation? What would not they have
done, who nul'd our Laws? Who ruined our Church? Alas, we did not see the worst
of it, which possibly, we should by this time! It was high time for God to mind
his own Honor, and Glory, and Name, and Cause amongst us, or else this
flourishing State, this famous Church (that ever hitherto had Renown in the
World and is under God (as it were) the prop of Christianity through all the
World) had bin utterly destroyed, and made a desolation. It was much (and that
not without cause) feared, often threatened, and certainly had not God stepped in
between us and destruction, our Honor and Glory had quite fallen, and for ever
have lain in the dust. But God minding his own Honor, Glory and Interest, did
great things for us, to release us from this great, and sad affliction.

2. That so he might manifest his love to, and care of his people, even in this
condition. Though God suffer his people sometimes to be afflicted, oppressed,
and persecuted by wicked men, yet his love to them, and care over them, is the
same still to them, that changes not. He sometimes suffers wicked men to do
very great things to the prejudice of his people, but when once he sees them
really intend to ruin his Church, then he shows his love to them, and care
over them, in putting a Bridle in their Jaws, a stop to their Isa. 30. 28.
Exodus 14. 4. Exodus 14. 10.
wicked intentions. He may stir up a Pharaoh to pursue his people, with
resolutions to destroy them all, and he may suffer him to come in sight of
them; yea, even in reach of them, and may let him be confident of his Victory
over them, and contrive how to ruin them, Exodus 14. 3.
but yet the evil that Pharaoh intended against them befell not them, but
himself, and in the very place he had Exodus 14. 27, 28.
designed for their execution. He thought to have forced them into the Sea to
have drowned them, but it was himself, and his own Army that were drowned. He
may suffer Haman to get a decree against his Church and People, and to build a
Gallows for Mordecai, but yet so did God manifest his love to his People that
he wrought things so, that another decree passes from the King against him
first, and is executed himself, hanged on the Hest. 38, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Hester 5. 14. Hest. 7. 9, 10. Mat. 28.
Gallows he built for Mordecai, and the Church delivered. He may suffer Herod
to intend, and contrive the death of the Child Jesus, but yet he out of love to
it, took such care of it, that it outlived Herod. So he may suffer many of the
malicious Jews to intend and contrive Mat. 2. 19, 20. Acts 23. 12, 13, 14.
the death of Paul, yea to swear they will kill him ere they Eat or Drink any
more; yet he took such care of him, that he reprieved him out of their hands.
So Acts 23. 31, 32, etc.
likewise, though God did suffer wicked men to contrive and to resolve to ruin
all amongst us, both Church and State, Religion and our Laws, to bring all to
Anarchy and Confusion; yet God loving of us, and caring for us, so manifested
both unto us, as that he prevented the threatened ruin, he did great things for
us. Thus with respect to himself.

2. With respect to his own people. And I shall instance briefly in 4. or 5.

1. Because of their relation to him. He Will do it because they are related to
him. As his Subjects, his Children, his Spouse, his Servants, his Friends, etc.
Now a King will do great things for his Subjects, a Father for his Children, a
Husband for his Spouse, a Master for his Servants, a Friend for his Friends, if
in misery; the relation will engage them to it.

2. Because he Sympathizes with them, In all their affliction he is afflicted,
and therefore he sent the Angel of Isa. 63. 9.
his presence and saved them. He that touches them, touches the Apple of his
Eye. He suffers in his Churches Zach. 2. 8.
sufferings. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me. Not my people but me. He is
wounded through the sides Acts 9 4.(...)
of his Church. When the Church bears the Cross it pinches his shoulders. When
the Church is Crowned with Thorns, it wounds his head. Now he knows our
infirmities, and knows what it is to suffer, how irksome to flesh and blood. Now
to ease his people when they sigh, groan and cry by reason of the Oppressor, Oh
then he does arise, and do great things for them. Psalm. 12. 5.


3. Because they are still crying unto him in times of affliction. They cry and
sigh, groan and lament, by reason of the evil of their condition, as this
Church does. And so they cry unto God too, to avenge their quarrel, to ease
their trouble, to set them at liberty, and therefore God whose ear is ready
always to hear, and whose heart is ready to pity, will have a hand ready to
relieve them. Many (says the Psalmist) are the afflictions of the Righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of them all. Why so? Why says he, The
righteous cry, and the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their
troubles. And Psalm. 34. 19. v. 17.
says God, Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee. God
cannot hear his people cry to him by Psalm. 51. 15. Fenetrant suspiria coelum.
Bernard.
reason of the fury of their Oppressors, but his pittyfull heart will move him
to do great things for them, to rejoice their hearts, and to stop their cries,
wailings and moanings, etc.

4. He will do great things for his people, least they should sin against him,
and dishonor him by revolting from him. Oh Sirs, suffering seasons, are
critical seasons. Many times Gods people revolt from him in such days, and
hours of temptation, especially if they continue long.

But now to prevent this, God will do great things for them. And this is one
reason God himself gives us why he does so. The rod of the wicked * (or of
wickedness) shall not always rest upon the lot of the Righteous Psalm. 125. 3.
(...)
That the Righteous may not put forth their hand to iniquity. Their Rod may be
upon the Righteous, and may lie for some while, some days, some months, it may
be some years. But says God, It shall not rest on them: why so? why says he,
Lest he put forth his hands to iniquity. Least they depart from God, turn their
backs to him and to Religion, and turn to error and heresy, Yea to Atheism. For
this reason it is probable God did great things for us, in putting a stop to the
wickedness of the times, least his own people should have put forth their hands
to iniquity. And certainly it is sad to consider, how that many (of good repute
formerly amongst the people of God) were inclining (if not wholly turned) to
Error and Apostasy from the Truths of God, and brought to comply with wicked
Oppressors, that they might save themselves, and their Estates; and in all
probability it would have been much worse in a little space. But now to prevent
this, God did great things for us, etc.

5 God does great things many times, even for his own peoples sake.

They are very near and dear unto him. And in all ages of the world he has
done great things for them, (not only for his own name sake) but for their
sakes. Thus says the Lord, your Redeemer, the holy one of Israel; for your
sake have I sent to Babylon, and Isa. 43. 14.
have brought down all their Nobles, and the Caldeans, whose cry is in the
Ships. For your sakes I have, (or as some say) I will send into Babylon, that
is, I will send Cyrus into Babylon, and bring down all the Nobles (or the bars)
of Babylon; that is, remove all persons, and Detraxi, vel detraham muros,
turres, portas, ea^umque vectes et Claustra, omniaque munimenta Babylonis A
lapide, Isa. 54: 15.
things out of the way, that would hinder your deliverance, and this I do for
your sake, says God. So again, Behold, (says God) They shall surely gather
together, but not by me: whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall
fall for thy sake, I Will cause them to fall, and that for thy sake, and thus for
the reasons respecting Gods own people.

3 Respecting the wicked. And I will only instance in one, Namely that he may
be known amongst them to be God that Rules in the Heavens, and so to be some
way honored by them. That they may know that he is God, and can over match
them, when strongest: and out-wit them, when wisest. That he can tumble them
down to the ground when they are highest, as he Tolluntur in altum ut Lapsu
graviore ruant.
usually does, and make their mountain to shake, when strongest. Thus God did
great things for his Israel in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and in the Red
Sea, that he might be known by the Egyptians to be God, above their Gods, and
that he might get some honor to himself. Exodus 14, 4, 17.
God sometimes acts such great things for his people, that the very heathens do
see it is his handy work, and do so far honor him, as to attribute it unto him.
The Church here having spoken of what great things God had done for her, she
adds (then they said among the heathen) that is the heathen said one to
another, The Lord has done great things for them. The Psalm. 126. 2.
very heathen knew it, saw it was Gods work. So those wicked Oppressors, and
Usurpers, that have so long enslaved these Nations, cannot but see it was the
work of God, to cashiere them of, and tumble them down from their undue
Honors, and their Usurped Authorities: to take the Sword, and so the power out
of their hand; And to restore to us, our Gracious and ROYAL SOVEREIGN, our
good, wholesome, and Ancient Laws, and the Purity of Religion, our own
Proprieties, and to the Nation her former Glory, Honor, Trade, etc. These very
persons must needs see (all circumstances weighed) that it was the very hand of
God that did it, and that he has honored himself upon them. And thus much for
the Doctrinal part: I now come to the

Vlt. Thing propounded, scil. Application. And that by way

1. Of Caution. 2. Exhortation.
1. For Caution, And that (1) to the Enemies of Gods Church and People. (2) to
the people of God.

1. To the Enemies of Gods Church and People, Is it so, etc. Take heed then
(Sirs) how you act toward Gods people. Take heed what you do against those for
whom God will do such Great things. It Is hard for Acts 9. 5.
you to kick against the pricks. It Is not safe for you to afflict those, who
are to him as the Apple of his Eye; are Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his
Flesh.

Oh consider, who ever resisted God and prospered! Though you act never so
cunningly, and never so confidently, yet he that still does great things for
his people will find out your depths, and secret devices; and overthrow you in
the midst of your confidence. Precedents there are enough, yea now a days.
Look to craftiness, cuning, and policy, never were there greater Politicians in
this Land, then some of the Workers and Actors of our Ruin. For Hellish,
Destructive policy, never the like. Machiavell was but an Idiot to them. But
yet God has befooled these subtle Sophisters, and puzzled them in their own
Labyrinths.

He had an Hushai, who was a friend to his King, and 2 Samuel 15. 31.
Country, by whom he turned all their Counsels into foolishness. And for
matter of confidence too, they were come to this height, They are entangled;
they are Exodus 14. 3.
entangled, we may now play Rex among them. Who dare oppose us? The Sword is
ours, the Power is ours, we Stat pro ratione voluntas.
may do what we please, our Will is our Law. We will have no King Charles; We
will have no Free-Parliament. Death (at least imprisonment or confiscation of
Goods and Estate) to any man that shall plead or appear for them. We will have
no Magistrates, no Ministers, no Churches, no Ordinances, no Baptism, no
Supper, no Sabbaths kept, etc. And who dares plead, or appear for these
things? One will have this, another that: one will have his way, another his, a
third his, but to be sure neither the right, respecting either God, or man. But
now, in the height of their confidence, how did God take them off. It Is all our
own they thought, and why? because The Sword was theirs; herein lay their
confidence. Oh but this confidence Jer. 2. 37.
the Lord rejected, and would not let them prosper in it.

See we then these wise ones outwitted, these strong and mighty ones
over-powred, Oh Sirs you who are Enemies to Gods Church and People, do you
consider it, and record it to posterity hereafter, that they may take heed of
afflicting and oppressing the people of God. Oh never is the Church of God
afflicted but he does some great things for them: and never did any set
themselves against Gods people, but God set himself against them and brought
them to shame and confusion. Examples enough we have in the Scripture and in
Ecclesiastical Histories, of wicked Persecutors of God his Church, against whom
God has done great things. Thus he appeared Exodus 14.
against Pharaoh and his host, in giving of them up to the rage and fury of the
merciless Sea,

Thus he dealt with Mamucha a Sarazen for spoiling Paulus Diacon de gestis.
Longob.
the Christians of Cassine and Messana, causing the Sea as he was returning
home, to swallow up the whole Navy so that few or none escaped. Sometimes God
does it one way, sometimes another. Sometimes he makes the enemies of his people
to do great things one against another. So he caused Tamerlane the Tartarian,
to be a means to remove Bajazets seige against the Christians in
Constantinople. Composulas.
And. withal to overthrow him, and take him prisoner, yea, and to make his back
a footstool to get on his Horse.

Time would fail me to speak of Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Hadrian, Valerian,
Aurelian, Dioclesian, Julian, and others, how God appeared against them, that
some of them slew themselves, as Nero.

Some were slain by their Servants, as Domitian, and Nicephorus. Eutropius.
Aurelian; Some of them dyed in the midst of their days, by deadly and noisome
diseases in great anguish, as Trajan, Hadrian, and Dioclesan. Some of them
captived, as Dion. Nicephorus. Eusebius.
Valerian. And some blaspheming, as Julian God still sets himself against
those that afflict his people

What got Haman by plotting against the Jews, and contriving their ruin, but
the Gallows. Oh then if God still does great things against the persecutors of
his people, Hester. 7. 10.
and Great things for his people, take heed then you that are Enemies to the
Church of God, what you do against it! Look how God has appeared, and done
Great things for his people, and against their oppressors; and let this
consideration bind up your hands, that you do not any more oppose and afflict
them.

2. To the Church and People of God in England, formerly Sighing, now Singing;
formerly Sorrowing, now Rejoicing: to you, for whom God has done great things.
Take heed you do not return to your doing great things against your God, that
you turn not again to your sins and follies.

'Twas because of our sins that God did formerly do great things against us.
For our pride, haughtiness, looseness, profaneness, impenitency,
unthankfulness, hypocrisy, formality, profanation of Sabbaths, abuse of the
Servants of God; and it is for the sins of Kings, that they suffer, for the sins
of Parliaments, that they suffer, for the sins of Magistrates, Ministers,
Commonalty, that they suffer. Jerusalem Has grievously sinned, therefore she
is removed -- The Yoke of my transgressions is Lam. 1. 8.
bound by his hand, they are wreathed, and come upon my neck. God having now
accomplished the Punishment of our iniquities. verse 14. Lam. 4. 22.
let us not return with the washed sow to her wallowing in the mire, with the
dog to his vomit. 2 Pet. 2. 22.


Let us not return again to folly. It Is the caution the Holy Ghost gives to
this Church, I will hearken what God the Lord will speak. For he will speak
peace unto his people. But let not them return again to folly. Psalm. 85. 8.


We have for some years suffered for our follyes, and in the time of these our
sufferings we prayed, and cried unto our God for mercy; that he would Cause his
anger to cease, revive us again, and make his people rejoice Psalm. 85. 4, 6.
in him. That he would Restore us our judges as at first, Isa. 1. 26. 126. 4.
and our Counselors as at the beginning. That he would return our captivity as
the streams in the south. And we hearkened what God would say, in return to
these petitions. Well, he at last spoke, and did speak Peace to us his people.

Oh let us not then return again to folly, to our former profaneness,
hypocrisy, superstition, etc. If we do, that God, that has done great things
for us, can, and doubtless will, do great things against us, and greater yet
then he has done. Let us not rebel any more against our God and King. Let us
not sin any more (that is, the same sins) least worse things befall us. John 5.
14.


Exhortation, in 3. or 4. particulars. Is it so, that, etc. Then

1. Let us not despair of Gods mercy to us, and care of us, under any
calamities whatsoever. God has In nullis periculis, neque corporalibus neque
spiritua ibus, desperemus. Fabrit. in Psalmis. 1 Samuel 17. 37. Job: 5. 19.
done great things for us, does do great things for us, and that therefore, he
will, is a good consequence. He has delivered me from the Lion, and the Bear,
therefore will from the Philistine. God has delivered us from five troubles,
and from six. So that the Great evil of destruction has not touched us, and
he will also from seven. God has, and does deliver us from all sorts of
unreasonable and wicked men, who have not faith, and he will do it for the
future. Let us therefore depend upon him in our greatest troubles. We could
scarce be in a worse condition then we were. Nothing visible but Heresy, Blood
and Confusion. We were hopeless and helpless, as to man: Yet when we could do
nothing for our selves, God did great things for us; and began, carries on,
and will perfect our deliverance and Salvation.

2 Let us bless our God for his Mercy, that engaged him to do such great things
for us, that he did restrain the wicked, whilst we were at their mercy, that
they did not utterly ruin us. That he did so wonderfully, and so miraculously
preserve his MAJESTY; notwithstanding he had so many, and so mighty enemies at
home, and abroad.

That he did preserve Him from the Sword, from perils by Land, by Sea, in the
Wilderness, from Poison, from Error, Heresy and Popery; and has restored Him
to us, a Glorious, a Godly, a Gracious PRINCE: That he has given us again the
freedom of our Parliaments, the benefit of our Laws, the comfort of our
Estates; and hopes of the continuance and maintenance of the true Protestant
Religion. That God was pleased to raise up a Gideon, a man after his own heart,
and his peoples hearts, in a miracle, almost, to do such great things for us.
So that now our dying, yea, dead Church and State, is in hopes of a glorious
Resurrection. It Is the greatest mercy that we, who ever have been a people of
mercy, have received from the Lord for many years. That though we have bin, and
yet are, such a sinful, obstinate, Rebellious, treacherous people; a people
that have been changed from vessel to vessel, and our scent remains in us, a
people that have been in the fire of affliction, and yet our dross and tin is
not purged away, A people that have as much dishonored our God,

1 By our sins against him. 2 By our abuse of his mercies, as any people this
day on the face of the whole earth.
1 By our sins against him, thousands committed against him every day, yea,
every hour, and many of them high and daring sins, whose cry reached unto
Heaven; as oppressing of one another, shedding innocent blood, punishing of
men, because they would be honest, and not let their Consciences gallop in the
road of the times; a people that established Error, and Heresy by a Law;
wrested the Word of God, and changed the Ordinances of God, etc.

2 By our abuse of his Mercies; greater Mercies no Nation under Heaven have
had, then this Nation; Peace and Prosperity, abundance of Wealth and Honor;
the presence of God with us, and pure Religion for many years: these we have
abused, banished our own Peace, wasted our own Wealth, thrown our Honor in the
dust, when none else could, said unto God, depart from us; corrupted our pure
Religion. Job. 21. 14.


Seeing we are so sinful, and yet God appears so merciful unto us, it calls
upon us, both for Admiration, and great Thankfulness. Sing O Heavens, and
rejoice ye Inhabitants of the Earth: Let our Souls bless the Lord, and Psalm.
103. 1.
all that is within us praise his Holy Name.

3. Seeing God has done such great things for us, let us be Exhorted to do
some great things for God. Seeing he has done such great things for our
comfort, let us do some great things for his honor and glory. This concerns us
all, from the Highest to the Lowest; the Kings Majesty, and the Nobility,
Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty. God has done great things for us all: God has
done great things for the KING, preserved him in many dangers, great and deadly
dangers both at home and abroad, even in a miracle of Mercy, and has restored
him even Miraculously in Peace and Safety, and with great Pomp and State,
Honor and Glory into his THRONE, to govern these Nations. The God of our
Mercies grant (we beseech him) that this Mighty Monarch, set over us by
himself, may be a Sheshbuzzar to lay the foundation, and build up the house of
God, to repair the ruins of this (formerly) famous Church; set Ezra. 5. 16.
up the Ordinances of God in it, in the power and purity of them, free from
Error, Heresy, Superstition, and Popery; and pull down the Groves and Idols
of Heresy and Schism, and maintain the Truths and Honor of God in his
Kingdoms; and that the Lords Day be not Profaned by wicked Sporting and
Pastimes, as they are in many places; that he may free the Land from Oppression
and Cruelty, and Rule us in Righteousness; and may ever be a praise to Good, a
terror to Bad men.

This is it that God looks for in return to his great Mercies vouchsafed to his
MAJESTY. When God does great things for Kings, he looks that they, above all
Men, should do great things for him. They may do it, God has put them in place
where, and given them power whereby they may do it, which others cannot. The
King may do great things, in Church and State, for the Honor of God; it is in
his power: O that it may be (and I doubt not but it is, and will be) in his
heart to do it. It Is not for nothing, doubtless, that God has so Miraculously
preserved his MAJESTY, and so Mercifully restored him; it is doubtless to do him
some Eminent Service: God give him a Heart to set about it, success in it, and
power to effect it.

Seeing God has done such great things for our Parliaments, that we had
liberty to Elect, and they have liberty to Sit in Parliament, without fear of
having a force laid upon them, by proud, mutinous, and lawless Soldiers: It
concerns them to do some great things for God, by being as the Elders of
Israel, to assist in the work Ezra 6. 14.
of the Lord with their King.

Seeing God has done such great things for Magistrates and Ministers, as again
to confirm the power of the one, and continue the honor of the other; it
concerns both to do some great things for God. The Magistrate, by his power, to
keep up the honor and esteem of the Minister; and the Minister, by his
doctrine, to confirm the Lawful Authority of the Magistrate: And both to act
together, to Inform the understandings of the people, to Reform their lives,
and Conform them to the Rites and Customs of the Church of England; To
suppress Vice, promote Holiness, and beget and maintain Order and Unity
amongst Christians.

Let us all set our hands to work for God, our hands, our heads, our hearts,
and our prayers. So we may all help: and the meanest Christian as much as
others that are more eminent. So did Israel, as appears in the 2. and 4. chap.
of Ezra. They all set themselves about building the House, and Cities of their
God, as soon as ever they came to Jerusalem in Judea.

Let us all set about the work of our God, in our several places, and
stations: and be sure to keep our selves within the verge of our own Callings.

Let us lay aside all contentions, and vain janglings, least the sound of
Hammers and Hatchets be heard in Sion.

Let us lay aside all animosities, and heart-burnings, and forget, and freely
forgive one another, and pray for one another, that God would make us of one
mind, 1 Cor. 1. 10. Act. 2. 9, etc.
and one judgment, one heart, one soul, one spirit, that we may be all but as
one man. Though now we are some Medes, some Parthians, some Elamites, etc. Some
of 1 Cor. 1. 10.
one Sect, some of another; some of one Opinion, some Acts 4. 32.
of another; some for one form of Government in Church and State, and some for
another; that God would make us of one heart, minding the same thing. God can
do it, he has done it. The multitude (that is, of Parthians, Medes, Elamites,
etc. now Converts) were of one heart, Non Physice, quia quisque habet suum cor,
et suam animam: Neque datur anima Communis; sed moraliter, q. d. ita animis and
sensibus erant concordes, ac si omnes unum id^mque habuissent cor, and unam
animam. Dandinus de anima.
and of one soul: So God can make the now divided multitude of one heart: He
can unite us, and bind us together with the bond of love. De tot animabus fecit
unam animam charitas, Austine. Let us pray for it, and endeavor it, and God
will effect it. So that (though as yet we are divided in judgment, and so in
affection, and are not one, but many hearts, souls, and minds,) we shall act
together as if we had but one soul in all our bodies, and as they were but as
so many Instruments or Organs for that one soul to act in, Inter homines ex
diversis regionibus profectos, talis fuit morum, ac disciplinae similitudo,
adeo ut in unum coaluisse videntur, and in pluribus corporibus unus tantum
animus inesse videtur, vicissimque plura corpora unius animi instrumenta.
Basil. Constitut. Monast.
and then indeed will the work of God go on and prosper. We shall do great
things for God.

Let us so consider one another, as to provoke one another to love, and to good
works; and keep the unity of the Spirit Heb. 10. 24. Ephesians. 4. 3.
in the bond of peace: Living to the Honor of God, and of our Religion: and
the comfort of one another, Denying all ungodlyness, and worldly lusts, and
living righteously Tit. 2. 11, 12.
and soberly in this present world; And being delivered out of the hands of our
Enemies, may serve him without fear in holiness Luke 2. 74, 75.
and righteousness all our days. These be the great things God requires from
us, and which Reason, much more Religion calls upon us to do for him.

4. Lastly, to conclude. Let us be exhorted to pray earnestly unto God, that he
will yet go on to do greater things for us. There are greater mercies behind
yet, and greater things to be done. Let us be instant with God in our prayers,
that he may perfect and finish the good work he has begun amongst us. This was
the course these people took. The Lord has done great things for us, whereof
we are glad. As in the text, and in the next verse they pray, Turn again our
captivity, as the streams in the South: that is, do thou perfect our
Deliverance and Redemption. Thou have begun, build up thine House, and our
Cities: establish Righteousness in our Land, and Religion in our Church, in
despite of all opposition, and that suddenly too. Such let our prayers be unto
God, that he will reform all things that are amiss amongst us, and establish
us upon the sure and lasting foundations of Righteousness, Truth and Holiness,
and continue his Truths and Ordinances in our Church, his Presence with his
people, and peace, and abundance of plenty, and prosperity in our Land as long
as the Sun and Moon endures.

That he would bless our KINGS excellent Majesty with long Life, with a happy
and peaceable Reign, and in the Affections of the people.

That he would make up all our Breaches, compose all our Differences, repair
all our Ruins, and cause us to live together in Unity and Peace to the honor
of God, and the King, and the Comfort of one another.

Then indeed shall our mouths be filled with laughter, our tongues with singing,
and our hearts with gladness.

Then shall the heart of the King rejoice in the God of his Salvation; his
Throne shall be established on Earth, and the Diadem of earthly Honor, placed
by God himself, on his Head, shall be for a blessing, and a comfort to him.

Then shall his Loyal Subjects manifest their obedience to him, and he shall
see the destruction of all Gods, his own, and his peoples Enemies. And now what
remains to glad the Kings, and our Hearts? but that we bring him out, and put
the Crown on his head, give 2 Chronicles. 23. 11.
Him the Testimony, and make Him KING, and Anoint Him, and say, all of us,

God save the King.
FINIS.

