THE KINGDOMS REMEMBRANCER: OR, The Protestation, Vow, and Covenant, Solemn
LEAGUE and COVENANT, Animadverted. So far as it concerns Religion.

By W. WICKINS, late Minister at St. Geo. Southwarke.

Genesis 28.20, 21, 22. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying; If God will be with me, and
will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment
to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace; Then shall the
Lord be my God: And this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be Gods
house, and of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto
thee.

Genesis 35.1. And God said unto Jacob, arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there,
and make thee an Altar unto God that appeared unto thee, when thou fleddest
from the face of Esau thy brother.

Sept: 19 LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell at the Fountain in Goldsmiths-Row
in Cheapside, 1660.

To the engaged Reader.
GOD requires of thee the use of thy memory, three things he would have thee
not forget, his mercies, judgments, and thine own engagements; that therefore
in this last thou may not be wanting, Thou art minded of Protestation, Vow,
and Covenant so far as concerns Religion, which thou can not but take well,
if thou mindest to perform that good, which thou did so solemnly promise in
the day of Englands distress.

W. W.

I. PROTESTATION. In the Preamble to the Protestation, 1641.
THAT diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions.

How brought in, may be collected by what spoken a little before, viz. That the
designs of the Priests and Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome,
have of late been more boldly and frequently put in practice then formerly, to
the undermining and danger of the ruin of the true reformed Protestant
Religion in his Majesty's Dominions established. By which it appears,

1. Whose design, innovations, and superstitions are, the Priests, and
Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome. 2. Whether it tends to the
undermining and ruin of the true Religion. And further we have one very ill
consequence thereof; The driving of multitudes out of his Majesty's Dominions.

All which is sufficient to provoke 1. true Christians to withstand in their
respective places Innovations and Superstitions. 2. The well-affected Statesman
to prevent the rise and growth of these things; for the multitude of Subjects
is the honor, and may be the safety of a Land.

In the Protestation. I A. B. in the Presence of Almighty God promise, vow, and
protest to maintain and defend as far as lawfully I may with my life, power and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same doctrine: where should be remembered, 1. What vowed,
promised, and protested, viz. To maintain and defend the true reformed
Protestant Religion. 2. Against what? All Popery and Popish innovations. 3. How
far? As far as lawfully I may. 4. With what? Life, power, and estate. 5. Where?
Within the Realm. Lastly; That length of time, does not disoblige from this
vowed, promised, and protested in the presence of Almighty God.

Yet more. [ANd to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and
by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such
as shall by force, practice, counsels, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise do any
thing to the contrary.] Which binds not only to a withdrawing of the hand
from promoting Popery and Popish innovations; but to a putting forth of the
hand, as far as lawfully I may against those that shall any manner of way
attempt it.

Conclusion. And neither for hope, fear, nor other respect shall relinquish
this promise, vow, and protestation; which hinders the working of inordinate
affections, and baracado's against temptations from without.

But if it be queried whether this does not bind to the form, discipline,
rites and ceremonies of the Church? the House of Commons answer by what
explicative follows.

WHereas some doubts have been raised concerning the meaning of these words
[The true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England against all Popery and Popish innovations within this Realm contrary
to the same doctrine] this House does declare, that by those words, was and is
meant only the public doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as it is
opposite to Popery and Popish innovations: and that the said words are not to
be extended to the maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline or
Government, nor of any rites or ceremonies of the said Church of England.

And this was thought so meet then to be taken, that

Die Veneris 30. July 1641.
Resolved upon the Question. That this House does conceive that the
Protestation made by them, is so to be taken by every man that is well affected
in Religion, and to the good of the Commonwealth, and therefore does declare;
That what person soever shall not take the Protestation, is unfit to bear
office in the Church or Commonwealth.

2.The Vow and Covenant appointed by the Lords and Commons to be taken by every
man throughout the Kingdom.
THere then being a Popish plot for the subversion of the true Protestant
reformed Religion, therefore they declare; That in order to the security and
preservation of the true Protestant Religion, they have thought fit, that all
who are true-hearted, should bind themselves each to other in a sacred vow and
Covenant.

In it. I A. B. in humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my
hearty sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have
deserved the calamities and judgments that now lie upon it; and my true
intention is by Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of my own ways.] If our
calamities and Gods judgments were cause sufficient 1. for us to justify God.
2. To be heartily and truly sorrowful for our own sins and the sins of this
Nation: as 3. also to promise the amendment of our ways, how should his
wonderful works and great mercies affect our hearts, and oblige us so much the
more to repentance and amendment? considering that the goodness of God leads to
repentance; and that of Christ to the man that was healed, go and sin no more,
lest a worse thing befall thee. But most emphatical is that of Ezra c. 9.13.
And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespasses, seeing that thou our God have punished us less then our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such a deliverance as this; should we again break
thy commandments, would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed
us, so that there should be no remnant nor escaping.

3. The Covenant.
In it. 1. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly through the grace of
God, endeavor in our several places and callings the preservation of the
reformed religion in the Church of Scotland, in doctrine, worship, discipline
and government against our common enemies.] The discipline and government of
the Church of Scotland is here undertaken to be preserved against the common
enemy, and enemies to them are the Papist, Prelate, Erastian, Schisma^ick,
he^etick and profane. 2. The Reformation of Religion in the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland, in doctrine, worship, discipline and government according
to the word of God, and the example of the best reformed Churches. 1. It was
then thought, that in all these there was something amiss, and that they might
admit of a Reformation. 2. That the word of God would be the best rule, 3. and
the best reformed churches the pattern: and that we should never attain to this
desirable reformation, by 1. seeking to accommodate, or comply with Rome. 2.
Making the politicians head the fountain of our rule, or 3. to continue in our
old-way without any progress of amendment; but surely hereby Covenanters are
bound to go on toward perfection, working by divine rule, and not serving the
times, eying the best reformed, not the most corrupt.

3. And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the 3. Kingdoms to the
nearest conjunction and uniformitie in Religion, confession of Faith, form of
Church Government, Directory for worship, and catechizing.] 1. The uniformity
of all is the engaged endeavor, one must not be looked upon as independent,
there should not be built up a wall of partition, but a regular line should be
stretched over the whole. 2. And that not only as to faith, but to discipline,
government, and worship. 3. Whereupon it was, that the Parliament advising with
an Assembly of Divines, did ratify by their civil Sanction, a Confession,
Directory, form of Church Government and Catechisms, greater and less, if we
could be so happy as to go on, and not so unhappy as to pull down.
4. That we shall in like manner without respect of persons endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, Commissioners, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound doctrine, and the power of godliness.] 1. That sound
doctrine and the power of godliness might thrive and prosper to the glory of
God, and salvation of souls, there are sundry evils to be endeavored against,
even to an extirpation of them. 2. Not only profaneness, heresy, and schism,
but superstition, and particularly Popery and Prelacy, and that Prelacy
particularly named as a thing not only to be reformed, and moderated, but even
extirpated, and not only the head and tail, but even the whole body of that
Hierarchy. 3. This is to be endeavored in like manner, that is sincerely,
really and constantly in our several places and callings. Lastly, without
respect of persons, though never so high, near or numerous, so that the turning
of the tide, alterations of time gives not a disobligation to the so
endeavoring.
5. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common cause of
Religion assist and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant
in the maintaining and pursuing thereof: and shall not suffer our selves
directly, nor indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to
be divided, and withdrawn from this blessed union and conjunction, whether to
make defection to the contrary part, or give our selves to a detestable
indifferency or neutrality in this cause; but shall all the days of our lives
zealously and constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote
the same according to our power against all lets and impediments whatsoever.]
Here is, 1. an engaging to persevere even to the end, and that not only
constantly but zealously. 2. To the assisting and defending all those that
enter into Covenant, in the maintaining and persuing thereof. 3. To be so far
from falling off to the contrary party, as not to be indifferent, or neuters
in the matter. 4. And all this against all lets, oppositions, combinations,
persuasions or terrors.
6. We profess and declare before God and the world our unfeigned desire to be
humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these Kingdoms, especially that
we have not labored for the purity and power of the Gospel, and our true and
unfeigned purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our
power and charge, both in public and in private in all duties we owe to God
and man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example
of a real Reformation.] A profession of true repentance, 1. In godly sorrow
for our own and others sins, in special not endeavoring after the purity and
power of the Gospel. 2ly. Resolution of amendment 1. in all duties to God and
man. 2. In all ways public and private. 3. In respect of our selves and
others under our power and charge.
Lastly, so far as to be examples one to another in real Reformation, to
strive, 1. not to draw back, or 2. to go along; but 3. even to be for most in
reformation.

7. This Covenant we make in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of all
hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that
great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed.] 1. God is called
to witness of the sincerity of our hearts. 2. We bind our selves over to answer
it at the general Sessions, where not only actions shall be tried secundum
allegata and probata, but even hearts, de quibus non judicat Ecclesia nec judex
terrenus, of which no man judges.
Lastly, Grace is begged to perform this Covenant with such success, that it
may be encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger
of the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same or like Association
and Covenant.]
And indeed it is not the taking, but keeping of Covenants, that produce good
effects, and give encouragement to others. We may safely say, had this whole
Covenant been kept, we had escaped a world of evil, with which we are almost
sunck; and had been so amiably provoking to others, that they would have long
since said Come let us join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual Covenant,
that shall not be forgotten. But alas! the breaking of our Covenant has almost
broken us, and what it may yet do in the end, who knows? when we shall be
found partial in the Covenant, and not have respect to the whole of it, there
is that we have recovered; but there are other and greater things to be looked
after. God is more tender of his own honor, then we are desirous of our
safety, since there is given to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, let none
of us dare to withold what we have devoted to God, for God can (...) destroy
both us and our King.

There are of the then House of Commons, that not only took it and subscribed
it, but have arrested it in print to the number of 228. There are many of them
now sitting Members, and see the King in his greatness, and the two Houses
enjoying their Privileges. I shall not name them, but hope and desire they
would endeavor in their now place and calling, to see the rest of the Covenant
as to the whole put in execution, if the liberty of the Subject be preserved,
and Religion in what amiss reformed and secure, we are safe, and shall call
them blessed, Amen.

For the taking of this in England and Wales, there was an Ordinance of Lords
and Commons as follows.

WHereas a Covenant for the preservation and reformation of Religion, etc, has
been thought a fit and excellent means to acquire the favor of God toward the
three Kingdoms, and likewise to unite them, and by uniting, to strengthen them
against the common enemy of the true-reformed Religion, etc. And whereas both
Houses, London and Westminster, and the Kingdom of Scotland, have already
taken the same. It is now ordained that the same Covenant be solemnly taken in
all places through England and Wales.

And for the better taking thereof, directions were appointed strictly to be
followed. 1. That the Speaker of both Houses do send to the General and
Admiral copies of the Covenant, that it may be taken by all Officers and
Soldiers under them. 2. That the Members of the Commons House do send down
into their Counties a competent number of Copies unto the Committees, and that
they within six days disperse them to every Parish Church or Chapel, to be
delivered to the several Ministers, Churchwardens, or Constables. 3. That the
several Committees return a Certificate to the Clerk of the House when they
received those copies, and the day when they sent them forth, and to what
Parishes. 4. That the Ministers read the Covenant publicly to their People
the next Lords day after they receive it, and prepare their People for it. 5.
That the Covenant be taken by the Committees in the place where they reside,
and tendered to the Inhabitants of the Town within 7. days after it comes to
the Committees hands. 6. That the Committees after they have taken it
themselves, do speedily disperse themselves through the said Counties, so as 3.
or 4. of them be together on days appointed at the chief places of meeting for
the several divisions of the said Counties, and summon all the Ministers,
Churchwardens, Constables, and other Officers unto that place, where after
Sermon preached by one appointed by the Committee; they cause the same Minister
to tender the Covenant unto all such Ministers and other Officers, to be by
them taken and subscribed in the presence of the Committee. 7. That the
Committees give the Ministers in charge to tender it to all the rest of the
Parishioners the next Lords day, making then unto them some solemn exhortation
concerning the taking and observing thereof. And if any Minister refuse or
neglect to appear at the said summons, or refuse to take the Covenant, or to
tender it to his Parish, that then the Committee appoint another Minister to do
it in his place. 8. That it be tendered to all men within the several Parishes
above the age of 18. 9. That the Earl of Manchester take care that it be
tendered and taken in the University of Cambridge. 10. That the Assembly of
Divines make an Exhortation to all sorts of persons to take it, as that which
they judge not only lawful, but (all things considered) exceeding expedient
and necessary for all that wish well to Religion, etc. to join in. 11. That if
any Minister refuse to take or tender the Covenant, or any other to whom it is
tendered do not take it, that it be tendered them the next Lords day following:
and if they refuse, that their names be returned to the Commit, and by them
to the House. 12. That such as are within the several Parishes, when notice is
given of the taking of it, and do absent themselves from the Church at the time
of taking it, and come not in afterward to take it, they be returned as
refusers.

The manner of taking it. The Minister to read the whole Covenant distinctly
and audibly in the Pulpit: and during the time of reading thereof, the whole
Congregation to be uncovered, and at the end of his reading thereof, all to
take it standing, lifting up their right hands bare, and afterward to subscribe
it severally.

13. That the exhortation of the Assembly be publicly read when the Covenant
is read.


The Assembly of Divines presented the House an Exhortation for taking the
Covenant, which being brought into the House occasioned this vote.

Die veneris, Feb. 9. 1643.
An exhortation touching the taking the Solemn League and Covenant, and for
satisfying of such scruples as may arise in the taking of it, was this day read
the first and second time, and by Vote upon the Question, assented unto, and
ordered to be forthwith printed. In which Exhortation there is this remarkable
passage.

IF it be said the extirpation of Prelacy, to wit, the whole Hierarchicall
government (standing as yet by the known Laws of the Kingdom) is new and
unwarrantable. This will appear to all partial understandings (though new) to
be not only warrantable, but necessary, if they consider (to omit what some
say, that this government was never formally established by any laws of this
Kingdom at all) that the very life and soul thereof is already taken from it,
by an Act past this present Parliament, so as (like Jezebels carcass, of which
no more was left but the skull, the feet, and palms of her hands) nothing of
JVRISDICTION remains, but what is precarious in them, and voluntary in those
who submit unto them. That their whole government is at best but a humane
Constitution, and such as is found and adjudged by both Houses of Parliament
(in which the judgment of the whole Kingdom is involved) and declared, not
only very prejudicial to the Civil State, but a great hindrance also to the
perfect reformation of Religion: Yea, who knows it not to be too much an
enemy thereunto, and destructive to the power of godliness, and pure
administrations of the Ordinances of Christ, which moved the well-affected
almost throughout this Kingdom long since to Petition this Parliament (as has
been desired before even in the reign of Q. Elizabeth, and of King James) for a
total abolition of the same.

In this paragraph are many remarkable passages, which at this time, and in
this thing should not be slightly passed over. 1. To omit what some say, that
this Government was never formally established by any Laws of this Kingdom at
all; which though the strength of it may seem to be weakened with Some say, yet
there is more to be said for it, when both the Assemblies of Divines, and the
House of Commons say, Some say; it is not every hour say that they thus speak
of, it is almost as if they themselves had said it. 2. That the very life and
soul thereof is already taken from it by Act of Parliament.] So that were it
formerly formally established, the life and soul thereof is taken away by Law,
therefore they infer nothing of jurisdiction remains. 3. That their whole
government is at best: but a Humane Constitution, and adjudged by Parliament
not only very prejudicial to the Civil State, but a great disturbance also to
the perfect reformation of Religion. 4. Who knows it not to be an enemy
thereunto, and destructive to the power of godliness and pure administrations
of the Ordinances of Christ. 5. How earnestly the removing, not only now, but
in former times has been desired; Which moved the well-affected almost
throughout the Kingdom long since to Petition this Parliament (as has been
desired before even in the Reign of Q. Eliz. and of K. James) for a to all
abolition of the same.


By these preceding, it will clearly appear, 1. How strictly the Covenant was
imposed, and that by authority of Parliament; not only commanded, but the
taking thereof enquired after, and they severally proceeded against that
refused: it was not then adjudged a slight matter, nor left arbitrary to every
ones pleasure to take or refuse 2. How solemnly taken, not in a formal,
superficial manner, but seriously and deliberately entered into. 3. That
thousands are engaged therein in all the three Kingdoms, and persons of all
sorts, rancks, and conditions. Lastly, how far the Ministers concerned more
then others, as having not only entered into it, but given it to many, yea
seriously and earnestly exhorting them thereunto;
and therefore next to those that by authority imposed it, are most concerned
to the observation of it, lest they be found great and inexcusable breakers of
it; and since that, through the gracious and wonderful providence of God, we
have attained to a making it good as to King and Parliam. After foul breaches
made upon the Covenant in that particular, what remains, but that the other
parts be looked on, and prosecuted, to wit, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy,
Superstition, Profaneness, Heresy and Schism, and whatsoever is contrary to
sound doctrine, and the power of godliness, lest otherwise we shall be found
before God to have entered into Covenant only with respect to our selves, and
such as can acquiess in the attaining of our own things, and are no whit
touched with those things that so nearly concern the glory of God, and the good
of his Churches.

FINIS.

