A LETTER Sent from Mr. Sergeant Wild, Esquire and Humphrey Salwey, Esquire Both
Members of the House of COMMONS, To the Honorable, WILLIAM LENTALL Esquior,
Speaker of the House of Commons; Concerning diverse Passages at the Quarter
Sessions in Worcester, about the execution of the Commission of Array, and the
Ordinance of the MILITIA: At which Sessions was the greatest Assembly that has
been seen for many years past.

Together with The humble Petition of the Grand-Jury-men of that Sessions to
the Knights, and Justices of that County; wherein it appears they are well
satisfied of the Illegality of the Commission of Array; with their Desires of
the speedy execution of the Militia, by them who are entrusted therewith.

Read in the House of Commons, and Ordered by them to be forthwith Printed and
published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed by LUKE NORTON and JOHN FIELD, for Edward Husbands and John
Franck. July 18. 1642.

To the Honorable, WILLIAM LENTALL Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons in
Parliament.
Honored SIR,
WE hold it our duties to render you this short account of our Journey into
Worcestershire, which fell out to be very necessary and seasonable, for we
sound by the way, and after our arrival here at Worcester upon Monday night
last (being the night before the Quarter Sessions) that great preparation had
been made for the Execution of the Commission of Array on this day, and great
distempers raised in the County, by the violent prosecution of Master
Sherrington Talbott (whose high contempts and oppositions against the
Parliament shall be more partitularly represented to you hereafter) giving us
just cause to believe that there was a design, hope, and probability, (with
reference to other parts adjoining) to have made this County a place of war;
But (blessed be God) our coming down by the Command of the Honorable House
whereof we are unworthy Members, has wrought (we hope so effectually that the
Commission of Array was this day quite deserted by the whole County; The
Declarations of the Parliament most joyfully, and thankfully received, and the
minds of the People (which before were by mis-reports, and publications of
matters from York full of anxietie and trouble) are now (we believe) fully
settled, as may appear by this enclosed Petition, which in a very full, and
great Assembly as ever we saw at any Assizes, or Sessions, was by the
Grand Jury presented to us, and the rest of the Justices with a great
acclamation of the company then present, and further intimations of ten
Thousand hands more to have been added to it, if time would have permitted.

Mean while Master Sherrington Talbott having the night before at his house
peremptorily refused to obey the arrest of the Messenger, as the messenger can
testify, with other his speeches and actions, and coming hither to this City
in a daring manner to have executed the Commission (finding his hopes fail,
and his apprehension like to follow) secretly fled away, and as we hear is
gone again toward York, with Menaces in his mouth, leaving the Lord Dudley
(one of the chief Commissioners) to manage the work, who being not seconded
by the Commissioners whom he expected (or any other) the same day quitted the
placce, leaving the City and County (thanks be to God) in good peace and
quietness, wherein we hope by Gods blessing it will continue faithful and
firm to the King and Parliament. And of other passages we shall be ready to
give the House a more particular account at our return, which we intend (God
willing) shall be very speedily. Mean while and ever with our due respects and
best service presented to you, we take our leave, and rest

Wednesday, 13. Iulii, 1642. Your most humble, and Affectionate Servants, John
Wild: Humphrey Salwey.


TO THE Right Worshipful, The Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the
County of Wigorum;
The humble Petition of the Grand Jury, which does now serve at this present
Quarter Sessions of the Peace, holden this 12 of July, 1642.
Shows,
THat with all thankfulness even from the bottom of our hearts we acknowledge
the exceeding great favor the Parliament has been pleased to show unto us,
in declaring the illegallity of the Commission of Array intended at this
present to be executed among us. And we do most humbly beseech those to whom
the Ordinance of the Militia for this County is entrusted, that they would be
pleased speedily to put the same in execution, that so His Majesty's Royal
Person, the Parliament and Kingdom may be secured, which (as we are now fully
persuaded) are in great danger by reason of the plots of a Malignant party, and
Persons ill affected to the King and State.

And we shall daily pray, etc.
FINIS.

