THE IMPEACHMENT AGAINST THE Bishops.

Sent up by Sergeant Wild, and delivered at the Bar in the Lords house by
order of the House.

August the 4. 1641.

LONDON Printed by I. N. for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at the three
Daggers in Fleet Street. 1641.

August 4. 1641.
The impeachment against the Bishops, sent up by Sergeant Wild, and delivered
at the B^rr in the Lords house verbally, by order of the House.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house of Parliament,
being sensible of the great Infelicities and Troubles which the Commonwealth
has sustained by the exorbitant courses of the Bishops, and knowing well what
the wiseman says, That if sentence be not speedily executed against an evil
work, the hearts of the sons of men are set upon further mischief. The
timely redress whereof does better become the wisdom of Parliament, then a
too-late woeful Repentance, Have commanded me to represent unto your Lordships,
That Walter Bishop of Winchester. Robert Bishop of Coventry and Leichfield.
Godfry Bishop of Gloucester. Joseph Bishop of Excester. John Bishop of Asaph.
William Bishop of Bath and Wells. George Bishop of Hereford. Matthew Bishop of
Ely. William Bishop of Bangor. Robert Bishop of Bristoll. John Bishop of
Rochester. John Bishop of Peterborough. Morgan Bishop of Landaffe.
Together with William Archbishop of Canterbury, and others of the Clergy of
that Province, at a Convocation or Synod for the same Province begun at London
in the year 1640, did contrive, make, and promulge several Constitutions and
Canons Ecclesiastical, containing in them diverse matters contrary to the Kings
Prerogative, To the fundamental Laws and Statutes of the Realm, To the
Rights of Parliament, To the Propriety and Liberty of the Subjects, and matters
tending to sedition, and of dangerous consequence.

And to add the more weight and efficacy to this their monstrous design, They
did at the same Synod under a specious and fair Title grant a Benevolence or
Contribution to his Majesty, to be paid by the Clergy of that Province,
contrary to Law: It rested not there, for though this had been enough to have
affrighted and terrified the Kings People with strange apprehensions and
fears, yet that these might not seem to be contrivancies of the Brain or
Fancies only, They were put in Execution, and were executed upon diverse with
animosity and rigor, to the great oppression of the Clergy of this Realm,
and other his Majesty's Subjects, and in contempt of the King, and of the Law.

Whether these persons, my Lords, that are culpable of these Offenses, shall be
thought fit to have an Interest in the Legislative power your Lordships
wisdom and Justice is able to judge.

But for these matters and things, The Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
Commons house in Parliament, in the name of themselves, and of all the Commons
of England, do impeach the said Bishops before-named of the Crimes and
Misdemeanors before expressed, and do therefore pray that they may be
forthwith put to their Answers in the Presence of the Commons, and that such
further Proceedings may be had against them as to Law and Justice shall
appertain.

FINIS.

