OOTOI'A, OR, OBSERVATIONS ON THE PRESENT MANNERS OF THE ENGLISH: Briefly
Anatomizing the Living by the Dead.

WITH AN USEFUL DETECTION OF THE MOUNT BANKS of both Sexes.

By Richard Whitlock, M. D. Late Fellow of All Souls College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft, and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, at
the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1654.

The Explication of the Frontispice.
THE Experienced Scepter of the Preaching King,
And Sermon of Paul's Cross, both show what THING
(Compared with Heaven) this empty world would prove,
If once Ripped up. Is here ought worth your Love?
Bewitch't Admirers! View each Region,
The Vain, the Vexing, and the Loathsome One.
No; He, and That^s above, which only can
Full Ravishments afford the Soul of Man.
If ought that is worth your Souls, or Love you find
In The World below, call us Dissecters blind.
ZOOTOMIA* or A Moral Anatomy of the Living by the Dead* in Observations
Essays* etc*
Valla

(...)

Stercus

Seneca

Plutarch

Quam Mundi Illecebris Vacuum quam Triste Cadarer? Cuius tres Tentres, Stercus,
Texatio, ^ana,



To his Ingenious, knowing Friend, THE AVTHOR.
THy Sharp, but Gentle Pen reformes the Age,
Where Vice is thy Disclosure, not thy Rage.
The Guilty, naked laid, will dread thy Name,
Not for the Lash they feel, but for the Shame.
Ills thus unmaskt by thee, will fright us more,
By looking Ugly, then by being Sore.
Thy Characters so circumstance each sin,
As 't not Described, but had Embowell'd bin,
The Knife, joined with the Pencil, glories here:
As thou both Limner, and Dissector were.
He that shows Guilt her Face, shows but her skin;
He that will show her F^ul, shows her within.
Some maze their Thoughts in Labyrinths, and thus
Invoke no Reader, but an Oedipus.
But whilst Revealed Sense we find in you,
You write to the Understanding, not the Clew.
So Theseus through the winding Tower was led
By Ariadnes Beauty, more then Thread.
TO HIS INGENIOUS FRIEND THE AUTHOR, Concerning these his Endeavors.
SIR,
IF your Book did depend wholly on my Judgment of it, I would say, that in
Truth, for Wit, Learning, and Variety of matter, put into a handsome Dress, you
have exceeded any Writer in this kind which I have yet met with; nor should I
doubt to say thus much in Verse before it, if it were not for two Reasons: The
one is, that the Rudeness of the place where I dwell, and my weekly Thoughts
compelled to size themselves to a plain Country Congregation, have abated much
of that Fancy which should do honor, either to your Book or my self. The
other is, that if I could write well, yet all my public Poetry has, and still
is, objected to me as a piece of Lightness, not befitting the Profession or
Degree of,

Your faithful Friend, J. Main.
November. 1. 1653.
The Titles of the distinct Discourses.
THe honest Adamite, page 17 Ambodexter, p. 25 Of Books, or the best Furnitur^,
236 The false Balance, 282 Commendable Carelessness, 28 The Faithsull
Chyrurgian, 384 The Chaire-Man, 319 The thriving Craft, 34 The wise Cha^man,
264 The sad Descant, 31 The Do little, Worthless, 30 The Valentinian Doctor,
101 The fifth Element, or of Detraction, 444 The g^and Experiment, 548 The
Quacking Hermaphrodite, 45 The best Husband^y, 294 The Blots of History, 268
The grand Impertinent, 308 A Dissection of self-killers, 109 Life's Abbreviates,
4 Learnings Apology, 138 The Levellers, 419 Mercies Hyperbole, 37 The happy
Match, 192 Malchus, or Misconstruction, 1 The Magnetic Lady, 321 Man's two
Elements, 395 The las^ing Monument, 408 Of Music, 480 Parlour Divinity, ^6 The
Peoples Physician. 62 Of Printing, 227 Poetry's Defense and Excel^ence, 467 Of
Painting, 487 The Divine Prospective, 535 The ov^r Rate, 10 The best Revenge,
39 Reasons Independency, 207 A Lecture on Readers, 461 False Reformations
Shipwreck 494 The grand Schismatic, or Suist, 357 The unguarded Tree of Life,
515 The commanded Tree of Knowledge, 527 Fabula Vitae, 8 The politic Weather
glass, 275.
The Preface, or an Antidote for Authors, against the Poison of Aspes.
INstructions (Courteous Reader) that render the Design and Purpose of the
Work, may well be styled an Essay upon the Author, and as it were Contents, of
him, no less then the Book; and so may well supply the room of a Dedicatory
Epistle to some protecting Eminence, or of courting Apologies, like forlorn
hopes first sent out to set upon the Benevolence of Readers. That Acquaintance
of Readers with the Contents of the ensuing Chapter might insinuate a
Candidness, I am induced to believe, because with well-Meaners even good
Meanings and Aims in Authors atone their Failings. Instead of other kinds
of Epistles, take therefore this Anatomy of the Anatomy, (the Book it self) by
way of a Preface; and so not tied to the shortness usual of Epistles; it may
serve for an Essay on Men's Publications of Themselves by writing, and more
especially on mine. I shall not here trouble thee with the Burden of many
Epistles to tell thee this Qualecunque (whatsoever it shall deserve to be
called) was midwived into the Light by Importunity of Friends, or fear of
Antedated Impressions; (with such like Apologies for increasing the Number of
Scriblers) no, it ventured willingly into the world: if it increase the trifles
of the Press, I dare excuse it from adding to the Guilt: it was rather
destined to save its Reputation by crowding in somewhat less unprofitable,
less mischievous, then the Press daily issues forth in these Pamphleting
Days, bringing forth (to say true) little else then Trifles or Invectives. The
Things I present are nove dicta, etsi non nova, (according to Vincentius
Lyrinensis) Observations if not quite new, yet in a new dress; and as new
things are acceptable, so among them nothing more than new clothes. The Old
Saw, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius, proves all writings to be but various
Descant on plainer Rudiments; or if you will, but the Anagramms, the Alphabet,
and Transposition of men's various Collections from Men or Books. Such are the
Materials of this; one End whereof was my rehearsal in the School of the
world* the same that stirred up Juvenal, Semper ego Auditor tantum? --
And what is that Rehearsal, but doing of good by Tongue, Life, or Pen, or
all. I am not delivered from it by either of those two Arguments, either the
Number, or Excellency of Printed Labors.

1. Not from the Number; that of S. Chrysostom bears me out; which take in
Latin, (not its original) as more easy and fashionable: A Scribendi Munere
Nos Scriptorum copia non avocet, vigeat potius, and provocet: bonos libros qui
conscribit, Retia Salutis pandit, let not the number (says he) of books
discourage, but provoke our Writings; he that writes good books spreads Nets
of Salvation. Cornelius A Lapide counts them requisite, ad Dei
Magnificentiam, and plenam Rerum universitatem, reckoning them among those
works that glorify our Heavenly Father, and fill the world as ornamentally,
nay, usefully as many other things.

2. Then for the excellence of books already writ, or that Eximium quid Re,
sive modo and Methodo scribendi, somewhat excellent in matter, manner, or
method of writing (which A Lapide requires in Writers) even the fear of this
is lessened by that of Seneca. Qui ante nos ista moverunt non Domini sed Duces
sunt; patet omnibus veritas, nondum est occupata; multum ex illa etiam futuris
relictum est. Former Writers Lord it not over our Endeavors, but lead them;
all Truth is not engrossed, after Ages shall travel her Terra incognita, her
undiscovered parts: Never did Momus himself require all should write best. To
those that write better I shall do the courtesy of a foil; from those that
write worse, receive the courtesy that I do. I know not but that it is
commendable enough to make the same the Cannon of our writings, the Apostle
does of Actions, Phil. 4. 8. Finally my brethren whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, any praise, think of these things. He that hitteth on
either of these writes excusably, if not commendably, though I think it better
may be termed a thing more commendable, than to pass over the Stage of the
World as a Mute, leaving no Testimony that he lived ( much less lived to the
end of his Creation) his Being to be found no where but in the Church-book:
where it may be, many of the same name make even that but confusedly known. And
if I should own that which many Writers dissemblingly decline ( and one of the
best ingenuously owneth) I mean an Aim at a good Esteem ( little or much) for
my desires of doing Posterity good, it is but ingenuous Natures desire. The
confirmation of my assertion I cannot leave out in either Language. An erit qui
velle recuset
[Pers. Satyr.]
Os populi meruisse? and cedro digna locutus
Linquere, nec Scombros metuentia carmina, necthus.
Non ego cum scribo, si forte quid aptius exit,
Laudari metuam; neque enim mihi cornea fibra est.
Which take in English from that inimitable Imitator, and Translator Mr.
Holliday. For does there breath a man that can reject
A general praise? and his own lines neglect?
Lines worth immortal Cedars recompense,
Nere fearing new sold Fish, nor Frankincense.
When I my self do write, if from my Brain
Does flow by greatest chance some happy strain,
(For it is by chance) my heart is not so hard,
So horny, as to fear the due Reward
Of deserved Fame. --


How hypocritical the declination of this Fame is let Cicero tell us, Tuscul.
Quaest. 1. Quid nostri Philosophi? in his ipsis libris quos scribunt de
contemnenda Gloria, sua Nomina inscribunt. Our very Philosophers ( says he)
that write of contemning Fame, set their Names to their Books; which they would
not, if they were such Decliners of a Fame as they pretend. But it is not only
a natural desire, but Canonical obedience, (as our Fame may be subordinate to
our makers Glory) to that Apocryphal Text, Ecclesiasticus 41. 12. Have regard
to thy good Name, a good Life is but for a few days, but a good Name endures
for ever. A Charge seconded by that Canonical Injunction in the above
mentioned place; If there be any virtue, any praise, etc. If Plinies Counsel
may be heard, he will tell us, Tanto magis quicquid est temporis futilis and
caduci, si non datur Factis (nam horum Materia in aliena manu) certe studiis
proferamus: and quatenus nobis denegatur diu vivere, relinquamus aiiquid quo
nos vixisse testemur. By how much (says he) our short time escapes Exploits,
let us spin it out in Studies; and since we cannot live long, let us leave some
lasting Testimony that we have lived. This why I write at all, now why I write
thus: I must use Mountaignes Apology in his Essay of Books; I make no doubt
(says he) but I handle many Themes that are far better handled in the
scattered works of able Writers: But my intent was not to beat my Brains in the
Acquisition even of Knowledge it self that was too difficult; Nor have I what
came easily among Authors or Observations to my understanding; what conduces
to living or dying well, that I communicate. To say true, I find Mountaignes
Palate ( and not quite without judgment) pretty general among Readers of most
Ages; and because his words are very significant, take them in his own
language. Je aim en general les livers, qui usent les sciences, non ceux qui
les dressent. I love, says he, books that make use of Sciences, not compile
them into their Geneticall, or Analyticall Parcels. Authors (to say true) are
more Thumb'd that are variously useful, than those Embodyers of Arts in
Cancellos suae Methodi, into the limits of their proper Method: useful I
confess they are, but wanting the Dulce, Pleasure of variety, and convenience
of more contracted brevity: the pains of reading them is seldom bestowed on
them, especially if they swell into Tomes of that bigness, that he that can
have no leisure, dares not look on them, and he that will have none, cares
not. I know not, how but as Montaigne says of himself, Tracts of a continued
Thread are tedious to most Fancies, which of it self indeed is of that
desultory nature, that it is pleased with Writings like Irish Bogs, that it may
leap from one variety to another, than tread any beaten Path. Among many kinds
of writings I find Plutarchs most inviting Imitation for the form, ( call them
Discourses, Essays, or what you will) nor behind any for matter; if mixed
sometimes with those Mucrones Sermonum, Enlivening Touches of Seneca, full of
smart Fancy, solid sense and accurate reason: such like Pieces compiled by able
Penmen out of Plutarchs fullness and Seneca's quickness, would undoubtedly fill
the mouth of the most gaping Expectaltee among Readers. Seneca's brevity alone
in some things (as Controversies, etc.) might make good that slander on him,
that he did frangere Pondera Rerum Minutijs erborum, crumble the weight of
Points. But for Hints of Descant he has dealt with us, I must confess, as he
says of another, Cupiditatem imitandi fecit, spem abstulit. Their fiery
liveliness has enkindled a desire of imitation, and their accurateness has
damped all hopes of performance. And that in this I write not (as the Age
discourses) private spirited Opinions, take the confirmation of our english
Divine Seneca, Bishop Hall, who says, never any Heathen writ more Divinely,
never any Philosopher more probably. For my using these so frequently, I
propounded this end to my self, even to shame our Christian dullness, and slow
Proficiency under the Brightness of our advantageous Light, by making us hear
the Symphony of the outward Court of Nature agreeing with the inner Quire of
divine Penmen; for what can we be able to say for our selves? neither knowing,
nor following our divine Light, so far as some Heathen seem to have progressed
in both Knowledge and Practice moral. Then why for Politics I make Tacitus my
Text, I need give no other reason than this, never any better cast Practice
into Precept, or made History Politics in fuller and closer Observations. To
write Controversies, engages their Authors to the censure of Factions and
Parties; All things being so now under dispute, that they will not leave us
that Nos nihil scire out of question (says Seneca) not allow us to know that
we know nothing: I chose therefore a way most comprehensive, and least
distasteful to the quarrel some world, to handle Observables according to their
Nature, or my liesure; some larger, some more contracted: the matter of them,
if you will, is somewhat of that nature, my Lord Bacon calls Satyra Seria, a
serious Satyr, an endeavor harder to forbear than undertake, says the Poet.
Difficile est Satyram non scribere; nam quis iniquae
Tam patiens Urbis, tam ferreus, ut teneat se?
Or if you will, they are what he elsewhere calls Jnteriora Rerum, Endeavors
(in the Observables of life) to discover and detect the more inward deceits of
men or things, and to strip them of their Appearances. That I on this Score
term it an Anatomy of the Living by the Dead, or of Practical Errors (
though in the particulars I decline the Nauseating of a continued Allegory)
does not much mis-represent my purpose; while in the latitude of my Discourses
( and according to the destined Bulk of this Tract) I deliver my Judgment (
made out of the seriousness of others, or casualties of my own Observations) of
men's mis-apprehendings, or things Mis-apprehensions, whereby the Glitter of
things often passes for Gold, while some things enduring touch ( but dull to the
eye) arise not to an Esteem equal with counterfeits, as in nothing more
appears than our Opinion of the World and its Desirables in gross, dreaming
of life in a Carcass, and of Perpetuity in a blast; and having high conceits of
our vain Projects, dear ones of our vexations, and doting ones of falsely
admired. Contemptibles. But come we to particulars, and it is undeniable but
that there are in (even the most familiar) Passages between man and man,
neglected (but on enquiry easily discoverable) false Principles, Erroures and
causes of Miscarriage, and in many things inner parts unobserved by the
careless world, Errores, Vulgi, vulgar Errors reaching to the Morals of men as
well as their Philosophy; the substance of these Discourses the Poet gives you
most fully. Quicquid agunt homines, Votum, Timor, Ira, voluptas,
Gaudia, Discursus, Nostri est Farrago libelli.
Et quando uberior vitiorum Copia?
Which take englished from Sir Robert Stapyltons ingenuous Translation. What
men do, their hopes, fears, distasts,
Sports, Fates, the Medly is our Book presents*
And when was sin more fruitful?
They are Collections many of them more from men than books, in which latter we
seldom meet with live, and particular presentiments of men's Principles and
Actions; indeed Poets do it best, and among them the Dramatick, the form of
them I owe as little to Books; for I must truly acknowledge I did not so much
as cast my Eye on Books of the like nature ( without it were my Lord Bacons
Interiora Rerum) till they were compiled, and then chiefly to avoid Actum
agere, writing the same things, at least in the same manner; not out of
presumption of my own Abilities to go alone, without their help, but out of an
Idiosyncrasis ( or particular Temper) of my Fancy, (blameable or commendable, I
determine not) to which Imitation is an unpleasing Confinement, and (I know not
how) more laborious than Invention. That some of these are mixed with Divinity,
the Title assures you: nor am I ashamed to profess it, since it is without
Intrusion into the Office of those Secretaries of Heaven, to whom are committed
the more Mysterious Oracles of our Credenda, Creed; Errors of Faith I leave to
those (sufficient for such things) to correct, but Errors of life I know not
why we should not amend in each other. That some of them are not only mixed,
but are professedly Essays in Divinity, transgresses not the Nature or Laws
of this kind of writing in mixed discourses, and I am sure to serious Souls
will not be unwelcome; since all Writings ( as well as Actions) are but Trifles
in comparison of what refers to Eternity. Nor will it be an Apology only,
but (with such) a commendations, to say I propounded that end Seneca gives us
in charge, haec alijs dic, ut dum dicis, audias; ipse scribe, ut dum scripseris
legas, Epist. 89. Give serious advise to others that thou may be thine own
Auditor, and write profitable for thine own perusal. As for being serious in
Discourses with Posterity ( such are Pennings for the public view) let it seem
as misshapen or uncouth as it will to Antic Fancies; I am sure printed vanity
is double unprofitableness; to be Fool, or Knave in Print does but double the
Blot. Useful Scripts, or Writers Seneca gives (I am sure) a higher Character
of, than of many other things, or men; that some (which would be counted the
worlds wise ones) set so high a price on. Si hoc mecum, si hoc cum Posteris
loquor, non videor tibi plus prodesse quam? cum ad vadimonium Advocatus
descenderem, etc. mihi creed, qui nihil agere videntur majora agunt; humana,
divinaque simul tractant. While I discourse (says he) these things with my
self, and Posterity, do not I profit more than if I voted in the Senate,
pleaded before a Judge? etc. believe it, though useful Employments of the Pen
may seem idle Enterprises, it is far above many Employments, falsely (if
compared) counted weighty. The youngest of us I am sure may say as Seneca,
premit a Tergo Aeternitas (etsi non Senectus) and obijcit annos inter vana
studia consumptos: tanto magis urgeamus, and Damna Aetatis male exactae labor
resarciat. Eternity (though not old Age) pulls us by the Sleeve, and upbraideth
the mis-spending of our former years in vain and fruitless Studies, and calls
on us to redeem them by some labors for the good of our selves and others. The
whole Tenor of this Piece is persuasion of others, nor a less obliging my
self. For Books (Seneca says) are Bills of our Hands to the world; and indeed
I think them more, being little less than Vows to God before men, and to men
promises before God of a mindfulness of our Vow made in Baptism of Renouncing
the worlds vanities, that by nothing more have got into our Affections, than by
an Erroneous Estimate of the real Worth of things, or undiscerning the
fallacious insides that appear when things are stripped. If any among these
Observations seem Paradoxicall to Credulous Ignorance ( that swalloweth
Traditions for Truths) or distasteful to the Guilty, according to Martial.
Ecce rubet quidam, pallet, stupet, oscitat, odit,
Hoc volo; nunc nobis carmina nostra placent.
-- At what we say,
One blushes, or looks pale, is ill at ease,
Amazed, takes pet; why now our Verses please.
If either of these I say, I have my End; one main end of my writing being
(like Diogenes his going into the Theater against the throng of people coming
out) to let the World know I think not as she thinks, and yet think never
the worse of my self; Erasmus assuring me it is bona pars sapientiae nosse
stultas vulgi cupiditates and absurdas Opiniones: A good step in Prudence to
know and dislike the foolish desires and absurd Opinions of the Vulgar. In
controversies I dissent without Peremptoriness or uncharitableness, and will
Salve the deepest Gashes of Detraction, or prejudice against my boldness in
dissenting, with that conclusion of Servius his book of the weapon salve: Quae
sanctissimi viri and doctissimi firma rataque sanxerunt, ea solum in nostra
Dissertatione firma rataque sunto. What the Learned and Religious assent to
(and no other) in our Writings shall have so much of Obligation over any man's
assent, as thereunto to stand in full force and virtue. As for Exactness of
writing on any Subject in Poetic heights of Fancy, or Rhetorical Descants of
Application, I leave to the Endeavourers in both those noble Studies, whose
profession it is to spend the vigor of their Conceptions on a Theme, to speak
as never any before, and if possible to damp the imitation of Posterity. For my
own part I may say, as Lipsius in his Epistlse; Rationem meam scribendi scire
vis? fundo, non scribo, nec id nisi in Calore and interno quodam Impetu, haud
aliter quam Poetae. Would you know (says he) my manner of writing? it is a
kind of voluntary Tiding of, not Pumping for; Notions flowing, not forced; like
Poets unconstrained Heats and Raptures: such is mine, rather a running
Discourse than a Grave-paced Exactnes; having in them this Formality of Essays
( as Sir W. Cornwallyes says of his) that they are Trials of bringing my hand
and Fancy acquainted in this using my Paper, as the Painters Boy a Board he
blurs with Trials. J may say in my defense as another before me, Sicut in magna
sylva boni venatoris est Feras quam plurimas indaganter capere, nec cuiquam
culpae suit non omnes cepisse: As in Hunting he is the best Huntsman that
catches most, and not bad because he catches not all: To comprehend all, or
most can be said on any of these Themes, I profess not; no, I fear that of
Ludovicus Vives, in attempts ad ultimum Naturae straining our Abilities,
Ingenia supra vires aspirantia infra Mediocritatem subsidunt: Wits that fly
above the Sphere of their Activity, fall beneath ordinary performances; and
were I one of such Laborers in vain, I should never please my self, but still
be at his fault that could never take Manum de tabula, his Hand off, but was
still mending disliking, interlining, and it may be at last corrected all with
a Sponge: ( I have much a do to forbear it now my self) it was the fault of
Protogenes ( as Apelles accuses him) Qui nimia peccarat diligentia, who
offended with too peevish diligence; a fault they blame Paulus Aemilius
Veronensis with, of whom it is said, nunquam sibi satisfaciebat, sed quoties
sua recognoscebat, diceres opus non correctum, sed aliud. He never was pleased
with his own work; if he went to correct it, you would say it were a new, not
reformed piece: As for my Quotations ( which in the Judgments of some are dashed
(like Pedigrees) with a vix ea nostra voco -- scarce worth being called our
own) I have on purpose confirmed some of my Descants ( as well as at first I
had them thence hinted) from such able Pens as are unquestionable. All Writings
are but Hints, Descant, or Confirmation; if any be our own, it may well enough
satisfy Expectation from any Single ( unless singular) Author. He is a
useful Servant to Truth that serves her by either, though not by all. Besides
such is the peevishness of present times, Contemporaries speaking even the
words of the Ancients, have no Authority, unless they disown them by Citation:
my Citations are from that Principle of doing as I would be done by, doing my
Reader Service by a Reference to some useful Bock (or part of it) that may
recompense his perusal of mine. I have my self sometimes been more beholding
to some Books for another Sense, than their own. The like may befall this. As
for my declining in many places Grammatical Translations, it is to bring the
Sense nearer my Purpose in our own Idiom; and where I do not translate, ( or
differently) to my Remembrance I have endeavored to continue the Sense, that
the several Languages need not trouble the english Reader so much as a
Parenthesis. For the Pleasantnes of some of these Tell-troths, let the world
excuse me, if I play with my Vexations, and turn my Experienced Torture to
Delight, as knowing no better Revenge on (no nor Cure of) vulgar Stupidity, (
specially in Concernments of Physic, and their own Health) than -- Ridentem
dicere verum, to tell them Truths pleasantly, since it is the constant humor
of the people to love the Jigg better, than any good or serious part of the
Play. Lastly for Detraction and Censure ( the Hydra all Authors must encounter)
it is more my scorn than fear, and ought to be to any Venturer abroad into
public view; or else he may lie open to such disheartnings, as become not the
confidence requisite to these undertakings. The rarest Antidote ( not only
against the Venom, but very Hissings of this Hydra) that I meet with. I am
Debtor to our English Bernard; for in his Epistle before the third Century of
Meditations, Those thoughts which our Experience has found comfortable and
fruitful to our selves, should with neglect of all censures be communicated to
others; the concealment whereof (methinks) can proceed from no other ground
but Timorousness or Envy. Wherefore Horace his Resolution may become serious
Writers. -- Valeat res ludicra, si me
Palma negata macrum, donata reddit opimum.
-- I le never write Toys,
If I must pine or thrive on th'vulgar Noise.


If Authors Carp (were not my Principle of Charity otherwise) I could momize
and cavil at Matter or Form (more or less I believe) of their Labors: at my
own I am sure I can and do (it may be where they do not) yet think not my self
^nstaved so much to any ones Curiosity, as to correct and still mend, like a
total Alteration. If they be not Authors, I value not their telling
Bellarmine, he lies, when possibility of answer is denied him. As for any
either Perfunctory Reader, or too severe Censurer (free of the Company of
Pish-mongers) that Pisheth at any thing not exact, either in it self, or in
compliance with his Humor; I answer, the Stationer (my Porter) mistook the
delivery of the Letter (my Book) for it was directed only to the Candid
Interpreter of modest Endeavors, not Exacter of Impossibles, or unseemlies;
viz. Perfection as the one, and to general Compliance as the other. To all
gaping Expectaltees (that look for more than here they are like to find) my
Book replyeth with this its motto; not queint, but useful; or, not rare but
honest, at least in the Authors Judgment and Intention; and I will use the
words of an Ingenuous Author of our own, being so apt to my purpose: I like
much better to do well, than talk well, choosing rather to be beloved than
admired, aspiring to no more height than the comfort of a good conscience, and
doing good to some, harm to none. If my Essays speak thus, they speak as I
would have them. Thus far he, as fit as if he spoke for me of any thing amongst
them. I will likewise add what Walafridus Strabo de rebus Ecclesiasticis said.
Si quid in hoc (Lector) placet, assignare memento
Id Domino: quicquid displicet, hocce mihi.
If any thing that is good i'th'Book you see,
Ascribe to God; but what distasts, to me.


I know there is not any one Devil compasses the Earth more than that Erasmus
speaks of: Adeo nunc in omnes and omnia, per universum Orbem grassatur
comitata furiis (...), ut non sit tutum ullum emittere Librum nisi Satellitio
munitum. The Devil Calumny ( says he) against all men, and all things, does so
rage in these days, that it is not safe setting out any thing unguarded. If
the integrity of the End may plead for the Matter or Form of this Book, I may
hope absolution; its chief Design being to double the guards of the Negligent,
that suffer erroneous mis-judgings to surprise their Inadvertency: or to awaken
the lazy drowsiness of others that are loath to be rowz'd out of Errors
pleasing dream; and to correct the vanity of most, that spend their time or
thoughts on impertinencies, besides, or below the noble end their souls were
destined for. For two lengths I must insert these short Apologies: the one of
some of these following Discourses, the other of this Preface: the former need
deter no man, if he be of my mind, with whom the flatnesse, or sharpness of
an Author, is in stead of Rests. Indisposednesse in my self, or a dull period
in an Author makes me turn down the leaf, (if my business do not) as well as
any Division of Sections or Chapters, etc. by much the younger brothers of
writing it self, and even in sacred Writ but of (almost) modern Authority.
Again, the nature of this kind of writing is like free speeches in the
Parliament of Parnassus, or Liberavi Animams, whose length or shortness is
from the Authors sense, not any stint of Rule, or Order. For the length of the
other, ( this Preface) it is Name were enough, if we follow the Allegory of a
Porch and Building,: I have, I am sure, come far short of Solomon's proportion
of twenty to sixty, as it is observed by that Secretary to Wit, Reverend Dr.
Done: or if, Reader, thou be in the number of such as account Epistles, and
Prefaces material part of a Book. And now I am excusing the Books Geometry,
give me leave to excuse its unexpected bulk, and thickness, from mere mistake
that my writing had not been so close. But I write not this, nor the Book, to
any curious in the shapes and outsides of Books, or that think it necessary to
a Books handsomnesse, (as well as woman's) to be slender in the waste; but it is
now past cure, and must venture abroad with all its faults, material, or in
printing; which may be more then should, by reason of my distance from the
Press. Some principal Errata's are mentioned; the rest, an ordinary English
Critique may correct in his reading. I shall therefore conclude with letting
thee know, what Reader I slight, and what I honor, in the words of Erasmus, in
his Enchiridion Militis Chistiani: Nil moror aut lauds, levis aut convitia
vulgi:
Pulchrum est vel doctis, vel placuisse Piis:
Spe quoque majus erit, mihi si contingat utrumque
The flouts or the praise of the vulgar I not weigh,
If Learned or Pious men content I may:
But O! if both, a Joy unhop'd 't would be.


The good, and good will of thee (if thou be either of these) is the Desire and
Endeavor of Thy true honourer, R. W.

Decas 1.
MALCHUS, OR MISCONSTRVCTION.
MEN'S Words, Observe. 1.
or Report of their Actions, have fared hard, since Mis-prision, and Envy have
dealt with Men, as Peter with Malchus; cut off their right Ears. Affections
always cut off one, (and too often the right.) We seldom reserve our Ear for
the strangers, (much ^esse the Enemies) Relation: but Envy and Prejudice
always interpret worse, than Babels Brick-layers.

He that is a bold Reprover of, or Dissenter from the Worlds Dotages, passes
for a Surly, Michaiah, or Cy^^call Dioge^^s. He that is prudentially quiet
under grand Alterations, is a Tempori^er, a Weathercock. He that but moves a
Reprieve for Liberty, or Religion, is a Troubler of Israel, A Mutinier, not fit
to live. He that is not as Ceremonious as the whole Book of Leviticus, or
Durandus his Rationale, is a Nonconformist: and He that believes some
Ceremonies, (though not commanded,) the necessary Clothes of Devotion, or
reckons them in the Number of Circumstances, without which no Action can be
individuated; He that thus thinks, is a Popish, and a Prelaticall Formalist.
He that Spitteth in the Church is irreverent, and He that will not set his
Horse there, is needlessly Scrupulous. He that Boweth to the Altar, is
Idol^trous; and He that will not, ( Cacar S^ L' Altar, according to the
Italian Proverb) untrusse on it, is Superstitious.

He that forbeareth Wine for the same reason another drinks it, his Health,
He is precisely unsociable. He that uses it to that other use God allotted
it, to ^^hilarate, or drinks not all his Wine before the Salt is taken away,
and only for Digestion: Such a one is a Drunkard, A Sot, etc. Or if between
Meals, if it be not Poculum Fraudis, rather than Charitatis, Some Bargain (
alias overreaching Cup,) He is an Ill-Husband, and such like aspersions. Thus
fares the Golden Mean through the misconstruction of the Extremes. Well
tempered Zeal is Lukewarmnesse, Devotion is Hypocrisy, Charity Ostentation,
Constancy Obstinacy, Gravity Pride, Humility Abjection of Spirit; and so go
through the whole Parish of Virtues, where Mis-prision and Envy are Gossips, be
sure the Child shall be nicknamed: What better resolve in this Case, to steer
the Prudent Man, than that of Persius? -- Nec Te quaesiveris extra.


I will not make Hue and Cry after my self abroad in the mis-judging World,
Pers. Sat. 1
nor care what they think, or say of Me, so it be not deservedly ill; their
good opinion, if general, is either hardly, or ill got. A good Repute in the
Hamlet, or litttle Dorp of the good, is ^ame enough. I say, among those Few
that understand the Canons of Actions, and the every-way-Circumstantiated
Individuations of mine. He that fails in either, has nothing of Justice,
but its Blindness, in the Emblem, not its Ears, but (as I said,) one, and
that his right cut off. From his mouth can I look for any but Sinister
Interpretations of Me, and my Actions? can I but male audire apud male
audientem, hear ill with Him, that cannot hear well? since bad Ears admit
not good Reports.

The Abbreviates of LIFE.
Observe. 2.
IF to make away, or give away our Lives differ not much, most Men deserve the
Name of Seneca's, or Selfe-Destroyers: at least, Abridgers of their Lives.
While they Term away their Days in Obsequious services of others, not
allowing Themselves a Days vacation, scarce an Hours. Nemo se sibi vindicat,
S^nec. de brev. vit. 2.
sed Alius in Alium consumitur. (says that incomparable Master of the
Sentences, Seneca) No man Husbandeth himself, but vainly, or bufily,
Prodigalls Himself out on others. What is the Complaint of those Pressed, or
Votier wearers out of great Men's Thresholds, is the Fault of Grandees and
Patrons, as well as Clients: the Proud, or Busy Patron is not of harder
Access, than we are to our selves; none of them but at some time or other, Ib.
it may be, will afford thee Audience. Et Tu non inspicere Te unquam, non
audire dignatus es; Says the same Author; Thou never affordest Thy self A
look, nor an Ear.

And would you know the weighty concernments that hinder us; Persius will tell
you in his Satyr 5. Mercibus hic Italis mutat sub Sole recenti
Rugosum Piper, and pallentis Grana Cumini:
Hic Satur irriguo mavult turgescere Somno:
Hic Campo indulget: hunc Alea decoquit: Ille
In venerem est putris: Sed cum Lapidosa Chiragra
Fregerit Articulos, veteris Ramalia Fagi,
Tunc crassos transisse Dies, Lucemque Palustrem
Et Sibi jam Seri vitam ingemuere relictam.


And because these Serious Affairs are not confined to Italy alone, but have
been seen, and daily are, in England; hear that equalling Translatour, Mr.
Holiday, tell you them in English. -- One his Mind does give
To Merchandising, and with care does run
Out to the East under the rising Sun,
To get rough Pepper, and pale Cummin Seed
For Roman Wares. Another loves to feed
His Panch, and then Swell with distilling Sleep.
A third does Mars field Wrastlings duly keep.
A fourth turns Bankerupt, by the desperate Die.
A fifth grows rotten by his Venery.
But when the knottie Hand-gout has once broke
Their Joints, as the Boughs of some decayed Oak,
Anger and Grief do then begin a strife
Within them for their base, and dirty life
Now spent: when now, but now too late, they look
Upon the Life They wretchedly forsook.


Nor are these the Complaints of an Epi^^re only, but of the worlds bu^ie great
ones themselves; as Seneca de brevit* vit^^. c. 4. Potentissimis, and in altum
sublatis Hominibus excidere voces videbis, quibus otium optent, laudent,
omnibus bonis suis praeferant. How often may you hear Them of the upper End of
the World, commend the leisure, Quiet, and pleasure of less busied Lives? What
a more Regulated course therefore it were, to afford Vacations to circuit Thy
self in, to give Thy Conscience a Day of hearing, and to make vexing Cares,
vain Delights, unsatisfiable Desires, needless Courtships, with other such
Thieves of time, not only to wait without, but to come in to their Trial.
Senec. de de brev. Vit. c. 1.
Doubtless the Verdict would be: non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus: not
Destiny, but thanklesse business, or fruitless Idleness, has shortened our
Lives. Would you project an Elixir, that might lengthen them, even to an
Immortality; hear Seneca: Qui Sapientia vacant, soli v^vunt, nec enim suam
tantum Aetatem ^uentur, sed omne Aevum suo adijciunt? haec una Ratio extendende
Mortalitatis: de brevit vitae, cap. 14. and 15.

They only Live (says He) that truant least from Wisdoms School, as living
not only their own, but all the former Ages, etc. In the future there may be
something for such to hope, nothing to fear: thus may a Man be young in
years, and old in hours: whereas some old Men are Semper pueri, non bis,
always Children, not twice; and that in Age, as well as abilities: for
Seneca's Oracle is most true: Illorum brevissima, ac Sollicitissima Aetas est,
Qui Praeteritorum obliviscuntur, Praesentia negligunt, de Futuro timent: de
brevit. vitae c. 15. Their Lives are short, the Kalenders whereof are divided
into these three Columns, Forgetfullnesse, or Ignorance of Times past, Neglect
of the Present, and Fears of Future.

Fabula Vitae.
AMong the many Apothegmes of Octavius Caesar, Observe. 3.
his Epilogue-like Speech on his Deathbed was more meriting, than commanding
Applause, when He asked, Ecquid ijs videretur Mimum vitae Commode egisse.
Whether he had handsomely acted his Part on the Stage of the World, and
commanded their Plaudite. Saying.

(...).
Edite strepitum vosque omnes cum Gaudio applaudite.
Sueton. Octau: Caes. Let me have then your loud and cheerful Plaudite; it is
no unusefull Metaphor, to call Life a Histrionicall Presentment; as in that,
not the Part chose, but appointed, must be acted; so in Life He is a true
Actor, and Plaudit-meriting Roscius, that lives his part Sutably, to strut in
Rags, or Crawle in Robes, equally transgress Decorum, an humble Deportment,
and the low receiving condition keep it; Awful Accents, and reserved State
become the Trustees of Power and Justice. Look what Part Providence has
allotted Thee, and act it submissively, Sutably, as Persius excellently. --
Quem Te Deus esse
Jussit, and humana qua Part Locatus es in Re,
Disce --
Whom God has made Thee, and in what Degree
And state of life he here has placed Thee.


What fails of either, will appear Ridiculous, if not Monstrous; as they
do, that either Quarrel at their Part set Them, because they were not their
own choosers: or leap out of one part into another: from making Heels, to jump
to prescribe Pills for the Head; from the Trade of making Ca^vas, to leap to
speaking Fustian in the Pulpit, are breakings of Ranks that neither the
Discipline of Nature, nor the Lord of Hosts does tolerate: and in the Scene of
Life are Anticks, not Action: or if Actings, of no part but the fools, as
lastly do those that observe not Decorum in their Part set them. Correspondence
and Proportion are both the Beauty, and Harmony of Actions, as well as of the
World: it were as absurd to sing Catches on the Ladder, as Psalms at Revells.
Do therefore, as Thou art, and be thy Part Comicall, or Tragical; Thy Exit
will be Glorious.

The Over Rate.
Observe. 4.
MAny things owe the height of their Esteem to Low Spiritednesse, ( con^^^^da
miramur) et Nobis ut Pueris om^^ Ludricum in Pretio est. Seneca says, that we
bestow wonder on Contemptibles, and value Toys, is only from so much of Child,
as is left in Men: that Judgment is in its Nonage, and cannot write Man, that
thinks Riches consist in the Patrimony, and not Soul endowments: it is
Rustic simplicity to take the gayest Courtier for the King; or esteem Men not
according to Gods, but their Taylours making: it is by the servile Mind, that
Honor is too much honored. The wise Rater of things, as they weigh in the
Sanctuaries Balance, and Reasons, will obey the Powers over Him, but not
admire them into an a Apotheosis, Deifying of them; or leave out the sicut in
their Dij estis, consider them only as Gods. not GOD him self; nor give that
adoration to one Ray, (and that a weak one) of the Deity, that of Power, due
only to that conjunction of Wisdom, Power and goodness immeasurably; it
being the Divine Majesty's Pre^rogative to have Goodness, Wisdom, Power,
unseparable; a Trinity seldom combined on Earth. Often times both Bad and Fools
bear sway; an experiment enough to cheapen the Price of over-valued honors in
others; or in its Incentives of am^ition in our selves. Men would not buy a
petite and small Authority of the small continuance of some three or four
years, with the unwearied Cares, broken sleeps, slavish Resignations of quiet
security, and contentments of life, of 40. or. 50. precedent years. How vainly
do some no sooner slip from the Tyranny of the Ferula, but lay a plot for the
managing the Sword of Power.

Rate Men as Moneys, according to their stamp: the more of that image they were
first stamped with, you see, the more esteem them: the more I find of the
Attributes of the Architype, the Deity, the more real worth I may justly set
on any man. We see what love and reverence they challenge scattered; Goodness
or wisdom even divorced find men's minds tributary of respect: Goodness with
simplicity has love: wisdom, though but knavery, men afford so many grains of
esteem, as to term partednesse, and cunning: but the conjunction is that alone,
that centereth all of men's respect, love, esteem, or what you will call it,
into that comprehensive, called Reverence.

Thus therefore rate men, nay thus thy self; cast up thy worth according to
what thou will yield in that Day, when the great Lapidary (God) makes up his
jewels when neither Clothes, Inheritance, Beauty, Honors, no nor Parts
(separated from Piety) will be admitted into the Scale. Would we know whence,
Verus re^rum honor cecidit, Ep. 115.
the just Market of things fell, it was, says Seneca, Ex quo Pecunia in honor
esse caepit: Worth has been under-rated, ever since Wealth has been
overvalued; the question is now changed, not qualis, but quanti; men and things
are not esteemed to what they are, but what they will yield; none observes
that rule, Cum voles veram Hominis inire estimationem and scire qualis sit,
nudum inspice; ponat patrimonium, ponat honores, Ep. 76.
and alia Fortunae mendacia, Judge of men, as Hipparchia took Cratetes the
Philosopher, stripped: or as Horse-Coursers, Horses, without their Trappings;
without Estates, Honors, or such cheats of Fortune, belying men into the
esteem of the vulgar.

In sum, their usefulness public (and that is prudentiall Honesty or Valor)
or more contracted and private, and that is Freindship, is all the inherent
real worth of any man; as to Men: (to their Maker all their worth is
imputative, through that man Christ Jesus.) What there wants of ability of
Parts, or will to do good, they want of Price: the latter, I confess, does
higher rate men. For as with Beggars we quarrel most with their laziness, so
do we with idle abilities. Worthy Sir then, we see, is frequently by Flattery
mis-bestowed on Wealth, or Power. I will search neither men's Shop-Bookes, nor
the Heralds for their worth, much less the Mercers. He is hard put to it,
that owes it to Beasts, or the Silkeworme; and for my part, I owe my Hat or
Knee no more to the Skins, then the Beasts. The thing called Fine, is more
duly the unborrowed praise of the Lilly of the Field, then Solomon's in all his
glory. Give me the Worth the Plunderer cannot finger; nothing truly deserving
the title of Mea, mine, but what (as Bias) mecum porto; I must trouble no
Porter but my self. At this rate were men esteemed, Fools would not be
admired, Knaves would be scorned, the wise and honest Man would be heightened to
his just and deserved esteem. The vaunter of Pedigrees, the successful
Knave, nor the Golden Ass, would not have that over-rate upon them still,
which they had first from rustic Ignorance, or ^bject servility.

The Guard; or, Defense against Surprise.
AS I owe not Misery the service to meet it, Observe. 5.
by pensive fears; so keeping that Inn of common, and humane frailty, I may
expect it as my Guest: he that does so, is not surprised by it, as by an enemy:
Sickness, Poverty, Exile, Death, (and what the effeminate world calls
evil,) by expectation lessen the terror of their visors, and by such
familiarity is bred contempt of their threats or power. It is discretion to
look on good things, or bad, but as guests; so the one does not too nearly
intimate it self into my friendship, nor does the other alarm my fears. He
that too closely imbraceth Transitories, is much the worse for them; for their
departure causes a rent in his constancy: Good is the Philosophers rule,
Accedant, non adhaereant nobis, (says Seneca) and sine ulla laceratione nostri
discedant: Ep. 74.
Let them approach us, not stick to us; or allow them the vicinity of our
Garments, not Pro^cimity of our skin: it is less pain to be stripped than
flayed. As for evil Things, look on them but as Lodgers, (though as unwelcome
as Free-quarterers) the expectation of their coming will lessen thy trouble at
their presence; and to consider the shortness of their abode, will recover thy
impatience to a healthful quiet. Among many distempers of mind, avoid
peremptorinesse of desires, or love to things, or men; it over-valueth their
presence, and imbitters their departure. I know scarce any better Physic,
than out of the shop of that same Apothecary of the Soul, (to his Contemporary
Paul, and Divines, I reserve the title Physician;) it is this: Senec. cur bonis
mal. fiant.
Quamvis magna varietate, singul^rum vita videtur distingui, summa in unum
venit, Accepimus Peritura Perituri: Let the difference be what it will, between
Palaces and Cottages, they are the decaying Tenements of more decaying Tenants;
either our backs are on these sublunary enjoyments, or theirs are on us.
Indifference therefore is the truest constancy; and none so constant as that
changeable He, that neither desires, nor fears change; but is Ad utrumque
paratus. Socrates his face may be the copy of the resolved countenance; which
was always noted to be the same at his coming home, as going abroad, what
weather soever happened in his fortunes or affairs. Christians then sure much
less (being placed Vulgati supra commercia Mundi, above the Region of fear)
need cloud their brows, in the most blustering storms of the lower world, (to
whom the shipwreck of death is a prize above all the In-comes of life.

The honest Adamite.
HE that said, Obser. 6.
Totus Mundus agit Histrionem, the whole world are but Stage Players, was a
wise Spectator of the Plays of life, called business, and of its Actors. The
whole crowd of those we converse with, Tacit. Hist, 1.
what are they? but a company of Mummers disguised in all they do or say: Vices
are dissembled, virtues but acted; they are one thing in their retirement,
another on the stage of public view. Palamtum claressecreta, male audiunt.

In the Church they would cosen (if possible) God with shows of zeal, in the
Shop their Neighbors with Protests of good Usage; Thus blinding the World with
Jewish Pharisaisme, and Protestant Cousenage. Thus many times long Prayers
become but grace before Meal, to some Widows House, or Orphans Portion.
Diagoras took Hercules's Statue, to make his Broth sees, (scoffingly calling
it his thirteenth Labor;) what else does the Hypocrite or Politician, with his
Idol, the show of Religion, but make his Pot sees, and bring about his
Designs? What cloak does Knavery wear, when it goes abroad, but Friendships?
What are the commerces of Men, but courteous Cousenages? Your humble Servant
Cheats, believe me, (if not Renounce me,) lies; O modest Vice! that dare
not appear abroad naked; beholding to officious Hypocrisy, to cover thy
Nakedness: whereas the truly Honest man, and that comes nearest the first
Innocence, wears only its Robes; (which was a commendably shameless
Nakedness) nor covers its Purposes with one Ragge out of Hypocrisies, or
Policies Wardrobe. He is neither in honesty, nor Religion Haereticall, that in
his Politics, and Dealings, is an Adamite.

The desirable Reputation.
TO contemn Fame is but a security of doing ill; Obser. 7. Erasmus in Apotheg.
p. 112. 86.
to fear it, or court it, a necessity, and a misery verifying that of Diogenes,
Qui Oratores and caeteros omnia ad gloriam facientes (...) appellabat, ter
Homines: He called Orators, and all such Traffickers for fame, thrice men; and
that in Homers sense, who makes man and miserable Synonyma's. He that would
not be thought good, cares not for being so; Contemptu famae, contemni
virtutes, says Tacitus, he that contemns a good Report, despises the
goodness deserving it. He that would be thought good by all, can appear so but
to the worst, nor is so to any; he that is thought so by the best, shall
confute the most: Good actions may silence slander, where they gain not
applause: the best resolution is to take virtue with a sweet or ill sented
breath; the first is hers naturally, the later more the fault of the medium or
corrupted air, than hers: With a sweet breath she may be pleasanter; but with
an ill, more meritorious, since, Regium est male audire cum been feceris, it is
Kingly to be ill spoken of for good deeds, was the saying of one (doubtless)
resolutely constant to such actions, as went under the great Seal of Virtue.
Ovid. 4. fast.
Conscia men's Recti, Famae Mendacia ridens.
A Mind upright,
That Fames flams slight.


A well-grounded self-justification, scorning the dispraise of the vulgar,
(which is Omnis honestae rei malus judex, whose commendation is not authentic
enough to call Persons or Actions good; nay such infamy has its delight,
(says the sententious Moralist) Non vis esse justus sine Gloria? Ep. 113*
at me hercules, saepe justus esse debes cum infamia, at tunc si sapis, ma^a
opinio been parta delectat. Will thou not be just without glory? thou must
oft-times be content to be ill spoken of for being so; and thou know not the
pleasure of a well-got ill report. They that place honor in honorante, honor
in the bestower, exile it as well from our care as power. That passage through
good and bad report, (if not discovered) gone through by that great Adventurer
for Heaven, (the Apostle Paul) leads to a Haven of such inward rest, as
fears not the blasts of misprision, nor the mire and dirt the wicked in their
ragings cast up: One Echo sounded from that Murus Aheneus, brazen wall, of an
upright conscience, surpasses all the Gingles of Fame: nay after death, often
martyred names, (as well as men) are Kalender'd, even to an unquestionable
repute of merit, and that in those faithful Registers of impartial History.
The living may be Tenants at will to reputation; but it is the possession of
the dead: and when the Grave dust is flung on our Chronicles, envy it self
cannot blur them. Animis hominum manet, in Aeternitate Temporum Fama rerum,
(says Tacitus of Agricola:) While some are buried in oblivion, others in the
memories of men survive even Posterity. Stamp therefore thy actions in the mint
of virtue, and the time will come, when their Fame shall be current in the
Court of Honor, among those ( Qui scribunt legenda) that write things worth
the perusal, thy ( facta scribenda) History-deserving deeds shall be filed, to
their merited perpetuity. Suppose; they be not here, which thou feel not;
they are recorded against that Day, when will be read the History of the world
parcell'd out into Lives, every one reading over his own: Some whereof will
prove Panegyricks, others Inditements. And now we have lighted on that solid
Reputation, (for only That deserves that name) will have an Euge taum and
belle, (as the Poet) from the mouth of wisdom, and Justice it self; not from
that ( Turbida Roma) Rout, that cries up one thing to day, another to morrow:
Tacit. Hist. quippe eod Die diversa pari certamine postulaturis
This steady praise, is the flight and aim of truly noble souls; do, (or
write, or both,) something that may meet with applause at that Day, from God,
Angels and Men, when the applause of value Herod's shall be as he was, (...),
worm-eaten, and (almost without a Metaphor) what remains of the empty worlds
applause, shall be eaten up by the worm of conscience: that for thy fame. Now
for thy Reputation, which is but thy living fame, as one excellently, Senec. de
Clem. c. 19
Quid pulchrius quam vivere optantibus cunctis? Et si paululum valetudo
titubaverit, non excitare Spem Hominum, sed metum.

What more desirable, then to live the peoples wish, not fear? and by thy
passing Bell to sadden, or affright, not rejoice them, as for a Deliverance:
whereas with Some, Men observe the Thracian Rule, who weep at their Childrens
Birth, and feast at their Funeral: So we might mourn at some men's births
(were we all Astrologers) not as those Thracians, because they are borne to
misery, but because a misery is borne to us: and rejoice at their death, not
because they are taken from evil to come, but because an Evil is taken from
those that are to come. But the good man understood, lives beloved, and dies
lamented: he has more mourners at his Funeral then acquaintance: Whereas the
Tacit. Hist. 1. v^lut ad predendum sataliter electos
Ominously borne, may have many in Blacks, but few in mourning: whose Mothers
fruitfulness has made many Childlesse, bringing forth not so much a
Manchilde, as Manslayer: and whose Father, though otherwise never so innocent,
is guilty of Antoninus his only crime, Hoc solo Patriae, quod genuit, nocuit,
murdering his Country by one single act of Generation. When such a one, I say,
satisfies the wishes of the living, by their own dying, there is a sadness
on people, as when some calamity forsakes them; indeed a joy at their
Funerals as at Triumphs, allayd only with this true grief, that it fell out
no sooner: They never doing so good a deed before to their Country as to dye:
As Ausonius of Otho. Hoc solum fecit nobile, quod perijt.

Repute, or Fame then we see are more at our own disposalls then our Fortunes:
if bad among good, our fault; if good among bad men, our fault no less. And
since it is so hard (in Commonwealths, nothing less then Platonic) to obtain
it steady or lasting; aim more at a good one, then great one: or if a great
one be thy aim, let it be such a one, as may hold good among the more numerous
and uniforme of the other World; where it shall have the greatness of duration
added: ample it shall be, as the approbation of that glorious Theater can make
it: unchangably lasting as Eternity. For thy Repute, while in this medly World,
thus regulate thy self: Let thy Actions be justified by the Square of Religion
and Justice; then say (as a Poet as justly confident) It Is good, and if you will
liked you may: it not being Arrogance, but well becoming Confidence to scorn
the injurious World, when it denies merit its due. I would not be good on the
Salary of its praise, nor shall their scorn spoil good purposes in their
conception, by damping my resolutions, or by frights abortive their execution,
or smother my joy at their birth.

IF the Philosophers School found two Handles, a sufferable and unsufferable
to every thing done or said by Men, or commanded by Providence, (So Seneca will
have all events, Non tam accidentia quam Imperata, not Lottery, but Orders from
the Supreme power:) We cannot but (on the improvement of Christianity)
confess, that nothing has an unsufferable, because not an unusefull Handle to
be taken by. He that has course Fare, has more to boast on (it may be) in his
stomach, relishing each Crust, like the various pleasing Manna. when the
Gluttons dainties are but as meat before Idols, Ecclesiasticus 30. 19. or as
Meat set upon a Grave, Verse 18. or if tasted, no pleasanter then nauseating
Quails. Have thou Enemies? Look on them as Discoverers of thee, more then thy
self-love, or thy flattering friends will discover. Lingering sickness has
its acceptable Handle, by preparing; and inchoate mortifications lessening the
horror of (that must-be-done) Dying. What is wanting then to our serenity, and
calmnesse of mind, but an ambodexter acception of Occurrences; since all may
be resolved into Banquet, or Physic: What is not pleasant, may be useful; and
therefore ought to be acceptable.

Infallibility minced.
THe modesty of the Scribes and Pharisees, Obser. 10.
accuses the Arrogance of our Scriblers, and Divinity-Mongers (now the largest
Corporation) They left the Prerogative of teaching as having authority, to him
that alone spoke as never man spoke. Among us what more familiar phrase in
Controversies, Admonitions, and Discourses of any nature, then, I think so: I
would not do so: My opinion is? Which used, leaving out a reason, proves no
small reason against a Wise man's Assent; for if it be a truth, that he that for
himself, advises only with himself, has a Fool his adviser; in Counsel,
or definitive sentence on Controversies, where I think is all the Premises, A
Fool said it, must needs be the Conclusion. How vainly do we make the
Enclosure of Infallibility to the Papal Chair, Antichristian? yet make
Infallibility minced (as I may term it) into severalls, and private
Interpretation the Canon of our own and other men's belief: In point of
Authority, take no more to thy self, then thou will allow any other: Give more
to many others, then thou will to any one, and especially thy self. To swim
against the stream is harder then to sail: he that would stem the Tide, had
need of a good Gale: let strength of reason make thee Dissent; and for thy
Assent, authority of most, best may be thy Reason, where other Perswasives are
silent. Allow Writers the privilege of a Jury, where Number adds weight to
the Verdict: else why may not the Judge judge of the fact, as well as the Law?
He that will believe none but himself, let him give others leave to be of the
same mind: and his reason and judgment shall keep still of private authority,
as well as Interpretation; and his I think so, shall meet with a Nemo
credidit, No body else does.

The power of Prayer:
NO Poet durst have fetched his Fancy so far, Obser. 11.
as to call Prayer the Manicles of the Almighty, had not God himself (in a
Line strong next to Prayer) confessed it: when he says to Moses, Let me alone:
O powerful Privilege allowed poor Man! that the Almighty's Justice must take
out Commission, for Execution, from the Intercession of his Saints: if Moses
hold not his Tongue, God cannot move his Hands. O blessed obstructer of Justice!
I will never doubt thy Power in procuring Mercy, that can hinder a Provoked
Deity, from proceeding to execution of A dareing Worm.

Decade 2.
Commendable Carelessness.
SElfe-vexations, The Politicians Pattern in Tacitus speaking of Galba will be
a good one in this Case, Quia mutari non poterant comprobasse.
(which are most unpitied,) may by no way better be blown over, then by
reckoning Impossibles not to concern our Desires; nor Vnavoydables our Fears;
nor things past our Remedy, our vexing sorrow: (except sin:) to sit down and
cry, because we are out of the way, is no step into it: to Curse at bad Casts
is no part of the skillful, but impatient Gamster. Desire not what thou can
not attain; it was not the weakest part of the Fox to despise the Grapes he
could not reach. Fear nothing thou can not prevent; and for Things past, use
their Remembrance, as thy instructive experiments, not renewers of thy Torment:
follow the Comedians Comic carelessness, because Life is but a Game, Ita est
vita Hominum, quasi cum ludas tesseris, si illud quod est maxim opus jactu,
non cadit, illud quod cecidit forte, id Art ut corrigas.

Since Life is but as a Game at Tables, if the fore-game be not to thy wish;
neither whine nor Curse, but rowse thy care to an after-Game.

Afflictions are Pursivants.
THat Afflictions stay with us, Obse^. 2.
is commonly our own fault; they have their Errand to deliver, and we make
them wait for a Hearing. Sometimes Let my People go, is their Message. Let thy
Soul go from the Captivity of Satan, or drudging Taskings of the World, and
serve the Lord thy God: obey their Message, and the Messenger shall be
discharged. Sometimes they come to fetch away some Sin, let them have their
Errand with them, and they are gone. Only when they come as Refiners of thy
Dross, or gilders, (setters off) of thy Graces; wish not their Removeall: for
it would be the greatest Cross, to be without one.

The do Little, worth Little.
A Do yra el Beuey, que no ara? Obser. 12.
Whither goes the Ox that will not plow? The Spanish Proverb knocks that
Ox on the Head, that will not plow. Doubtless the wilfully Vselesse Man is
better in the Earth, than on the Earth. Lazy unprofitablenesse must look for
its Slaughterhouse in the other World; if it take not a Newgate in the way
here: if necessity betrayit not to such self-punishing courses, yet Idleness
beckeneth to sins of a worse Nature. Upon the Couch of Idleness expect the
Sins of Sodom. It was never a good world, since Employment was counted
mechanic, and Idleness Gentility: Since Gentleman and Labourer took their
Leaves.

The ingenious Germane in this shameth the most of his Neighborhood in
Christendom, counting the Idle man, (no Edleman) no Gentleman; and therefore
instruct their noblest borne in some Art, if not labor; it not being indeed
Disparagement for the best blood to be acquainted with Sweat, out of a hot
house, or without the help of a Diet Drink.

The sad Descant.
DEsque naci llove y cada Dia nace porque. Obser. 13.

When first brought forth, we cry;
Each Day brings forth its why.
History affords examples of Souls Prophetic, at, and before their Death;
but by this Spanish Proverb, Every one calculateth his Nativity (truer than
Astrologers,) and sentenceth his own future fate, by crying at his Birth, not
coming only from the Bodies Monopathy, or sole suffering by change of i'ts
warm Quarters; but, (according to some) from Sympathy with the divining Soul,
that knows it self for a Time banished from the Father of Spirits; (the God
that gave it,) into a World elemented with Sin, and misery, the following
Days being but Division, and Descant, on this plain Song Lachrymae, teeming
with Causes of sorrow, if not for punishment, yet for Sin. (...).

If one Day prove a Mother, the other is a Stepmother, dying daily into the
succession of each other.

Mirth ends in Dullness, if not Sadness; Grief again has its intervalls,
the saddest notes their Pauses and Rests.

The Sisters Web of our lives is checkered with Vicissitude, The whole piece
proving but a medley of Light and Shadow. The one of these Mothers is welcome,
the other we must not strike, nor by Impatience provoke. With thy good Days be
cheerful; in thy bad Days be Serious, not sad; nothing we can suffer from
without, being worth one minutes Disquiet of so noble a Thing, as the Soul,
which then comes nearest its Original, the nearer it comes to
Immutability. Let not therefore Sunshine Days betray thee to naked Security,
or wanton forgetfullness of change, nor blustering ones so muffle thee up in a
Mourning Cloak, as if thou were following the Funeral of hope. Sperat
infestis, metuit Secundis*
Alteram sortem, been praeparatum
Pectus: informs Hyemes reducit
Jupiter idem
Summovet --


How does Horace his Harp and David's agree? the one tells us the same Power
brings the Joys of the Spring, that sent the unwelcome hardships of Winter;
the other assures us, our sad Vespers are succeeded with the Comfort of
Festivalls. If grief lodge with us over night, Joy shall be our Day Guest.
Well, since I must quarter the forces of two Garrisons, it will be prudence to
dissemble the unwelcome of the one, and silently to welcome the other; not
knowing which may at last get me into a sole subjection to them. He that will
not be injured by either, must provide for both.

The thriv^ng Craft.
THat golden-mouthed Father* was a rare Spokes-man for the Almighty's Box,
(such are the poor;) when he said, Nescis quod non tam propter Pauperes, quam
impendentes, Deus instituit Eleemosynas, that God commanded Alms not so much
for the Poores sake, as the good of the Rich; which with a slender Descant will
appear. The Poor man gets a corporal Refreshment, Raiment, or Food. The
Rich, (if he keep his left Hand in Ignorance, and his right Hand in Actions of
Liberality:) receives Interest, not only exceeding, but excelling the
Principal. Thy Lone, (or rather Restitution*) what is it but Colored Earth
and Dross? and thy Reward, (O Mercy rewarding its own Gifts! viz. The Alms,
and the Mind to give,) bears no imaginable Proportion, for a Cup of Cold
Water, Waters of everlasting Life. For thy cast Clothes, the Robes of Christ's
Righteousness; for thy Scraps, the Bread of Life* and that in fulness of Joy
for ever more. Chrysostom might well call this Nobilem Prodigalitatem* a Noble
Prodigality, as another calls Alms, Artem omnium Artium quaestuosissimam; An
Art the most thriving of all Arts. It is so gainful, it is very hard to be
honest in the exercise of it, that is sincere: (Sincerity being nothing but
honesty toward God) without regarding our own Profit, more than our Brothers
Necessity, or Gods Command. Nay the Almighty often makes present Payment,
(knowing how hardly he can get credit from our Infidelity:) and even in
temporalls. Thy Bread cast upon the Waters; makes better than East India
Voyages; and returns back to Thee Laden with Improvements. Thy Corn given to
them, with whom all years are dear, (the Poor,) is more advantageous, than
Corn sold in the greatest Dearth, even by a Monopolist. Such is the Mystery of
this ^raft, (where God is Debtour, and Man Creditour,) that Present payment is
the least, and worst: the Lender owes more, than the Receiver. The Poor,
(whose prayers are heard,) bestowing more than he receives; and his Box is
more the Rich man's treasury, than his one: would thou have a Policy on
Heaven? (of thy uncertain Riches*) make the Poor thy Ensurers.

Parlour Divinity.
OUr Table, is a Book, on which is written Gods bounty, our Frailty and our
Hopes: the first reads Thankefullnesse, the second humble sobriety, the third
Comfort. As for our Frailty, what rotten Tenements are our Bodies? that need
Reparation twice in twelve hours: keep the wind from them, and Childrens
Houses of Cards will stand longer. How do our Meals then upbraid our Designs?
we repast as if to live but to day; (every Meal being but the renewing of our
Lease for twelve Hours longer,) and we build as if to live for ever: but
again for our Hopes. How is our living for ever assured? by the several
Deaths of Creatures for thy use, receiving a kind of Resurrection to life, from
their common Sepulcher, thy stomach. Look on thy full Table as a Mortuary of
the dispeopled Elements; where their slain are hudled up, and all to extract
Reparations of Life for thee. In their Progress behold thine, through
Corruption to Resurrection: and fear not Death, that thus but dresseth Thee
for Immortality.

Mercy's Hyperbole.
THe Reward of Afflictions, is the Hyperbole of Mercy: all we can suffer here,
being not a moity of our deservings; what infinite Mercy must that be, that
makes even our Punishments meritorious? for while Man suffers for his sin,
(if he suffer according to Gods will,) his sins increase not his Punishments,
faster than these inhaunce his Glory hereafter. Patient bearing the
chastisement, does more please, than the fault did displease. Omnipotent Mercy!
that thus workest good out of evil! Our Reward out of our punishment: Our
pleasure for ever hereafter, out of thy Dis-pleasure by us here. What is this?
but to bestow on the Offender a Dignity for his deserved whipping? and to give
the Thief A Paradise, for being crucified for his Robbery.

Of the 2d. Decade.
Amigo di Bocca,
Non vale una Estoppa.
A Friend at the Bottle
Not worth the Stople.
THe contract of Souls and Minds, by Friendship, is not, (like Dutch
Bargains) made in Drink. He whose Friendship reaches no further than the
Club, will no more do for thee, than pay for thee. How many Protestations of
Love Swim in the Cups of Men? that will suffer thee to sink under any
Adversity! Of all verities in Vino, in Wine, Veritas Amiciti^^, the truth of
Friendship is not in it: give me the Love that is contracted out of some
likeness of Minds, and conditions, that unlikenesse of Fortunes cannot
obliterate, that owneth a Friend, though his Clothes be as old almost as his
Friendship: and his condition as low as even Enemies could wish; that
Friendship is worth little that continues not to a (discreetly chose) object,
though now worth nothing; as to the market of the World.

That Friendship only will have no End, that in its first contracting had no
by-End.

The best Revenge.
MAlice slighted loses (as the Be) with its sting its life; take notice of
it, and thou make thy self thy Enemies inferior. Nemo enim non eo, aquo
contemptum se judicat, minor est: Confession of being hurt, An. 4.
makes thy Enemy know he is revenged on thee. The Oracle of Policy ( Tacitus)
found a subtle Revenge, Injuriae spretae exolescunt, si irascaris, agnitae
videntur: Slighted injuries dye; whereas anger confesses thy hurt, and
therefore must needs increase thy adversaries content. A rule for politic
Revenge ^o universal, that it reaches even to the silencing of Scolds; there
being questionless no better silencing of a Billinsgate noise, then with a
Drum.

Injurious spirits are often galled with Arrows they shoot at others, if they
stick not in the mark, they may recoyle upon the Archer, Cum dolor caedentis
solida feriuntur, Senec. de Ira. 3. 5. He that strikes a Wall may hurt his
Knuckles. Christianity commands us to pass by injuries, and policy to let
them pass by us: By the former we are lesson'd to take no notice of the
injurious, by the latter to take none of the injury; both, or either preserve
us from injuring our selves by disquiet: For would we revenge, then true is
that Emblem of the coursed Hare and Greyhound with this Motto, Agitas,
agitaris at ipse, thou troublest me, but art troubled thy self: Thy mind it
may be is troubled, to vex thy Enemy in Body, Liberty, or Estate, etc. If we
take notice of injuries by complaints, as we vex our selves, we rejoice our
Enemy: our tears are his Wine, our lamentation his song: That, Quicquid
recipitur, recipitur in modum recipientis, things are as they are taken, is
here most true. The weak mind being troubled, at what the resolved one, would
slight, with that of the Philosopher, Deridet, sed non derideor, He derideth,
but I am not mocked. Resentment is as it were the formality of an offense; if
thou do good for evil, thou make a Bonefire on thy Adversaries head,
sadder then firing his House; if thou take no notice of the evil, his
vexation is increased, and thy quiet not diminished. He was the wisest
doubtless that said, Anger rested in the bosom of Fools: for by this Maxim,
it is its own Torment, and the Offenders pleasure. If not Christian love of
our Enemies, politic love of our selves, will quiet Revengefull agitations:
Since it is a doubt whether Sheepish meekness, or Womanish tenderness in
apprehension of Injuries, do more double the assaults of Malice: the noble
scorn that intimates a sense with contempt, is that mean that places a man
above Injuries: In the serenity of that ( Superior pars mundi, and ordinatior
ac propinqua sideribus, quae nec in Nubem cogitur, nec in tempestatem
impellitur, etc.) upper part of the World, and orderly, nearest the Stars, it
is neither cloudy nor tempestuous, That knows no mutiny of the Elements. They
are lower-Region souls, that admit of heats and colds at the cross occurrences
of businesses, or waywardness of Men; it is a Magnifico gate of spirit (as I
may term it) not to mend, or slack our pace, for all the barking Currs, great
or small; and was in King Antigonus, who over-hearing (the great Provocation)
slanderous railing, only bade them speak further off, least the King should
hear them. Another time lighting on free-tongued company, and afterward
guiding them, brought them into the Dirt, but helped one out, and bid him
revile Antigonus that brought Him thither, but love Antigonus that brought him
out. To conclude, Seneca's Rule is good, Aut Potentior, aut imbecillior Te
laesit; si imbecillior, parce illi, si Potentior parce Tibi, If the Injury be
from Peers, or Inferiors, spare them; if from thy Superiors, spare thy
self, so shall thou reap in the one, the Honor of a forgiving Spirit; in the
other, (besides the Noble, and lawful Revenge of scorn;) provide for thy
calm security, which thy Enemy would disuiet, and for anger or thoughts of
Revenge, think on the Philosophers Dilemma. Vtrum aliquando desines, aut
nunquam? will thou leave them off at all, or never? if at all, why not leave
thy Anger, as well as that leave Thee? if never, judge what an unquiet life
thou have sentenced thy self to. Give therefore Injuries one of these
Entertainments; either as a Christian Conquer them by forgiveness; or as a
Politician, revenge them by contempt, that is, (as I said,) pass by them, or
let Them pass by Thee.

Observe. 10. of the 2d. Decade.
IT is a Pride, (that has the vexing Nemesis and Vengeance of discontent,
following it) to think, wish, or expect, Things to fall out according to our
wills alone: as if we were of that grand Concernment, that it were some lapse
in Providence, not to choose us Natures Arbitratours, or Sole Disposers of
Events: no it is an Oraculous Truth, that of EPICTETVS, (...);

Latin it if you will with Martials golden Rule, Epigram lib. Quod sis esse
velis, nihilque malis.
Will Thy condition still,
Whether a good one, or an ill.


Wish Events according to the Canon of Vicissitude, or secret order of the
grand Disposer, and thou shall always have thy wish. This is that Lex Naturae,
quae jubet Nos non tantum Deos nosse, sed sequi, and Accidentia non aliter
excipere, quam Imperata; that Law of Nature teaching us not only to discourse
of God, but to follow him with willing submission: Looking on all Events, not
as Casualties, but Commands. Demetrius, that Heathens cheerful submission to
the will of the Gods, shameth all our verbal Pater noster Parrats, (that say
nothing oftener, and mean nothing seldomer, than, Thy will be done.) Seneca
brings him in saying: I can complain of nothing O ye Gods! but that you
would not let me know your Minds, for I had met this Calamity: Et maluissem
afferre, quam tradere: I had rather have offered my self, or your Loves, then
stay the Delivery upon Demand. This is that Temper and Pallat that gusteth, A
Quodcunque evenerit optimum, What befalls, best: and relisheth the Dish set
before him, above all other. This Ductility of Spirit commends Men, as well
as that other does Metals, (it being not the least among the Commendations of
Gold) and is indeed the true Philosophers stone, turning all occurrences into
its own Temper. Such a golden Complacency, as thereby Victory may be
conquered, and Adversity made prosperous: for, will what befalls, and befall
what will.

The end of the second Decade.
THE Quacking Hermaphrodite, OR Petticoat Practitioner, Stripped and Whipped.
ANd have at thy Coat old Woman, (or young,) whose knowledge is Simples,
Practice the misapplying of them, Charity, Manslaughter, Creed, a Receipt-Book,
and Library an Herball. Since you will be learning Propria quae Maribus, Arts
difficult enough for Men, still nibling at forbidden knowledge, pray be not so
angry at the reading of these Truths, (or if you be, it matters not,) as justly
I was, at the writing hereof. And first let me tell you, I do not so much
wonder you retain your Grandmother Eves Quality, (with this difference) she
killed us all at one blow, and you kill us one by one, (as our excellent Poet
said in another Case,) as that there are any, (nay so many,) that will Jugulum
dare, be killed by the hands of a Woman. How easily might I here digress in
Satyr against Mountebanck-making Patients: from whose folly, Fools set up for
Employment in a Profession that requires as sufficient abilities, as any the
fools Beard teaches the young Barber his Trade. Were there not foolish Men,
there would be no Cunning Women: but I return to the enquiry of the two things
believed in you, Mrs* D. your skill, and your Good will; which when proved to
be no more in these [ hae Galeni] Heteroclite Physicians, ( nam genus variant,
for they change the Gender) than there is Frankincense in a close-stooles
Contents, we shall I hope be as sick of these she Docters as of their Physic,
(and many Sextans know that is sickness to the purpose,) the Physician, and
Physic being both simples, compounding the Destruction of the Credulous
Patient.

First for their skill, if it were Catech^sed in any part of that requisite
knowledge, which distinguishes the Physician from the Mountebanck, (viz. the
Diagnostick and disease-discovering Part,) all its Answers will be, it is a
Surfeit, a Cold* an Ague, A Fever, A Consumption, and (neither of which they
know any thing b^t the Nicknames) in neither can they pronounce any more, than
that Waterologer in Dr. Hearts Anatomy of Vrines, that sent his Patient word he
was sick of a blind Ague. for to these know-nothings, all Diseases are occult,
(it were to be wished their Ideas, and Discriptions* were undisputable among the
Sophies themselves in Physic,) Their general information from their ignorant
Latins concerning particular diseases, what is it? but He or She is taken
(for sooth) for all the World as my Neighbor such a one was, to whom you did
good quick^y; but the water will show you more, (though the two maine things it
can show, is, that Waterologers are Knaves, and such Patients Fools, that take
the Vrinall for an Oracle.) Well, this Meretrix the water my she Doctor,
(sometimes no better,) takes to Confession, which after many shaking fits, to
her skillfull eyes confesses a Distemper in the Blood, and it may be, it shall
be called an Ague, and that is enough: no matter what Ague; call it any Thing
but a Fever, (for should you say an Ague were a Feaver^* the Doctresse would
have a shaking fit of Laughter at you presently, though as many of your Books
do say so, as she has Glasses or Gally Pots.) Well, the Seat of this Ague,
and the Cause, she neither knows, nor cares to know. She and her Medecin
regard them alike, their Remedies they apply, (as the Athenians dedicated that
Altar, ( Paul met with,) to the unknown God,) to an unknown Disease; and
thereby prove themselves as skillful, as those were Religious. They are not
much unlike blind Fencers, (indeed they kill surer) that should be famed for
skill for casual hits, which doubtless they would not among Reasonable Men.
What mad work it is to deal with unknown Diseases, let any Judge, whose
experience tells them, that it is hard enough to graple with those that are
best known, (either in their own nature, or in their particular subjects.)
Such Repairers of our ruined Tenements, our Bodies, work like Babels workmen;
that when a Trowel was called for, they brought a Brick: so these mistake the
call of the Symptoms for the Call of the Disease. When they should mind the
latter, they regard the former, principally or only: and when Nature calls
for Sweats, (which by endeavors of it often she shows, oh give him Cooling
Juleps, Cordialls are too hot; with such like nonsense do they Cure the
Disease, but it is by killing the Patient. If Purge they think on, how
preposterous are they? tell not them of Observations, and cautions for the
beginning, Increase; State, or Declination of a Fever: if they consult with
any rules, it shall be an Almanacks, if the Moon say Purge, or Bleed, the
signs of the Infirmity and its Progress shall not guide them so much as the
Signs in the Zodiac, and that Antic before Al^^anacks, that begins, Aries
Head and Face, etc. which they have by Heart, or else they would give us leave
to count them ignorant in deed, If they want sleep, through translation of the
Peccant Humor to the Head; (without any Revulsion, derivation, or diversion,
etc.) their Poppy water, and Syrup of Poppy, (that edged Tool in the hands of
such Doctor Wise-akers) it may be shall come into Play, by which many times the
matter is more fixed to the increase of their Patients Ravings, or sleep is
procured, which only the last Trumpet can wake; to say truth, a goodly Nap! And
for the Critical motions of Nature, how adventurously do they check them hand
over head? with their Cooling slopps, their Syrup of Limons, Sorrel, etc.
Things useful in their orderly administration) But because the word Critical
is Conjuring to our cunning Women, I may explain it by throws of a Woman in
Travel, which the Critical Agony of Nature in acute Diseases does somewhat
resemble; and let them judge whether they would take her for a skillful
Midwife should lay her Woman to sleep, or give her things to check her
Throws, because they were painful. Such Physicians are our she Doctors, that
some times preposterously administer Coolers in Fevers. It were endless and
bootlesse to Reason them out of their Crosse-grained Methods, to whom Sense is
a Riddle, and Reason, Paradox. Only this must necessarily follow, Hit or miss,
must be the only Dance of these She Practitioners, and suspicious the
success, where blind is their administration of Remedies; because to an
unknown Disease, and especially (which is another grand miscarriage) where one
Remedy shall serve not only the several Times of the same Distemper, but
several Diseases, and distempers, scarce agreeing in appearance, how ever
differing in Causes, and Subjects wherein they are; Sex Age, Constitution,
etc. makes no matter with them; Their Receipt-Book is as universally
indifferent, as A Church-Booke; with this difference, in the one you may read
Peoples beginnings; but in the other their Endings are virtually contained, as
effects in their Causes. If Diascordium fail them, have at Mithridate, if that
fail them, then Enter my Lady Kents Powder; If that fail, toll the Bell;
these must be given to all sorts, at any time, for any distemper, with this
Apology, they are safe, they can do no hurt, if they do no good; (A Character I
could wish true of either, the Physician or Physic) although apparent
Mischief is done in letting slip the Opportunities of more proper courses, (by
Evacuations, or proper Antidotes,) which are thus spent in doing often
contrary, seldom good, and most commonly, nothing; by their delays dallying
with violent Diseases, whose Assaults are Batteries and stormings, that admit
not of Parlies. In more mild Diseases that have more Deliberation (than these
Physicians,) their course does as little regard Indications, or Instructions
from the Disease, Causes, Patient, or Symptoms.

What work will they make with a Sore eye? proceed it from hot or cold Cause,
they have an Eye water, and that in the singular number, that shall make them
(like the deceitful promises for Bats blood) see as well by night as Day, till
the Patient can see nothing, but that his Physician was a Fool. To conclude,
this Oneness of a Remedy (to speak in the Language of as arrant Ignoramuses
as themselves) causes singular Mischief in men's Bodies, while like the Ass
or Mule in the Emblem, they strive to lighten Nature of her Burden all one
way, be her burden Salt or Wool.

The Emblem is Camerarius his, in his second Century Embl. 74. out of Plutarchs
sol^rtia Animal. Tom. 3. p. 67. The Mule laden with Salt, accidentally touching
the water with his Burden, was presently eased of it, the Salt melting away,
making his observations (like these She Empyricks,) thought to do so, when
laden with Wool; but to his heaviness found it otherwise, the wet increasing
the weight of his Load, and after would suffer no Burden to touch the water:
Whether the Asses folly, or these Empyricks skill, be the Emblem of the other,
is hard to say. The Folly of that Ass was by one experiment corrected, but the
folly of these is daily repeated, notwithstanding the Knells of the Dead and
Reasons of the Living, clamor their Conviction, and their pertinacious
Ignorance: Male cadentia iterum tentare libet: (to use Senecas Phrase) will put
again to Sea after many Shipwracks.

I could wish they would therefore at Length learn the Distick annexed to the
Emblem in Camerarius. Lana Sali haud eadem est, neque Spong^a mersa sub undis:
Discernit sapiens Res, quas confundit Asellus.
In wetting Salt, and Wool, there is difference found.
The Wise distinguish, what the Fools confound.


Well, in the discerning part* and prescribing, their skill has been a little
enquired too (for an exact survey would swell into a Volume too vaste.) Would
you (...) what is their care for Diet, (on which ^^^ pocrates has bestowed so
many Aph^^^^ mes,) they either think not of it, (...) their one Aphorism for
all: (...) what his Stomach servath him (...) ^^^^lessenesse that brings
Death (...) to some, as the carelessness of the first ^^man in her Diet, did to
us all; it was at first the sin, and now it is part of the punishment, for it
increases the Sickness, and beckens Death to mend his Pace: but I hasten
mine, to examine the second Article of Peoples Creed concerning our Petticoat
Practitioners, that is their Good will. It is generally believed they do use
their little or no skill in mere Charity, and for the good of such as will
not, or cannot, go to these Chargeable Doctors, and Apothecaries. Whereas on
stricter Scrutiny, this Benevolent Practice will appear to be begun in vain
glory, and to end in injuriousnesse, and that to more than the Patient.

1. How discernable is it, to be an Itch to be Counted somebody? how amply do
they think themselves rewarded, to have it said, such a good Woman,
Gentlewoman, or Lady, gave me that did me good when it had cost me, I will
not say what on Doctors, and Apothecaries, what it costeth their Husbands in a
year, in Glasses, Stills, Herbs, Coals, etc. to (cure I cannot say, but)
cherish this Itch, their Purses can best answer: but no means can claw it off,
while Pride sticks to them as close as their skins. Were it merely to do
good, on that Principle they might set themselves on more proper works, as
making Shirts and Smocks for the Poor, and such like Managery of their Needle
or Wheel, (Employments commendably within their own Sphere) for the good of
the needy. I much doubt they, (that will send sometimes of their Syrup and
Waters,) will scarce afford the Electuary of Beef, or the Cordial Julep of a
mess of Broth to the empty Belly. I could allow them the cure of the Colic,
and Wind, (coming from emptiness,) in the almost- starved Guts of the Poor.
Nay if a Beggar would perhaps beg something for the Ach of his Teeth he shall
have it, but nothing to set them a going. The fame of Curing them is greater,
then of Comforting them, with Food, and that is the very principle of their
Charity, of these liberal Shee-Doctors.

The Physic of Alms I allow them, but am out of charity with their Alms of
Physic (by their own hands:) with the former they may feed Christians, but
with the latter they too often with Christians feed the Worms: Or if they
would be charitable in this way, let them pay for the Physic of the poor, the
noblest way of giving Physic, and will have its Fee from Heaven. Thus a
Founder of an Hospital gives more Physic then any Physician in the World.
Thus does Queen Elizabeth to this hour give Physic in Saint Thomas
Hospital: in this way I wish the number of She or He Physicians increased:
But let these other kind of Plentymongers (that wanton away their own or
Husbands Moneys) know God has made them Semsters and Cooks of the poor, but
not Physicians or Apothecaries: the neglect of the former, not clothing or
feeding them, or the not visiting the poor when sick (yet that but as we visit
those in Prison) they may one day hear of.

But I dare warrant that Sex for ever being upbraided for two things; and
those are, for not Preaching, and not prescribing (or Administering, but by
directions of Physic) no more then for not professing all Trades that may
supply the necessities of the poor, with a cast of their office, for not being
their Brewers, Bakers, Dr^pers, etc. which are scorned as base and mechanic.
But O how it sounds, to be called Mistress Doctor, a knowing Woman, a good
Body, etc. Tickle them with such words, and they will be at more charge on you in
Syrups, Conserves, Waters, Powders, etc. then all the rest of their charity
stretches to, toward the poor, in half a year Charity in its most
justifiable dispensations, is too subject to have a smatch of ostentation; but
in this way it is notoriously rank, there wants nothing but setting upp their
Bills.

There is a virtuous, knowing, well-disposed Lady, Gentlewoman, or the like,
that by Gods blessing can cure all Diseases, from Aries, head and face, to
Pisces, the Feet, with a Water and a Powder, shall cost them nothing, but their
mentioning of her at Gossipings, Funerals, at Church before Sermons, and the
like opportunities of tattle: so that this famous Water or Powder (let it cost
their Husbands what it will) must purchase them oil of Talk (for which some
Women outdo the rarest Chemist) to lay, not so much on their Faces, as Fame:
If this be not sounding louder, then Trumpets after their Medicinal Alms, (I
am much mistaken, although though not before; and that is but vaineglorious
younger Brother: that Charity has its Reward, that has Boasting for her
Usher, or waiting Woman. Well, we see what sets our She Doctor and
Apothecary a work, and who will pay the Bill may easily be conjectured,
especially if we look on the Danger it ends in, to the Patient, and Injury to
other Professions, Sequestered by God, (and in that Sequestration confirmed by
Policy,) for the good of Mankind, in continuing or restoring Health by that
Mystery of Physic. 1 To the Patient their Purges and Vomits, how often do they
send the Soul out sooner than Disease: if the Seller be conscionable, (which
is often the desire of these simple Chapwomen,) the two pennyworth of Stybium, or
of Jalap puts the Patient into so sickly, if not dangerous, a Pickle, he
scarce will be reconciled to Conscionable dealings again; Commend him to hard
weight and Measure, or at least certain, in Physic: which our she Empyrick
is much to seek in. As much as will lie on a shilling, half Crown, or the
like confused Rules they go by; and that with as little care, as if they were
giving Carraway Comfits. Nay if they do keep to Book-Receipts, how apt are they
to mistake, as He in Valerio la (...) for (...) (in words at length) A dram
for a Scruple of Hellebore: a Mistake of sad consequence, says my Author, it
had been, had not I been called for: and thence concludes, Operari ex Libris
absque cognitione and solerti Ingenio periculosum est, without exquisite
knowledge to work out of Books is most dangerous. How many scapes in the
Printing of Books, which none but the skillful in the Nature of Medicines, in
Re Medica; (as they term it) can correct? I will instance in the Woman's Book,
the expert Midwife, where there is an Ounce (which is eight times as much) for
a Dram, (in probability meant by the Author;) and that in the Latin; no
mervaile therefore if so in the Translation: it is in the Latin; ( Ruffus in
his own Language) page 21. ( in mine.) R. Trochiscorum de Myrrha (...) croci
(...) etc. of Trochisces of Myrrh an Ounce, Saffron a dram, etc. for one
Draught.

Then for their mistake of Remedies themselves as well as directions, I will
use no other Argument than [ a minori ad Majus] from the less to the greater.
It is very unlikely they should know Plants, etc. When they whose Profession it
is (and skill it should be,) the Apothecaries themselves, both take, and
receive (from Herbe-women.) Quid pro Quo, one thing for another, many, many
Times. The inference of the danger to the Patient that may follow those
mistakes, is so plain, I need spend no more pains, or time on it: only it
will conclude thus much, that did the Country keep its Bills of Mortality, as
the City does, we might in both of them justle in Shee-Physitians among the S.
S. for a Disease, as surely killing as Surfeit, Stone, etc. or any other in the
Bill. Behold, a Charity, not so much to the Patient, a unemployed Sextons, or
Curates, that (like Lopez,) lie sick of a thin Stipend, and an everlasting
Parish. Such a Physician in a Parish (any thing big) and the Bells shall scarce
lie still. Landlords of Copy-holds (by lives) would feel the sweetness of
their Neighborhood too. Believe me they would be of no small use to purge a
Commonwealth, without the expense of Hemp. Sicken a Malefactor with
conviction, and mittimus him to the practice of a She Doctor, and you hear no
more of him, he troubles the Commonwealth no more: and all upon their own
charitable Account and charge. It were not amiss if they had a College, shall
I say, or Hall, (help me Invention!) no, Shambles erected for this Sister-hood
of Physicians, whither any unequally Yoaked might repair for Redress: The ill
Wived, or ill Husbanded Wretches might here be comforted; or indeed any (to
whom life it self is as bad as either of the former) might change, even a
World, if weary of this: and were not this a charity? but to sum the danger of
it without an Irony. I am confident a practicing Rib shall kill more then the
law-bone of an Ass; and a Quacking Dalilah, than a valiant Sampson.

CHARACTER 2. The Peoples Physician.
IN nothing more does that many-headed (but slender-witted) judge, the Vulgar,
betray their weakness of Judgment, than in their choice liking, or Admiration
of their Divines, and Physicians. For their Divine commonly, let his Doctrine
be new, and his Chin not old; and he is completely qualified. But would you
know their Physician? (On whose skill though they venture no wagers on it, they
will their lives) Them they will trust with those they would scarce trust for
an Angel. And would you know the Attractions that are in him? Why,

1. He is a Native with an Outlandish Name; A Renegado from some Trade, or
Profession, he could not fadge with: By whose Dullness, no Mystery, but
scorned to be Mastered: and banckrupt of all ways to live, He resolves to
kill; but his Valor would not endure the way of killing Folk against their
wills, but sets on a slier way of feeding Himself, (and the worms too,)
with bold, (because Lawless) and ignorant Adventures in Physic, in which,
(after a Prentiship to the Plague, or some Disease, so Epidemicall, that his
Miscarriages cannot be heard, for the Din of Knells) Opinion, and the
commendations of poor inconsiderable People, (no more able to judge of worth,
than to satisfy it;) makes Him Free: (for I cannot afford him, the Title
Graduates him, he does handle a Liberal Art, (or Science) so Mechanically.
And now He being to work too fast for the Grave-maker, or will by that Time he
is furnished with necessaryes for such Practice, his Tools and Impudence. As
for his Tools, They are Books in the Mother Tongue. 1. Some Obsolet Anatomy,
of whom we may say as Cardan of the Arabians skill in Anatomy in Praefat. Meth.
Med. Mombrorum Hominis nec Formu^^, nec Situm* nec Numerum savum dereliquerunt.

Out of which he learneth to miscall the parts of the Body, but in hard words
(and those mistaken,) that sound to the wonder and cheating of much people: and
believe it, this is none of the Peoples ordinary Physicians, for in many it
matters not if they can read or write any thing but boasting Bills; wherein be
sure S. begins Surgery, and F. Physic: or at most if his English Library
can furnish him with but the confused Notions of some diseases, and he can but
discourse them to fit all Waters: Their Patient is ready to admire and cry,
right Sir, you have hit, (as it is hard but he may in reckoning the Symptoms,
or pains that usually accompany distempers mingled, be they acute, or
Chronicall) and He must be the only Man can cure Them. Is not this the usual
Practice of Patients, to go from one Doctor to another, (in places that afford
them choice) and to like none for sufficient, but him that by Chance, or
undiscerned cunning in Questions, etc. hit upon any part of their Distemper.
For, light on one, and most commonly, they will tell you the rest; though
(poor simple souls) all they can tell, (which seldom but is more than the
water) or their Doctor, (even when they choose wisely) is often like enough to
give the Disease its right Name. None passes for able to cure, that smells
not the disease (for so he may as soon, as see some) in the Urine, of which
those That pass for most skillful, are on impartial Scrutiny, either Cheats,
or Fools. For they that know most in Theory, or Practice of that boundless
Orb of Physic, know these brackish waters of Urine, convey to none, or few
faithful Discoveries, and therefore generally care as little for the Fame, as
they trust in the certainety of this Waterology: the pronouncing upon it alone
being as uncertain and coniecturall, as Praescription would be dangerous: That
if the Waterologer take his degree in a Congregation of sober and rational
Physicians, the Title of it will be this in Sum, A dangerous Fool; and his
habit we will borrow out of that Doctor Hearts Arraignment of Urines, c. 2 p 96.
p. 86.
Jewish Apothecaries Shop Langius speaks of in his Epistles. He had the
picture of a fool at the entrance (doing as wise men do) laughing on an
Urinall in his hand; and the Apothecary being asked by a Physician (then there
with laughing) what it meant, he answered he had heard from his Father, and
Grandfather, Physicians both; that such Physicians as would undertake to know
and pronounce concerning Diseases, from the deceitful informations of Urine,
were fools, in derision of whom he had made this Image his sign. So free and
ingenuous confession of the Truth in this kind one should seldom hear among
Christians, says Forestus on this Story, but that the simpler sort of
Christians may be converted to this jewish faith, (as wholesome for their bodies
almost) as in spiritualls their faith would be destructive of their Souls.) I
shall insist somewhat on the Cheat of Waterologie, (a word though new, yet
easily to be understood, thanks to another Cheat that rhimeth to it) and
therefore I shall use it still, to signify this divining by Urines.) Latin it
we cannot better then Forestus, nor bring a Sentence more apt to our purpose.
Lib. 3. c. 2. [ Plebei totam Medicinam in Stultiloquio Vrinae ponunt.] The
common People place all Physic in foolish discourse on Urines.

Now it will be no hard task to prove it a Cheat, and a dangerous one; for
consider but the uncertainty of its best, and unsufficiency of the most
Instructions, this Urinall Oracle is consulted for: and compare them with the
wonders Waterologers from thence deliver to the credulous people, and we shall
see on what a rotten and unsound Principle the people ground their Judgments of
an able Physician; viz. this Ratio formalis, this formality and essence of so
able a man (as they take it to be) to be able to afford twelve pennyworth of
lies from an Urinall, to tell them by it any thing they can ask. View but what
it can tell, and what they do tell by it, and believe it, and you will (good
people) the less believe them.

First it confesses its insufficiency of Information, even in Fevers
themselves; if you will hear its confession in Authorities, or examples, (more
prevalent than Reasons, with such I would undeceive) In the Mouth of Forestus,
it confesses, that a burning Fever it could not discover in a Patient at the
Hague (says my Author) when I looked on his Water it was thin, white, and clear
like Well-water, insomuch as I could never have guest a burning Fever; till I
came into the Room, touched his Pulse, and viewed his face. I then told them,
not only he had a violent Fever, but that very Day being the seventh, and
Critical, He would fall into a Dilirium, or Raving, and the next day dye so,
which came to pass. Well, We see we cannot tell by the water whether the house
be on fire, it can as little tell whether there be a red Cross on it; I mean
whether it be a malignant Fever, or the Plague it self, or no. Forestus his
words shall maintain this seeming Paradox (to such as think a skillful
Waterologer might as well see before, in the Urinall (as after we do in Deaths
Diurnall (the Bill of Mortality) how many would dye of the Plague) 8 lib. 1. c.
4. Saep^ in Peste Delphica expertus sum, quod cum Vrinae optimae spectarentur,
ita ut vix Febrem indicarent, praeter spem tunc maxim morerentur. I have often
found in the famous Pestilence at Delph, when the Urines were most laudable,
the Patients condition was most deplorable. For Authorities many could be
heaped up* of learned Physicians putting least confidence in this
Intelligencer, although in Fevers. But instar Omnium, take one quoted by an
English Physician three hundred years since. I take (says he) God and all the
Saints in Heaven to witness, that (neither by skill, or Art, nor yet by use
and long Experience in Practice) I could ever attain to any knowledge by the
Urine, either in Conception, Quartans, falling Sickness, etc. Now if it fail
in Fevers, the guests (though unwelcome) of the Veins and Arteries, those
Channels, of the perpetual Tide, and Circulation; sure for Diseases out of
those vessels, as Toothache, Gout, Scab, etc. it may as well tell us the Color
of the Patients Clothes, as their Infirmities, alone and single without any
other information. Let Forestus speak (for the whole Jury against the certainty
of this Oracle) and he affirms totidem verbis. [fallit in Hydrope, Morbis
Pectoralibus, lib. 1. c. 4.] it is deceitful, says he, in the Dropsy,
Diseases of the Breast, Vomitings, Ulcers of the Throat, Fluxes of blood, etc.
Which Author, if looked in* will more at large weaken the credit of Urine in its
Information concerning Diseases. But now let us examine Her a little more
privately, whether she can tell us any thing of Conception, and women's being
with Child: this people hope these peevish Scollardicall Doctors (that will not
let people believe Lies quietly) will grant Them, if A child may not be seen in
the Urinall, then indeed the water can tell little, they will confess: But
methinks I hear water complaining, as once the Moon did to Jupiter. Lucian
wittily tells us the Story, how the Moon made her complaints to Jupiter, that
the Philosophers laid many things to her charg^ she was not guilty of; no grand
Alteration here below, but (strait forsooth) she must be made Author of it:
that ebbing and flowing of the Sea, the various weather, motion of humors in
men's bodies, etc. with such like Imputations: she therefore desired Reparations
of her Credit; and so may this Prophetess Urine; whereas she is slandered
with being acquainted with the Actions of the Womb; She ingenuously confesses
she cannot truly inform the Sex of the Body it is made by: She knows neither
Propria quae maribus, nor [ Faemineo Generi] that there is any water can show
the Breeches, or Petticoat; for which take Doctor Hearts Authority and Reason in
the first Book, cap. 5. Of the Anatomy of Urines. The Reason commonly alleged
for the judgment of the Sex by the Urine, is, because Men are of hotter
Constitution commonly, and therefore their Urines are of higher Color, and
because the Contents in women's Urine are more than men's, by reason of their
sedentary life: though this must be understood Caeteris paribus, that is, A man
of good and laudable constitution, using Diet answerable, both in quantity, and
quality, and active: and a woman of a colder Complexion, of moderate Diet, lazy
life, and avoiding hot Diet? but otherwise how weak a Conjecture is to be
made from the Urine, daily Experience will show, many women's Waters being
higher colored than men's. Will not heat of the Liver, or Kidneys raise the
color? and Obstructions lessen Contents? Where is then our Judgment of the
Sex? Bring the Water of such a one as Plautus his woman, that he says, A
Vintage would not suffice, and could out drink Rain-bowes, in his own Phrase,
whose Vade mecum is an Aqua vitae Bottle; or a Widows that bewaileth her
former Husband, over a Pot of good Ale; and cries, as this is my comfort, he
was as good a man, (Peace be with him) as ever lay by woman! Bring this woman's
Water, and the water of a man virtuously, or miserably abstemious, that is
either temperate, or penurious, and our Pisse-Prophet may easily be deceived.
And if the Sex cannot be discerned, let these Waterologers have a care, least
on mistake they should pronounce A Common Counsel man with Child, or a
Constable sick of the Mother: But if they will show Skill, let one try them
with Anniseed Robins water. Well, if the Sex cannot, much less can Conception
be discerned, though it be part of the peoples Creed, it may. A certain
Practical Professor of Pisa in Italy (says Scribonius, and a grave ancient
Physician) was wont to say that such as trusted to this Prediction, in this
case of Conception, were most of all deceived; and he never in his life time
observed any such Urines in women with Child, as Avic^n describes: and that
more-over he had observed such contents in men's Urines. Of the same Opinion is
Rondeletius, Mercurialis, Savanorola, Authors that have writ on purpose on
Urines, and say as much as Reason can; For what is to be seen by the Urine, in
which Number Roganus (not the least) says thus, Lib. de causis Vrinar^m, c.
15. Such is the blockishnesse of some Physicians, as to be persuaded, women
with Child make different Waters from them that are not; whereas the maine
difference is, that their Urines are more crude, than their own at another
time, or others in Health: Hear in common, that it is like those that are
troubled with Crudities: So that a Water of one with the green-sicknesse, or
with Child, may be like; thus far Roganus, Hear this good Women, that think
your Chamberpots contain more knowledge than your selves, or than some of you
would the world should know. I conclude these Authorities with the Example of
Emericus, Doctor in Physic, and of the Chair at Vienna (mentioned by Doctor
Heart, lib. c. 4. in his Anatomy of Urines, out of Cornarius) who found this
belief of the people had tainted even a learned man, and his friend
Rithamarus: who sending, or having his wives Water to a Physician, that told
him peremptorily his wife was with Child, he lessend his Esteem of this
Emericus, because he thought no such matter, and was confident of it, till
after preparation of Nurses, and other Necessaries, she dying, and on much
persuasion dissected (at which Emericus was present) but found big with nothing
but disappoinment of her Husbands preparations, and conviction of his Errors,
which he ingenuously confessed then to this Doctor Emericus.

Doctor Heart mentions another Gentlewomans Water (not far from Northhampton)
that was brought him, and was like a healthful young man's; but finding by
circumstances it was a woman's, (not by the Water, he confesses) he voteth her
with Child, and got Credit by it, as it proved; but acknowledges it due more
to chance than his skill, or any appearance in the Water. Innumerable were
Instances of this Nature, but such is the sottishness of the common people,
they will not stand out from beleiving a blind Waterologer (As I find in
Forestus (de falso Vrinar. Judic: Lib. 2. c. 5. out of Euritius Cordus) Of a
blind Jew richly arrayed sitting in his Chair, and giving peremptory Oracles
on the Waters brought him (his Maid sitting by him, and suggesting diverse
things to him she got from the Patient) to the wonder of many Fools. And if you
will believe the most of able Physicians in this matter, you will confess this
blind Jew might see as much as any can see in it; witho^t other Informations,
for take it in its best information, and it signifies nothing alone, without
other signs, in regard (and let that Reason serve for all) one, and the same
Water in Color, Contents, and Substance, may signify diverse things. In a kind
of Neutrality of health, the Urine may be thin, pale, crude, and then can
signify nothing but some erroneous Digestions: the same water may be made in a
Fever, when Natures Lamp is come almost to the Snuff; and Galen says, such a
one he never knew recover.

Well, you have in some measure heard what the Ingenious can see in the Water;
compare them now with the invisible appearances (as I may term them) that these
Empiricks (Male, or Female) make the people believe they can discern; and I
leave it to you, to judge where the Cheat lies: Take Forestus his own
Character of them, Lib. 2. c. 3. What dare not these juggling Knaves babble in
presence of the ignorant and unlearned people? If in giving their judgments,
forsooth, they have not hit the nail on the head, then strait they have
recourse to their lying Delusions of the simple Patient; pretending to see such
things, as are in themselves contradictions to suppose: but because the Patient
cannot confute, are by him believed; sometimes he tells him the Stomach is
fallen out of the place, and they will make no doubt to restore it again.
Sometimes they tell them, (and all by the Water) they have little wheales grown
on the Liver, or stones in it as big as Reanes; or that it is wasted with
venery, or drinking, or that the Brain is fallen close together, or that the
Heart has strange wheels, or bladders in it, -- Risum teneatis Amici?
Laugh not but believe, good people, if you will take this for Poetry, not
History, not for things done, but feigned. Take Forestus his Testimony, lib. 2.
c. 3. A maid (says he) bringing her Mistresses Water after some questions,
told me her Mistress had had a Physician, who told her that her Liver wasted
to the bigness of a Bean, but by his means it was growing again. But above
others, a woman Physician (as the Fools term them) went farthest, persuading a
Gentleman that his Liver was wasted (with his being an ill one, as to Wenching)
and promised him to make him a new one; But right, or wrong, she got eighty
Florins of him; whether the Ignorance or Impudence of the Sons and Daughters of
the Father of Lies, be most, is hard to say; and whether madness, or folly
give the greater tincture, to the Credulity of these simple Patients, the
Representative of the People, under which number we shall find no small Fools,
that in this matter of health, and life (not worth being wise for) are as
simple as the simplest: do but hear what people have been persuaded to, and
you will confess, the Credulity of the people out-runneth the impudent Lying
of these water Oracles. When I was a Practitioner in Alcmare in Holland (says
my Author) being sent for to a Gentleman, there were some waters brought to me,
among others, one by a woman, white, thin, transparent without Residence (all
imperfectly) importing a Dropsy, demanding whether she had been long so, she
told meyes, and she had been with a very famous Physician (as they called him.)
This Rascal had told the poor woman, that she had a Tree growing in her belly
(and had our Daphne had as strong an Imagination, and active, as she had
belief, she had almost rooted in his Presence, and confirmed his words by
Ovids Metamorphosis) this Tree would kill her, he assured her, if his Potion
did not spoil the growth of it, and all the Physicians in the World would do
her no good. For his devilish Lie, and Potion, he had an Angel from this
well- timbred Gentlewoman, to prevent her being sold to a Ship-Carpenter (as
this Credulous Rib feared would be the end of her) But at last her Navell broke
of it self, and the Tree was turned to water: But nothing is more common with
Water-prophets, then to persuade people to things by their simplicity
unrefutable: As that they are bewitched, and an evil tongue has wronged them
(if they would say, does wrong them, it were truer) but they will under take to
cure them: Why, if their Teeth do but ache, they cannot refute Mr. Doctor, but
it is long of some evil tongue; or let them feel somewhat that troubles them
(that they know no more by what name to call, than this their Doctor) who
therefore betaketh himself to such general Nicknames) if it go away, and they
take but a little Syrup of Roses of them, they are as ready to give the Credit
of the Cure to these Doctors, as their Impudence is ready to take it. Durst
ever such Fellows obtrude such Impostures, if they did not see them take with
peoples easy Credulity? But then by Confederacy, what Tricks have these
Pisse-phophets to cheat the people. Thus says Forestus: an old Tr^t (that
boasted of her Giftishnesse in Waterology) was wont to sit in her Chamber next
the Street door, where she could here her Maid talk with the Patient, and
over-heare information enough for the Disease, and its Accidents; then must
this Maid go to another corner of the house, and call her Mistress: but judge
you whether she see the Disease, or hear it. But among others take that
pleasant Story of those two Rogues in Dort, in the Low Countries, related by
the same Author, Lib. 2. c. 4. De falso Vrinarum Judicio. These Ramblers being
at a low ebb in Cash, their bellies commenced Magistri Artium, Masters of Arts:
and they set upon this Design. I will (says the one to the other) be the
Physician, and hang out an Urinall; thou shall go to some drinking-house of
greatest resort, and take occasion to extol this new Doctor for his Skill in
Urines so far, that if diverse men should make water in one Pot, he is able to
tell you how many they were, and wager on it; but be sure thou give so many
scores on the side of the Pot, as they be men that use it. The Project took,
and he was cried up for the most famous Pisse-prophet ever heard of. Upon the
like scores are people cheated into a belief the water can answer all
questions. Forestus in chap. 5. of the same Book, had much ado to beat a woman
off from beleiving he could tell her the Patiens Age by the water; for so a
learned Physician told her, she said, that look how^ many crosses were in the
water, so many ten years the Patient had seen; until Forestus had told her
there was never a cross in the water, and so her Husband was not ten years
old: bid her put on her Spectacles and look, which when she did, and could see
none, the Cause she perceived had failed her. The Clown in France would not
let the Doctor alone, till he told him how many stairs (by the water) his
Wife fell; he (out of the simplicity of the fellow, not water) having voted a
fall the Maladies cause, the Doctor ghessed some twelve, but being desired to
look again, and plunged, was relieved by that Ingenium usual ( Subitis
Casibus) Wit at a dead lift, and asked him if there were all the water, and the
Clown by good luck having spilt some, and confessing it, the Doctor told him
the rest of the stairs were lost; which sends my Fellow home with wonder,
and his mouth full of the Doctors Praises: the Story is in the same Book, Chap.
5 but I will spend no more Ink against this Urine (as it is taken for an
Oracle) Only wish people for their own good not to rate Physicians worth
(either in ability, or honesty) for Tales out of the Urinall (which they might
as well many times tell out of the Case) since there is not only Folly in
beleiving them, but danger, and that with a witness, if they follow advise, or
take Physic merely on the waters instruction. For which take one Story for all
out of Forestus, lib. 3. c. 2. which does handsomely vindicate Physicians, and
acccuse Patients for their mischiefs they many times pull on their own heads:
That when life is at Stake, will not afford to go to the charge of a Physicians
visit, which Physicians of old counted absolutely necessary; what ever foolish
and fordid Niggardlins think in these days: doubtless the Writer of
Ecclesiasticus was of another mind; he says, Ecclesia cus 1. 3 12. 1.
Give place to the Physician, for the Lord has created him. Let him not go
from thee, for thou have need of him. That is not, let him not come at Thee, or
send thy water and it will suffice, as Forestus descants on the place. But I
return to the Story. A Miser in Delfe, in an intermitting Tertian, sent his
Water to a Physician, otherwise able enough, who appointed him to purge, which
he took in his fit, on which he fell into extremity; So as then he sent for
another Physician from the Hague, who when he came, and hearing the sick man
rail against the other Physician, desired to see the Bill, and liking it well,
asked him whether he had been with him, or no; upon the Patients saying, no,
this Can did and Ingenious Physician, smilingly replied, blame not your former
Physician, nor his Physic, by him to good purpose appointed; but your self
for not taking it in the right time, which had he known fully your Condition
(as by one visit he had better then by twenty Vrinals) you had not erred in it,
but had been better directed: With which Candid truth I seal up the gaping
mouths of Admirers of Urine-prophets, or the slandering mouths of such as will
not allow him for a Physician that sees not Invisibles, or tells not
Impossibles, from this Deceiver the Urine; and I pass to the other
qualifications of the peoples Physician, which we will divide in Positive, and
Negative; or if you will, into what will edify the peoples expectation; and
what it can spare in them.

1. Their Positive Qualifications are precious ones (if examined) Talkative
Ignorance, and brazen Impudence, which has two fronts, its boasting one, and
bold one. with the one they look back on strange feats and cures done by them,
as hard to believe, as to perform; the other looks forward, and for half in
hand they will undertake Impossibles.

1. Their Talkative Ignorance is a great setter off before the vulgar, if they
can speak Oppilation and Obstruction of the Liver, or Spleen: Nay, if they
misapply words (in themselves proper enough) never so non-sensically, they
pass for fine Fellows; or if they can call a Paltis a cataplasme, obscuring
common and ordinary things in terms of Art (which is all the use they make of
such Terms) if they can, I say, go but so far, as to call the fit of an Ague, a
Paroxysme, fits of the Mother, Hystericall fits, etc. my admiring Patient
takes him to be a great Schollard, able enough to spose some that have more
Books, or Degrees, so that his Nonsense be but fluent, and mixed with
disparagement of the College, Graduated Doctors, or Book-learned Physicians,
against which they bring in their High and mighty word Experience. O! their
experience of this long standing is the only Abilities, cry they* Reason they
call wrangling, or bookishnesse, (whereas it is well known on a Rational
Scrutiny, that death is not more certain than that Proposition in Heurnius on
Aphoris. Sect 1. 1. [ Temerariae Experientiae finis certissima Mors] Death
without question, is the event of Immethodicall Experience) yet this and such
like discourse draws out of their wondering Patients, I marry, Sir, you are in
the right, you say very true, etc. and can you blame them, when they believe
the largnesse of their Experience, which they confirm by their second
Qualification.

2. Frontlesse Impudence, in its former part, or boasting of what they have
done* If you will believe them, no Pitch-field ever slew, or wounded more then
they have cured, and recovered: They have made death retreat, even when he has
assaulted furiously; and disappointed him of more Bits than Civil Wars have
furnished him with for some space of years. They have even beckoned Souls back
again, that have been some pretty part of their way from the Bodies. And this
many (say they) can attest, and those no small ones; in several Countries,
scarce a Court in Christendom, but they will slander with need of (and comfort
by) their Help in some Disease or other: and the people believe all, take them
for Traveled Physicians, when some of their Physic and Travel is much alike.
They scarce know but a body may ride from Dover to Callis, for ought they know
England may be walled round, and the Cinque Ports may be Sally Ports for ought
they can tell; but our ordinary Patient cannot disprove their lying Chorography.

2. But look on his other brazen Forehead, that looks toward future
undertakings, and that is not one jot modester: For there is not a Disease
Nature ever felt, but they have, or can cure, and will undertake with as much
confidence, as if their recipes were mere Transcriptions from the Almightys
fiats, for they will not only restore but create a new what is quite perished,
as you have heard, new Livers, Lungs, Kidneys, etc. they will not doubt for
somewhat in hand (always provided) Let Leases of Lives, of larger Date then
Popish Indulgences; if you will believe them, you would take their Closets
(Studies I cannot call them) to be Immortality Offices, or privy conveyances,
to slip by death and that common appointment of all men, once to dye. It is
nothing with them, to undertake more then the modest Physician will promise, or
the ablest can perform. Well, you have seen this peoples Physician, quoad
intra, what is in him? view him now [ quo adextra] what he, is outwardly in the
means he uses, and courses he takes, to make good the Title of Doctor thrust
upon him.

1. First, for the means he uses, or his Shop (as I may term it) of Physic it
has as many Cheats in it as his Tongue, and yet [ Populus vult decipi] the
people love to be cheated. His Caldron shall afford them a Catholic Syrup, or
Drink, as general (and on as much reason compounded) as that same Jews
Emplastrum [de faeno (as he called it (made out of a Hay-cock; Cardan Med. mel.
c. 8. 8.
for which he gave this Reason for the choice of such Materials, because there
were all sorts of Plants mixed by Nature, and therefore sure there could not be
a plaster for all intentions better. So these Physicians will have some
Catholic Physic, which their Patients shall be sure to carry with them, what
ever else they have: And this must be called [ Arcanum] a Secret they will not
discover.

Then for the courses (Method they know none) they take in their Cures; how are
they without rule? casual hits, misses, nothing more common with them then to
begin at the wrong end of a Disease. Whereas Omnis curatio est vel canonica,
vel coacta; as Hercules de Saxonia truly; all cure is either regular by Art, or
irregular by constraint, it is all one to them; for most commonly Symptoms
(though of no great-Importance) shall have their first Care: and indeed to
these blind ignorant Patients, a cunning way of Insinuation; for on a little
ease, they think the Cure begun, and what ever follows they will call a
Relapse, though they never set one foot forward truly to recovery. To bind
presently in all sorts of Fluxes, is not more sad, than with them familiar: in
Fevers, even Pestilentiall, they will satisfy the Patients thirst with
cooling Juleps, be they never so improper for the Malignity Nature has to
struggle with, or unconcerning her assistance to resist. Cardan observed this
Error when he delivered this Canon [modus medendi hujus morbi (Pestisscil.)
permutandus, Meth. med. c. 39.
naem calidis plus tollitur quam frigidis] and in their manner of cure how
pertinaciously do they adhere to some customary course, without variation
according to ^ndication from Age, Sex, Nature of the Disease, and its motion
Thus sometimes Eradicatives are omitted in the beginning requisite (as Cardan
in cap. 15. of the former Book) as in violent motions of the matter, specially
to the more noble parts; then how absurd to rest in Lenitives, as Cardan c. 14.
ibid. Some places, says one, customarily begin their Cures with Cassia; as at
Venice, with Electuario lenitino, or de Sebesten, as at Ferrara, with Pills,
Boles, etc. the other extreme is irritare silentem morbum, as Heurnius says,
to give Physic (as they call it) where Diet might serve, or use strong, where
gentle might serve; as excellently Heurnius [Frustra fatigant R^medijs aegros,
qui victus Ratione Curari possunt] it is to no purpose to tire Nature with
unpleasing Remedies, when Diet might do the work. Now these busybodies go
just contrary, rather then seem to do nothing, or not extort a Fee, or get
something by their Physic, they will purge them right or wrong; far from
Avicens tendernsse, who, it is said, wept when he prescribed a Purge. That
being indeed true of Ayrerias [Nulla est ferme medicina quae non aliquam de
viribus and partibus Corporis depraedatur] And in Preposterous Purges, much
more is that true of Cardan, Meth. medend. c. 18. [ Plus est quod adimitur eo
Tempore ex virtute, quam materia. But what talk I of the wrong and cross
courses of such Physicians practice, since it cannot be looked for, that these
Empiricall Amethodists should understand the order of Art, or the Art of order:
how can they steer by the [ Tuto, Cito, Jucunde] those three Sea marks guiding
to the Haven of Healths, since they have neither the compass of Theory and
Reason, or Rudder of experience (but broken and imperfect) without either of
which, they must necessarily Shipwreck, or float in uncertainties. How can our
Peoples Physician, that knows not one point in the compass, nor use of the
Rudder, make a saving voyage, or steer, first by Tuto, that never adapteth his
Remedies, or proportioneth them according to the age or constitution, but
gives a Child the quantity for a Potion, might serve it for a Glyster, etc. If
Nature slip this conflict with the Remedy (worse than the Disease) so; if not,
why none could save them; that which they gave them has done so many good;
nay, they will not stick to say it never failed in any appointed to live; but
their appointed time was come, which Art cannot go beyond, with such like put
offs, for their Ignorance, or Rashness: and how can it be otherwise? since
their Ignorance is as well in [ Remedica] Medecines, as the Disease, or the
Body. How ready are they to mistake their Guides, and read Opium, for Apium? Of
which see more in Fuchsius de compositione Medicamentor. lib. 1. c. 4.

Then for Cito, and speedy cure, they either cannot, or will not. Resolved upon
the question so much must first be got out of the Patient, before they leave
him. Then for Jucunde, pleasing or less distasteful; truly the Carter and
Committeeman, must be fain to taste of the same Kettle: for variety of means
their Art cannot, or Covetousness will not attempt. These and the like
Imperfections, are the less wonder; if you look on what the people do not
require in their Physician; which are next

2. To be looked on: They require none of those things required by Hippocrates,
in his Lex; Education even from youth. Natural Abilities advanced by Study,
confirmed by experience, etc. No in this matter Pliny the Naturalist never writ
a cleerer Truth, Hac sola Artium evenit, quod Cuilibet se Medicum dicenti
facile Credatur; cum sit periculum in nullo Mendacio majus; in this Art alone
it comes to pass, that any one but professing himself a Physician, is
presently believed, though in nothing more is easy Credulity dangerous: Tell
not them of Learning, Universities, or Degrees; slip but from any Profession
some little while, and say it has traveled, and it may pass for an able
Physician: Or go but to any place where they are not known, and they may
presently be styled Doctors. Never did people exact less time, or abilities
for Professions, than they do for those that have to do with their Souls, or
Bodies. Their Lawer, the older, the abler: the longer a Barrester, or at Inns
of Court, the more Angels, and legs they shall have: but in the other two
Professions, it is far otherwise. Let the Cobbler lay aside the Shoo-sole he is
about, and he shall have the mending of their immortal Souls as soon entrusted
with him as any grave Divine. Let the Tailor lay aside his Thimble, and but
undertake to mend a stitch fallen in their Bodies, and they shall have money
freer, and good words sooner than any Doctor of them all. Though men would not
send their Kettle to a Carpenter, they will their Bodies: Nor though they would
not send their Cart to mend to a Tinker, yet no Profession but shall have their
Health to patch up: It is Lemnius his own words, [ In exruendis Aedibus
Architectum deligimus solertem, etc.] In other Professions (says he) we seek
the ablest; in building, the ablest Carpenter; in Navigation, the skilfullest
Mariner, etc. [Cur in Morbis expugnandis, and sarcienda tuendaque Sanitate,
trio^olares Circumforaneos and deliras Anus admittimus? quibus corpus nostrum
trucidandum exponimus, etc. Lemnius, lib. 1. c. 17.] Why in removal of
Diseases, in patching up our health, or preserving it, do we admit every
worthles Quack, or doting old woman, or unconvicted Witch, etc. True is that of
Pliny [Qui tunc fore Arts felices pronunciavit si de ijs solum judicent ^asque
tractent Artifices, earumque periti] It will never go well with Arts, till they
are judged and handled only by the skillful, and judicious. If you would
further see what Notes the people like for Physicians, read, and bless your
self, the Catalogue of excellent Qualifications Oberndorfius has gathered
together [ Omnes qui sese falso Medici Titulo venditant, and insuper magno,
funestoque Damno praxin exercent, Plerumque sunt sordida, and abjecta faex
plebeculae, etc. detracta larva apparent Judaei scelerati, Christianorum
sicarij, Monachi suae Professionis Desertores, sacrificuli, Parochi (...),
etc.] All that falsely usurp this Title of Physician, and practice it, to the
sad cost of many; what are they but the Scum of the people, take off their
Visards, and underneath appear Wicked Jews, Murderers of Christians, Monks,
abdicant of their orders, etc. Unlearned Chemists, conceited Paedagogues, dull
Mechanics, Pragmaticall Barbers, wandering Mountebancks, Cashiered Soldiers,
indebted Tradesmen, Husbandmen that have been ill Husbands, Toothlesse-women,
fudling Gossips, and Chare-women, talkative Midwives, etc. In sum (says he)
Hominum (...) the scum of Mankind.

So that Gonellas Assertion to the Marquess of Ferrara, was as truly asserted,
as it was pleasantly demonstrated and related by Pontanus: it was thus. The
Marquess asking Gonella, what profession He thought there were most of, in
Ferrara; He answered; Physicians: know what thou say, says the
Marquess, when thou know there are but three: but Gonella persisted in his
Assertion even to a Wager, or forfeit. Next day counterfeiting (by going
muffled) the Toothach, and standing in a public place, he hears several
Advisers, sets down their Names, and Re^ipes, next day continuing so before
the Marquess himself, He had also his verdit what might do him good; after
which he presents the Marquess with a Catalogue of above three hundred
Advisers, and his name in the Front; at sight of which, the Marquess between
blush and smile confessed he had lost.

Thus far Lemnius out of Pentanus, but our times exceed Gonellas, the old
Adage^ All are either Fools, or Physicians, is altered now from a Disjunctive,
to a Conjunctive; for now every Fool is a Physician, if he can put the
Ingredients of Po^tage but into form of a Bill, he is a learned Physician* and
it is a rare secret, and most effectual Decoction. Their numbers are so
increased* that I believe should there be any occasion of flinging up new works
about the lines of communication, the company of Cordwayners that were so many
hundreds, would appear a Maniple, a handful, and make but a poor show in
comparison of Practitioners of Physic, if they were enjoined to dig Trenches;
indeed an employment, not much different from some of their business, any more
than Grave making (which resembles that Trenchmaking) and Grave-filling, at
which their practice is pretty nimble.

In this Nursery [ Charlatanorum] of Charlatans, or Mountebanks (as Doctor
Primrose justly calls England) our division of the living is not so much into
Physician, and Patient, as into well Physician, and sick Physician; it is no
Paradox (such an Olla podrida are we grown to) to say, we cannot see Audience
for Preachers, nor Patients for Physicians: Nor is it any wonder, since people
require scarce any more qualifications, than to say, I have a Recipe that
seldom fails, and it has done these and these Cures. Say you are a
Physician, and hold in their esteem; pre^end but to experience, and no matter
for reason: Nay, wear but a Doctors Live^y, marry but a Chyrurgions widow,
and the ones Service, and others Affinity, make you sufficient to know as much
as their Relatives: but I turn my eye from the sore to the Chirurgians, and
those that should be Mend-alls, in the words and complaint of Fevinus [De Abusu
Medicinae coercendo] for the cure of Physic it self (...) Micarum Fures
plectuntur corpore, at hodie verorum Medicorum (...) Empiricis Manicularijs
defertur. Grassatores, Sicarij, Latrones nec immerito capite mulctantur, sed
Empiricorum carnificum caput civica Corona praecingitur; saeviens pestis qua
fieri potest ratione a Regum, and Principum Aulis, and ab urbibus arcetur:
veris autem Medicinae Pestibus liberrimi adit^s ad Reges, and urbes, etc.
tolerante Senat^^, and connivente Rebup: quam miserabiles passim Lanienas sibi
extruunt! which I will render in English, not for their sakes that should and
may heal this Disease, in Policy, but for the stupid Generations sake that
insensibly are abused, and the complaint of Feuinus I will make known to them,
in sense nearest our purpose: it is this. That such as steal for bread are
clapped in Irons; but now a days the Practice that alone belongs to true
Physicians, is manacled by Empyricks. Thieves, and Murderers are justly
punished with death, but these welcomed Murderers are in Authority and esteem
with people. What care to keep the Plague from Court, or City? and the Plague
of (the very Antidote) Physic, Quacking Mountebanks are admitted in the
Bed-chambers of great and small, compared with whom the Plague it self is
Physic; and how large a shambles, and Butcherow (were they quartered near one
the other) would such make? and all this connived at by the Senate and State it
self. So far Fevinus; I wish the case had not been translated into England,
before the Complaints came into England; but how unnatural and unsufferable
this Toleration is, let Reason judge, which take in the most advantageous
delivery of Poesy; and hear Persius Satyr 5. Publica lex Hominum Naturaque
continet hoc Fas, Persius Satyr. 5.

Vt teneat vetitos Inscitia deblis Actus,
Diluis Helleborum, certus compescere puncto
Nescius Examen? vetat hoc Natura Medendi.


Take the sense without any loss, in that Originall-equalling Translator, Mr.
Holiday. The Law of Man, and Nature does deny
Weak Ignorance the Privilege to try
Forbidden things. Transl.
Do thou mix Hellebore
For a sick Patient, who nere tryd'st before
To weigh't exactly to a Dram? The Art
Of Physic bids thee not dare act this part.


Most justly therefore might Camerarius in his Sylloge Memorabilium, Cent 1..
70. Beata ergo est ea Respublica (imo ea sola) in qua Istud Horatij verum.
Navim agere Ignarus Navis timet, Horatius Epist. lib. 1. Ep. 1.
Abrotanum Aegro
Non audet, nisi qui didicit dare, quod Medicorum est
Promittunt Medici; Tractant Fabrilia Fabri.


That Commonwealth, yea that alone is happy, where that of Horace is true,
lib. Epist. 2. 1. (thus near the sense.) The unskilful (more than Shipwreck)
fears to guide
A Ship, Transl.
to compound Physic the untried
And simple dare not, Physics not for Fools
To meddle with, each handle their own Tools.


What Politics permits, or should in this case, hear Shopfius speak: [ Ex
legum Authoritate datur Redhibitio si quis fucum, etc.] Does Law forbid a
Fuller to meddle with dying? one Trade to incroach on another, be they never so
near akin, (as I may say) and shall the practice of Physic alone he like the
Spanish Trade, free for any? and if you will not punish them as Homicides,
surely you that have the power will not endure Clippers of money. Such are
these Physicians, as Forestus lib. 2. c. 3. wittily; only herein worse, says
he, they corrupt and deface Caesar's Image, but these the Image of God himself:
the Mercenary Bandetti (that will kill a man for twelve pence) in Italy may be
of the same Corporation with these bold Homicides, only herein these latter
outgo the former: They are hired by others, these by the Murdered People
themselves; so that it is hard to say which are the greatest Murderers, the
Patients, or the Physitia^s. To such kind of Quacks that Story in Agrippa may
be well applied: when a great Contest in discourse had passed about the
pre-eminence of the Lawyer, or Physician; one witty Arbitrator asked what was
the order used at Executions, to have the Thief, or Executioner march first,
answer being made, the Thief, he gave the pre-eminence to the Lawer, and
appointed the Physician to follow, as the Executioner the Thief. But it is a
blindness (generally) in People never cured, till the Grave dust is flung in
their eyes; and from that Powder of Experience they too late find that their
Judgments of a Physician were diseased (and that unto death) as well as their
bodies, If you would hear more of this rare Physician and his Feats (for I am
sick of him) enquire of sad Families, and merry Gravemakers, in a Churchyard
Term.

CHARACTER 3. The Valentian Doctor
IS one that has done his Exercises in Fees, or by some superior Fiat is
created Doctor; but for the Participle Dectus (the Abilities requisite for the
Profession) he may fling his new Worships Cap at it: for he came to Doctor (it
may be) per saltum, or say some years of Duncery spent in a Gown, never had any
thing in him Magister Artium, but his belly; covetousness or necessity makes
him now turn Goldfinder. in a lesser volume (by how much close stools are less
than those other Mines) that is Physician. He saw money might be got by the
Profession, be he able or no; therefore his Degrees he is resolved to get:
Doctor he will be, though but Doctor of Valentia: of whom the Italian Proverb
says, Doctor di Valenza, Longa Robba, Corta Scienza. So the Gown be long, no
matter how short the Scholar. The two Elements of this Ape Doctor, (the Foil
of deserving ones) are Pride, and Ignorance; by the (...) he scorneth to join
with any that writ^ not Doctor, or is not of the College (though his
understanding, or standing be above either in him) by the latter he often
joyneth with the Disease, contrary to the intention of Physic) to the patients
becoming the Martyr of his Ignorance, and dying for the faith of his Abilities.
He will talk little before the knowing Graduate, out of Ignorance, before the
ungraduated Physician out of Pride; If to the patient alone, it is in a
Language himself cannot construe, nor he would some should over-heare. His
Prescriptions are [ Syllanae Proscriptiones] (as my Lord Bacon excellently)
Sentences of death, rather than directories of Recovery, because made rather in
set form, tedious and impertinent, more for show than propriety of application,
to disease or Patient, to vary ex re nata, according to variety of occasion, is
besides his Formulae Receptarum, Model of Receipts: He considers not the
parability, or Propriety of Medicines, it is not unusual with him to prescribe
things out of use, or reach, or season, so his Bill may but make a show on the
file, it mattereth not. He pretends to Magistralls, that none but his
Apothecary and he must understand. He will put Nostrum, to Album Graecum (it
may be he keeps a Dog on purpose to make it, and then he may indeed) Pilulae
de Tribus, or the like he wraps up in this blind Nostrum; and he, and his
Apothecary must keep them for a Secret from the world (least their Theft be
betrayed) who together study all sordid ways, to keep the Nap on the Scarlet,
and his Doctorship from being thread bear. Candid he is to no stranger, he
will be sure to contradict Curtius; as Cardan relates of one so called, a
Physician in Venice, because he was a stranger, and practiced amongst them, he
was still crossed. If he prescribed hot Medicines, the other Physicians would
prescribe cold, and omnia perturbabant, in all things they did thwart him: if
the patient recovered, they cured him; but if he miscarryed, Curtius killed
him. Our Valentian Doctor is not more Laconick in his knowledge (as the Proverb
before cited assures us) then he is. He is like that Laco (in the Historian)
in this peevish temper, of whom Tacitus says, Consilij quamvis egregij quod
non ipse afferret inimicus, and adversus peritos pervicax, Hist. 1. 10. p. 265.
editione Lipsiana. He was always an Enemy of the Counsel (though never so
good) that he gave not himself; and an obstinate Crosser of men wiser than
himself. A Disease in Physicians too common, as well as in Statesmen; as
Doctor Primrose shall witness in his De Erroribus vulgi, c. 2. In genere autem
notandum, majus impendere Aegrotantibus Periculum, ab omnibus profitentibus
Medicinam, qui ea leviter imbuti, quam ab ijs qui nihil omnino norunt: fiunt
enim Audaces, Garruli, melioribus obganniunt, resistunt, atque illis sese
praeferre aut saltem aequare gestiunt. More mischief comes from such
Smatterers in Physic, than those more ignorant, by reason they are more bold,
talkative, and impertinently thwart the other, thereby endeavoring to equal
or prefer themselves: And indeed our Valentian Doctors Credit is principally
built on the disparagement of others: If he had been called sooner, or had the
former Physician gone this, and this course, no doubt the Party might have
recovered; the nature of the Disease being in it self benevolent enough, with
such like easy practices of Detraction (which I count as easy as arrant
railing, or profane wit, the two easiest labors of the Tongue or wit,) does he
patch up an esteem among the credulous vulgar. They are the very words of the
forecited Author.

Observavi in Quibusdam hanc malam consuetudinem, ut quicquid probe Medicus
quisquam dixerit contradicunt, ut famam aliquam ex alieni nominis Ruina possint
aucupari. I have seen many (says he,) in a peevish crossenes, contradict what
ever another Physician has said, or done, though never so Judiciously
Pertinent, that on the Ruins of another Fame they might build their own. He
is in short but an authorized Mountebank, that will speak good of none, and do
good to few, and that by chance. Indeed I think this Ape Doctor might have done
the Apes cure, that the story mentions an Ape did on a Physician that lay
dangerously sick, and his Servants, (perfect in that of the politic Directory,
Tacit. Hist. 1. Servorum Manus subitis avidae, and tanquam apud Senem
festinantes: catching what they could from no long continuing Master: The Ape
in this imitating them, gets the Doctors Cap, and came and sat down by the
Physicians bed side, which made him fall into such a Laughter, as broke his
Aposteme, and occasioned his Recovery. Such a cure, and Magistrall against
Melancholy, beyond the Syrup, would our Dr. be no doubt in his Formalities: not
but that degrees or fair trialls of men's Abilities, are commendable Politic
Shiboleths (discerning betwixt names, and things, that no ingenuous man will
decline, or disparage, (whose, Conveniences suit with them.) but when such
external Additions, are all the real worth; we may say of such A Formalist,
claro sese deformat amictu, it is hard to say, whether the degree does more
misbecome him, or he dishonor it: for that of Dr. Primrose is an undeniable
Truth; Non solet enim Qui hodie Doctor non est, cras scilicet futurus, repento
fieri propterea doctior, neque si eo gradu abstineat, fiet Doctor quodam
indoctior, lib. 1; de vulg. Erroribus c. 2. That is, He that writes Dunce on
the Vespers or Eve of his Doctorship, does not alter his Copy, and go out
Scholar next day, though he commence Dr. nor is he the less learned, or
Physician, that has not wrapped his Abilities in Scarlet, which often times
blusheth for the ignorance it covers, according to that following truth in
the same Author, and Chapter. Plurimi enim Medicastri hujus Artis ignari, aut
ea levissime imbuti, empto in peregrinis Academijs Doctoris Titulo, aut saltem,
se emisse simulantes, and sic ementito Honor, superbi domum redeunt, ut Civium
Sanguine, and Divitijs saginentur: which, because the fault is not confined to
Italy, take in English; many Medicasters, pretenders to Physic, buy the degree
of Doctor abroad, and come home and sell it for the Lives and Monyes of their
own Countrymen. As for the true Abilities of our Valentian Dr. his natural
Philosophy, what is it, (if He have tasted of Aristotle's well,) but a Systeme
of vulgar Errors? which he endeavors to maintain against all opposers,
with a sic dicit Aristoteles, though, Quae dicit Aristoteles? what Aristotle
does say, is so much a question, that Charity must assign, which limme of the
contradictions (frequent in his works,) is most probably his Opinion, and most
agreeing to the sense of so great a Master of Reason as in himself,
(Detraction it self will confess,) he was. But such Philosophers as this Dr.
wrong an Author, (worthy of esteem for many things,) in misunderstanding his
Truths; and themselves, in blindly beleiving the Errors of the compiler, or
compiling of those works that bear his Name. It is I confess a Philosophy too
general, to know too little, and believe too much: and for Physic, our Doctor
is pertinaciously either a G^lenist, or Paracelsian, but he is too raw to be
Judicious in either, too wilful to be a Conciliator* of both. His Ethics you
have heard are Pride, and her Train, Scorn of others, admiring himself, and
benefiting none, etc. so that here is scarce left any thing of this titular
Motion, but the Cap and Scarlet, containing in THem, for Intellectualls,
Ignorance; for Moralls, Insolence.

MEDICINAL Observations and Characters, Containing 1. A Live Dissection of
Selfe-killers, and their Accessories, or of Patients and their Tenders. OR A
Commentary on that part of Hippocrates his first Aphorism, (...), etc.
NOthing more ineffectualls, nothing more discredits the Physicians Endeavors,
than the Patients Practice, and Tenders unserviceableness. Hippocrates did well
to front his Axiomaticall Experiments, (his book of Aphorisms) with the grand
Miscariages in the practice of most able Physicians, among which his (...),
including the Patient and attendants among the Causes, seems to arraigne the
Patient of self-destruction, and the loving discourtesie of Friends and
Tenders, The Disease of Patients Minds.
of kind hastening the Sick to a Cure of all diseases. They and the Diseases
of the Minds of Patients continue, or end, their bodily infirmities too soon;
to sum up which, would be a Nosography, and tract of Diseases as large as any,
treating of the Bodies distemper. I shall rank them therefore into such as
precede, and go before they fall sick, such as accompany their sickness, and
such as follow. Among the first are 1. Blindness in their Choice. 2.
Lamenesse in their Address, by the first, to some Physicians they come too
soon; by the latter they often come to the best too late: the first may be one of
those two Infirmities of sight, (...) Dimnesse, that (contrary to that Patient
of the grand Physician; Their Diseases preceding sickness.
that took Men for Trees,) takes Trees for Men, or else-Heel makers,
Carpenters, or such wooden Practitioners would never be taken for Physicians.

2. The other (...) whereby they see afar off, but not at hand; So do men
discern I know not what fitness in men that come from far, but in our own
Countrymen they can see nothing but what is ordinary, in both proceeding from
false principles of Judgment, and choice; and that either from themselves, or
others.

The^r Causes.
1. To themselves, novelty, and boasting are set up as great Arguments of
Abilities.

First, for Novelty; New-come is the only welcome to his Fancy: give him any
that come but last Tide from Gravesend, come but now over in the Packet Boat,
that has but English enough to write, Me cure all these Diseases, par la
Grace de God; Our Patients head aketh presently, and he makes all the have
home to piss, to send it to this All-Things (because nothing he can
understand) who cured him, he says, next under God; of that our Physicians
were feign to fling their Caps at, and so soon, that he had not time to know
the Disease, before it was cured. Whether this famous man keep to private
practice, or mount, he takes it ill of any of his Friends that will not be
sick on purpose to send to him. O what a rare Country were this Island (cries
he presently) if it had but as good Physicians as Remedies. He sees none of
his own Countrymen to be compared to your traveled outlandish man, who
makes nothing (to show his skill in curing of a Disease) to procure it on
himself first, be it even the A La mode Pockes; and because People shall
believe his Abilities, he can bring good witness he has cured it twice, or
thrice on himself. And who would not put his life in such a man's hands?
especially if you knew what he has done.

2. And that it is the second false Principle, his easy credulity of brags,
that take much with such easy Souls, that will believe him faster then he can
lie, he will believe he cured the Emperor of A fistula, the King of France, of
the evil; and that his Holiness has not had a stool but by a Clyster by him
administered, for whole months together. He does verily think death is afraid
of him, and sickness shunneth him where ever he comes. He wondreth that
Hippocras, or Gallon (I, or Parcelsus either) be so much in, or among men's
Books, and in so much credit with Gentlemen, and thinks it merely
unacquaintance with this rare Adventurer; that not only has done more than
modest Physicians will speak of, but will do more than Nature, or Sickness can
puzzle him with.

But then those Principles of choice that come by contagion are as bad. Our
Patient it may be will not trust to his own Judgment in choice of his
Physician; but the matter is little mended, for it may be he is as competent a
Judge as my Cosen, or Ant, that told him of such a famous man, or than (the
Oracle of Censure) such a good woman, yet pray let him hearken to her story. O,
Sir! yonder is a man lately come (though it may be she have had forty Groates
returned her (when she has brought a Water to him) for to be perfect in her
following Lecture) that I never knew his fellow (and I have carried Urinals
this thirty years) She of her own knowledge knew of a Maid had like to have
been with Child, had not he discerned her inclinations a little before in her
water (and believe me, he that is a rare Waterologer, is no ordinary Coxcomb)
he will tell us as much by a man's Water, as others by a Scheme of his Nativity;
all the Diseases he has had, and shall have, and that in his Fortunes as well
as his Body: he can tell what Trade he is of by his working-dayes Water, and if
he see his Sabbath-dayes water, he will tell you what Religion he is of; but
for a woman (known, or unknown) with Child, let not her send her Water to him,
that would not have it known; he can tell whether the Father would have his
name known, and for a need name it without saying Parish.

Then for Diseases, he might wish his skill less, for he loses many a Fee
(for Visits) in regard he knows as much, and can prescribe to as much
purpose, on sight of the Water, as without it, or on a Visit: He will tell you
what Tooth it is that aketh, and for the place of the Disease, whether the
Apoplexy of the Patient lie in the knee, or arm-pit, or any other part of the
Body, within, or without: you would bless your self to hear how skillful he
is in that, the best Physicians are but little knowing in: he could almost make
you an Almanac of your Diseases for the time to come of your life; when, what,
where, and how they will take you, unless prevented; nay, he finds out more
in it, than any yet ever found in the Water. The Anatomy of man's body, parts,
and use, he can teach by the Urine. Whether the Liver lie on the right side (as
they call it) and Spleen on the other; whether the Kidneyes be fellowed or
single, and how many Hearts most men have (believe me, skill indeed) with such
wonders, their Books speak not a word of. If I lay a dying, no man should be my
Physician but Him: and can one, after all this, think you, find in his heart
to send to any of the College, and one of these booklearn^d and
Schollard-Doctors?

But there is a more subtle contagion, that makes a wiser sort (especially in
their own conceit) misjudge; and that is blind success (else some Coaches
would not be seen at some doors.) If any (whose practice in Physic is nothing
but the Country dance, called Hit or Miss) has cured some old grief (as
they think) that was just now taking its leave, and by some slow Energie and
virtue of a former course, just now thrust out of doors: even they that should
be wiser, never examine what method or course has been taken by the former or
latter, but looks on the departure of the Disease as routed by the daring
undertakings of the last comer; which if true, if done immethodically, is no
more a rule for curing the same again (much less all other Diseases) then one
Swallow brings a Summer, or can any more promise success again, then a
blind man shooting at random can promise to hit the same place twice: Would
men put on their considering caps (they might sooner put off their sick caps)
and did but know (as Ingenious Physicians do) what a dangerous Syllogism mere
experiments make, he would confess, that from having cured the same man, in
the same case, by the same means, cannot be drawn argument or direction
sufficient for the future, since the very time may so alter a man, that there
must be variation allowed in the Remedy, for alteration of temper and
constitution; nay, in the same Disease, what in the beginning may be remedy, in
the state and vigor may be poison, and the same Potion that in its due place
administered, may do the Patient good, in a wrong, may do the Heir or
Executors good.

He that sets up upon no score but some Book of Receipts (experimented in
some general mortality, where only their Hits, and not their Misses are
observed) may make an excellent Physician for men condemned, bad Wives, Elder
Brothers, tough Predecessors (in Offices or Means) all which are condemned in
the wishes of their concerners, since that is true of Damascenus, Operari ex
libris, absque cognitione and solerti ingenio periculosum est: and for them
that on bare and blind success make choice of such; none can wish them worse
then their dear bought experience, or advise them better then to send first to
the Parson, before to this Physician (indeed not unfit (according to an
Institution of the Cannon Law, first to send to the Priest) if always
observed.) And pray let the Scrivener come along (with that Sanicida Pensioner
to the Sexton) only leave out that clause in the Will, Being in my right mind
and perfect senses, etc. Or take that counsel, Ecclesiasticus 38. 11. Give a
sweet savor, and a memorial of fine flower: and make a fat offering, as not
being: (As a dead man, says the Margent.) And now abide the test of thy famous
Physicians Recipe taken out of some Wormeaten Book, and with him as Catholic
as the Roman Religion, or universal Medicine, and which has without doubt
(for some Generations) raised and kept up the price of black Cloth, and done
Drapers, Parsons, and Sextons more good then the sick (but confident)
submitters of themselves to this Empyricks cast of the Dye; for to no other can
I liken or call such practice, or afford them any other name then Zandainelo's,
with whose History (as their Character) I shall conclude the blindness of
Patients. He was a famous Spanish Physician, to which Fame he thus arrived. He
had all ordinary Diseases in one Paper, and Purges, Simples, and other Drugs in
another: after he had visited any man, and felt his pulse, etc. He never
desired they should tell him what they ayled, or where their pain lay; and
prescribe nothing in the Patients House, saying, Physicians should first study,
and then prescribe: (this was spoke like neither Knave, or Foole^) and coming
upon the paper of Infirmities, he let fall a Dye, and how many the chance was,
so many Diseases the party had, but principally that whereon the Dye fell: the
same he did on the paper where the remedies were, and prescribed that which
the Die lighted on to be taken so many times as spots on the chance: if the
sick were pained in the Head, he would discourse them into a persuasion it were
in their Hand or Toe; he was very fortunate, and so famous; but on his death
bed he confessed his course, with this Apology, Porque el dexaba en las Manos de
Dios, etc. He left it to God and Fortune, to know the Disease and Remedy,
whereas through Malice or Ignorance, others were the Death of many men.

2d. Fault preceding.
But to come to the second preceding Fault of Patients, and that is Lamenesse
of Address, the Physician is the last or late sent to, after trying this
Bodies Mithridate, that bodies Cowslip water, another Dragon water (with which
they will do more Feats than St. George himself) another Plaster for the
Wrists, and when all will not do, then Mr. Doctor must be sent for, or it may
be, (which is bad enough) they have tried nothing but what Nature can do, and
after Days for Phlebotomy, or any requisite Purgation are past; and cold
sweats begin to fright them, O then look out for some help: and so many times
the Physician comes so late, as but to share with the Patient in the Infamy
of his Miscarriage, whom he beholds with his facies Hippocratica, his dead
looks, enough to fright Physician, and Friends; he looks (it may be) as if
his Funeral Sermon were preached, and his four days in the Grave past, and the
Doctor sent for, not so much to a Cure, as to try his skill in ante-dating
resurrections: or if not quite so bad, yet it is so late, as little strength is
left in Nature to actuate and assist the working of Remedys: but to proceed to
the Diseases of Patients in their Sickness, but beside it, which is a vertigo,
an inconstant demeanor.

2 d. And now the Doctor is come, In their sickness.
let us see his entertainment: why it is with, welcome Sir. I made bold to
trouble you: which I had done sooner, but that I thought it would have wore
away: or at least my Neighbors Surfeit water (that has done many good) might
have saved any further trouble: and now the Doctor begins to be the Patient,
such Trialls of Patience do salute Him.

1. Some would only know, whether he thinks they shall withstand it or no. I
would be loath, says one, to Physic it too much. I hope it is but a cold, if
I could but sweat or sleep, I doubt not but I shall do well.

2. A second he would willingly take somewhat, but nothing but what is
comfortable and you must not deny Him to make him sleep: he always, when he
has been ill, found nothing did Him so much good as Rest.

Talk to him of any Vomit, or Purge, alas his Body is too weak, he never took
any sick Physic in his life: and humbly conceives this no fit time to begin:
and a Clyster, no though he dye for it, he cannot think of it: if the Doctor
will have patience, (as he must) the Patient wants but Pen and Ink, and he
will prescribe his Physic, which at last must be some Cordial or strengthening
(the Ludden of Them all,) what think you Sir of your what-sha' come Water and
Diascord, sure it could not be amiss: by this time the Doctors Trade is taken
out of his hands, if he will underwrite his Patients Bill, he may; if not, the
Patient is sorry he troubled him, if he find any need of taking any thing else,
he will send to him, he would willingly try a day or two further: and so paying
his Patient, (the Doctor) a Fee (and well he deserves for suffering by him,
if not for doing any thing for him) and so farewell Master Doctor.

3. A third, and most hopeful promises he will do any thing appointed, and
nothing thing forbid but is constant to neither any course of Physic nor his
Physician: whose Back is no sooner turned, or at least a Vomit or Purge taken,
but he is weary of Physic, and welcome that Neighbor that balleth in his
Ears, come, come, fall me to Kitchen Physic. I was just as you are, I never
mended, till the Cook was my Physician. Well* the next visit, the Physician his
welcome is colder, and then; Sir I took your Physic, but I find no benefit by
it: I shall desire to referr my self to God, and strength of nature: I shall
wait till my change come, to life or death; though indeed it is but his
inconstancy waits the change of his Physician; and pretty tolerable that, if
so well: it is often the change of Physician for some Woman, either with too few
Teeth, or too much tongue. Some good Neighbor that prideth it in charitable
killing Folks. A complaint of Andreas Dudith in Schaltz. Ep. medicinales, Ep.
26. p. 32. Vetulae triobolares, quaedam etiam Matronae illustres in Polonia
Medicinam faciunt plerumque stillatitijs suis quibusdam liquoribus, and
Pulveribus, quibus si nihil proficitur, ut plerumque fit, ad medicos
deferuntur, etc. That they may be accounted some body, and Do-goods; or pray
send his Water to Burford, Darking, or Rigate, if that good neighbor have not
so much skill, as good meaning; if not, try some men, so they be not Graduates
(unless in some Nurses Favor) and have no more Books than Doublets, nor
Doublets than backs; no matter how obscure, or beggarly, if my Ant, or
Kins-woman commended him, for what good (she was told by one that was told) he
did to one in a sad condition, with a plain easy Medicine (too dear bought for
the fetching) it is somewhat hot indeed in working, but fine, and cool in
Operation.

Well, this Panacea, this mend-all Medicine is taken, but now if it do not hit,
and my Gentleman miscarry, how good are they to Ignorance! (that are ready
enough to slander the rational Physician) and take off all blame, with, alas
his time was come, I am sure this would have done good if any thing: but at the
approach of whom must this Coarse bleed? or may not Melancthon (if he were
Coroner) file the Patient on his Bill of selfe-executioners, according to his
Rule, Qui barbara immanitate, and deploranda jnscitia contemnunt Praecepta
sanitatis, Mortem and morbos ultro accersunt, Lib. de anima: Those that through
their own barbarous ignorance contemn right courses to health do bring
diseases and death upon themselves: and whence does this way-ward inconstancy
come, but from ignorance, that Periodicall Diseases must have their times like
Tides, and the fault is neither in the Physic or Physician, if nature be not
as nimble as their wishes or hopes. And then for Chronicall Diseases of long
continuance, how do they (by changing Physicians or Remedies unadvisedly) but
begin a new Game, only the channel of their Fees a little diverted, but the
current of Humors neither diverted nor drained: more patient under a course
they would be, if they allowed Diseases their foot pace departure: which the
French Proverb allows, Maladies (say they) viennent au cheval, retornent a
pied, Sickness posteth to us, but crawleth from us: happy it were for
Patients, honorable for Physicians success of their labors, if men would but
truly deserve the name of Patients, when sickness is on them, if they would
take counsel timely, and obey it patiently.

Mercurialis complains in his Observations of the contrary, specially
Melancholy men, qui plerumque Medicis molesti ut alia alijs adjungant, Consil.
53. Melancholy men are most troublesome to their Physicians, to have the course
of their Physic changed. Nay, ijs proprium, etc. says Crato: Consil: 186. If
things fall not out to their mind, and they have no present ease, it is the
property of some, chiefly Melancholy men, says he, to seek another, and
another, and twenty one after another; all which promise cure, but perform
confirmation of the Infirmity. And Janus Damascenus his Rule might somewhat
allay the itch of changing Physicians. Qui plurimos consulit Medicos, plerumque
in Errorem Singulorum cadit, He that consults with several Physicians,
smarteth under the errors of each. And against change of Medicines (but on
advise) hearken to Montanus his Counsel, 31. Dum ad varia se conferunt, nullo
prosunt, While they try all, they profit by none: What Herodotus says of the
Babylonians, (and some of other Nations) that when any was sick they brought
him into the Marketplace, every one communicating his Experiment, thereafter
the Patient regulated his cure) is familiar with us. Every Visitant is become a
Physician; one that scarce knew any, but Crop-sicknesse, cries, no such
Apothecaries Shop as the Sack-shop; Temperance he c^unteth a Consumption, and
sober sleeps Introducters into Melancholy: No Disease but thirst, he says, and
no Recovery but quenching it. But I leave this Physician to a recanting Fever.
Another he advises; take some Pills, and after that a Carduus Posset (or some
two, or three things he has taken) and I will warrant you. But above all,
comes me one with the worst advise of all; give him comfortable things, feed
him with some Chicken, or Rabbets; let him eat what his Stomach serves him
for: he will not allow his Fever one fasting day, though it have almost made
Ember week in his Vitals, and Naturals; and though as strictly commanded by
Hippocrates, as ever Council commanded Lent, or Saints Eves to be observed.
And too general is this loving mischief, of turning plain Fevers or
Distempers into Surfets; while according to the known reason they distract
Nature, a Pepasmo ad Pepsin, from concocting of the matter of the Disease, to
the digestion of these Juscula charitatis, slops of good will. Should a Patient
be bound to give all his Advisers a Fee, he must quickly be removed (though an
Alderman) to the Hospital, there to be sick sub forma Pauperis. I know no
true reason of the length, or dodging of some Diseases (and chiefly Agues) than
the inconstant hearkening to (and use of) any remedy taught them: No that
golden Rule of Montanus might save silver in their Purses, and easier renew the
Lease of men's lives; were it embraced, and followed: it is in his 31. Counsel,
for a noble Matron. Si curari vult, indigebit, diuturna Perseverantia and
pertinaci Patientia^ obediendo fidelibus Medicorum Consilijs, etc. If she will
be cured, she must have lasting Perseverance, 3dly. Patients Disease after
sickness.
pertinacious Patience, and obedience to the faithful advises of Physicians,
etc. But I pass to the Disease of their Recovery, the Gout in their hands,
that Martial found in a Client. Litigat, and Podagra Diodorus, Flacce, laborat,
Sed nil Patrono porrigit, haec chiragra est.
No Fees for's Law? Diodorus Gout
More lies in his hands than feet, no doubt.


And now our Patient has gone through all his own cross Purposes, and
Mis-behaviours, yet is of the mending hand (no, in his Body, I would say) for
his Gratitude sickneth) all the ill humors of his body ad manus amandantur (as
they term it) run into his hands; where such a Gout settleth, he cannot reach
the Physician his hand (if you would never so fain) and such a costivenesse
has seized his Purse, nothing but a Tax, and Suffimigium, or smell of Match (a
strange course for Costivenesse) can loosen it, much less the Spirit of
Gratitude (some drops whereof, all Chemistry can scarce promise us) And now
methinks I hear the Parrot change his note, from a hundred pounds for a Boat,
to give the Knave a Groat: and whereas at beginning, it may be twelve pence was
little enough for casting the Water; now a few of them are too much for the
cure. Which sordid Ingratitude is maintained by a worse (for this may fall upon
Inabilities, but (that which the poorest may afford) they are now niggardly of
good words) and a malevolent Palsy of their Tongues must make good this Gout
of their hands; for what is their language now? but slandring all the
Physicians care, by fathering the Cure on some other; if it be but a Neighbors
Gelly of Hartshorn, or some comfortable Mess of somewhat or other they last
took; what ease they found? it did them more good than all the Physic they had
from the Doctor, or Apothecaries. How did a little Violl of the Syrup of Clove
Gillyflowres that I had from Mrs. such a one, how it refreshed me! I might have
saved money in my Purse, and have been sooner well (for ought I know) had I
h^arkened to my friends that bid me not meddle with these Doctors: But suppose
he was obedient, and pretty orderly* and took little, or nothing but by the
Doctors directions; why then either he was quickly well, (which is worth double
Praise, though not Fees) or longer under the Doctors hands. What work does the
Sophistry of Ingratitude make with this Dilemma? If quickly well, it was but a
small matter to do, or a small matter did it, scarce worth speaking of (much
less paying for) if longer, he doubts he took too much Physic; he might
have been better if he had given over sooner. Nay (which is the lowdest lie of
all) some are not backward to impute their Recovery, to leaving off: a fine
compendious way of thanking the Doctors care, if not an Atheistical slighting
of Medicines appointed by the Grand Physician, God himself, Ecclesiasticus*
38. 4. The short, and long is now no sight so unpleasing as their unsatisfied
Doctor; his feet are cloven now, according to the Epigrammatist, Praemia cum
poscit Medicus; vade Satan.
Doctors ill Angels are, that Golden Ask.


When they are brought at last to some satisfaction, to Doctors and
Apothecaries: What strange Topic, and Argument for Abatement do they use? that
they never mention to Mercer, Brewer, Butcher; etc. I am a poor man, Sir, and
have a charge of Children; perswasives the Chandler, and Alehouse would be
deaf to. Nay, the length of the sickness (which implies the longer
attendance, and pains of Doctor, and Apothecary) shall be urged. I have been
at great Expenses several ways in my sickness, and loss of time, etc. Such
crosse-graind reasoning has Ingratitude. They never use any of this stuff to
their Sow-gelder, or Farrier; only every penny bestowed on their own health
they count lost, and flung away, and pray give the Doctor (thus used by your
unworthiness) leave to think so too; and give him leave to repent the Cure, as
having injured the World, in longer cumbring the ground with such Cattle,
though good man he is to be excused; without he should go to a Figure-flinger,
and know before hand how the Patient would behave himself after the Cure: he
cannot tell it by the water (it were the best discovery the Water could afford)
or his Charity blinds him so (if it be to be discerned there (that he cannot
believe such baseness under the visage of a man. And so I leave the Doctor
sicker then the Patient, with the smell of Karkasse and Carrion Gratitude: and
I pass to the Accessories of this Manslaughter, Tenders Faults.
the Tenders (or Nurses, call them what you please) and their Faults. I doubt
not but Hippocrates was wont to find sometimes his Patients Window full of
Cawdle-cups, or Porringers, or some Scraps of forbidden Chicken, Rabbets, or
the like courteous mischiefs (out of their due time) which made him add this,
(...), attendants to the Aphorism of Indemnity, (as I may term it, for it
saves from blame, the honest and rational Endeavors of a Physician) for he
found such Tenders that more loved their good Master, than sound Master; that
is, that would humor him, so long as thereby they could keep him good to them,
though mischievous to themselves: for what is all the care out of the Patients
Chamber, in the Apothecaries Shop, or Doctors Study, if Errors be committed
there, that may undo more in an hour, than can be set up again in a seven
days circuit? If their good Master will have cold Beer, he shall; alas what
would you have him perish for thirst? and a little can do him no harm: If he
will eat, they are glad to hear his Stomach is come to him; what will you
starve him? he is now taking his leave of sickness, or Physic, now he can eat
again: But the sad consequences Physicians know, and I leave to Patients sad
experience, their best Eye-water.

A second fault is to conceal the Faults, or Transgressions through the
Patients wilfulness, or some Visitant Practitioners Persuasions. Jone comes
it may be with somewhat in a Glass (under her Apron) that did her Husband
good, when the Doctors had given him over (or rather he them) pray drink this,
it can do no hurt, if it do no good (and a hundred to one but Popy-water (if
not Syrup) is somewhat in it) Well, it may be when the Doctor comes again, he
finds in his Patient some pretty Bedlam looks (if not tricks, after this
preposterous Opiate) and nothing must be known what was done; they cannot tell
what it should be without his want of sleep, or some Cold taken without their
knowledge. And judge you, how men's lives are dallied with.

To conclude, through the default of Physicians, the Theory of Physic is for
the most part Conjecture, or Controversy, through the default of Patients, the
practice is but Lottery; and that at both ends, either to get handsomely in, or
crediblely out of: For the first Fortune, or (that which is as blind and
unconstant) Opinio vulgi, Opinion of the vulgar, dispenceth Prizes to
Ignorance, and Impudence; were it not so, a corner of a Street would not have
more Patients than the best Physicians Hall. And any kind of fellow on two
planks, and three Hoghsheads (as empty as his own) would not so easily cheat
that Creature, quod vult decipi, that will be consened (or it shall go hard)
the common People: Nor would broken French or Italian, in a disguised
Englishmans mouth (or broken English in an Outlandish man's) be more persuasive
than Latin, or Greek, I, or the sobrest sense in their Mother Tongue; though
from one, whose vigils for public good, and health have brought him low, that
has almost made himself a Sceleton, to preserve others from being an Anatomy;
every drop from whose Pen is an extract from the Counsels of Kings, and
Emperors Physicians, Experience of former Centuries, and Improvements of their
own. Yet such is the Lottery of entrance into Practice, that Fame, or some
accidental Cure, must have a greater influence on his lift into Employment,
than solid Merit: And then for the lottery, and hazards in getting out of any
particular Employment, the mentioned Miscarriages in my former Discourse
confirms. Against the first let the ingenuous Physician Antidote himself
with that rational verity, A piu tristi Porci le meglior Pere, the sorriest
Hog often lights on the best Pear. But above all Recipe Ecclesiastes 9. 11.
and I will secure him proof against all disturbance at the blind Praeteritions
and regardlesnesse of Fortune, or the Purblind Vulgar: the Receipt above
mentioned is thus made up. I returned, and saw under the Sun, that the Race is
not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet Riches to men of understanding, nor yet Favor to men of skill, but
Time, and Chance happens to them all.

Against the last if possible get that L^crensian Law enacted, which Aelian
mentions in his various History, Lib. 2. 37. That they that drank Wine in
their sickness, without the Physicians Prescription, were to dye for it,
though they recovered; or (if it must still be lawful for people to dispose of
their lives according to their Mother-wit) get a nil conscire Sibi, a discharge
from the Court of Conscience; that he neither winkt at his Patients Errors, or
through Supine Drowsinesse slipped into any himself, to the making of his
Prescriptions, for life, and health as dreadful (as my Lord Bacon wittily) as
Proscriptiones Syllanae, Sylla's Proscriptions to certain and speedy death.
This doing, there will be less fear of the Coarses bleeding, if he be invited
to the Funeral, than at the following of some of the Mourners, whom we leave
with the Coarse it self, for the Crowner to give in his Verdict of, and to
answer for the Manslaughter, at ^east (if not worse) fearing they are never
like to hear not guilty pronounced for them; but rather the largnesse of the
Bills of Mortality, filed on the score of them and such as they are. And now
the Dissection is done, I will wash my hands in the Laver of Charity, with some
good wishes for such, as scarce can wish well for themselves. I wish them men's
sana in Corpore insano, Sound Judgments (in unsound Bodies)^ to guide their
choice of their Aesculapius, but wish them a settled dislike of his Sister
Circes; by whom the Poets meant old women with more Receipts than hairs; or
(which it may be are most) years, whom they signified, together with the
Rabble of cunning woman, good woman, etc. (they call them that spend their
Husbands I know not what, in Syrupes waters, and Salves (besides Herballs) to
set up the charitable Trade of Widdow-making, and Orphan-making. I say, when
they made this Circes Aesculapius his Sister, they intimated lately that the
Creatures above mentioned, were Physicians Rivals in all Ages (it is my Lord
Bacons own Observation, Lib. 4. de Augmentat. Scientiarum. I wish him in the
next place, nimblenesse in his Recourse to help, but as much Slownesse to
groundless Change: This doing he may live out the days of his appointed time.
At which, Patient, and Physic must make a stand, and where I must leave him,
since even my wishes cannot bring him one step further.

Learnings Apology.
IN the shape of a Creature without Reason, the Tempter tempted us to
Knowledge: In the shape of an Angel of Light, he would now bring in Darkness:
At first the Liar told us we knew not enough; now he would persuade us we know
too much: He would (nay did) insinuate in our first Parents undoing subtlety;
now to their Children endeavors to commend a self-betraying innocence of the
Dove, sequestered from (and therefore liable to) the subtilty of the Serpent: He
is still endeavoring to bring Goodness and Piety into scorn with Learned
men, or Learning into contempt with Good men. And since he first divorced
knowledge and practice in our first Parents, he is loath they should ever marry
again: in order to which design, how would he feign persuade men, Sion and
College were profanely* coupled? and that the Jerusalem of God knew no such
Building; no Universities necessary in new Canaan, where all the Lords people
are Prophets: a consequence I confess true, were the Antecedent so, which I
think sober Reason is not to believe was ever purposed should be, since such
an universality of Prophesying would make it useless, being there would be
none to be instructed. You may take away the Pewes, where all are Pulpitarians.

But I shall contract that somewhat (a Discourse of this nature admits) that
may be said in the defense of Learning, into these two enquiries: First, who
and what have been against it: then who and what for it.

The first place I find Learned men slighted in, was a Court indeed, but such
a one whose Religion was Idolatry, and knowledge darkness: grosser then that,
they felt (the Plague of their hearts and understandings contending with, and
exceeding far the plague of their eyes) in this Court: the chief Enemy was a
Dipper, Pharaoh (the first and last of Kings that were so, as the Red Sea can
witness) he could not away with Moses skilld in all the Learning of the
Egyptians, nor with eloquent Aaron; it is like his quarrel was, They were
Seducers of the people, Incendiaries, Mutineers, Factious, with such like
cavills ignorance has invented against ability of Parts, or any pre-eminence
in knowledge.

A second famous Leader under the Prince of Darkness (whose quarrel no doubt
this is) and opposer of any light Truth might receive, but from Heavens
Bonefires (the Faggots of Martyrs) was Julian the Apostate, who outwitted all
the persecutors of Christians, in shutting up the Schools of humane
Litterature from them, and banishing them the Universities; he knew there was
no such Island to banish them to, as that of Silly; matriculate, or rather
Garrison, Truths Champions, in Dunce Tew, and he feared not the conviction of
his own Apostasy, or of the Dotages of Paganism.

To make up a third Officer in this Brigade, pray let that Pope be Listed, that
made it a capital Crime and Heresy, so much as to name, in jest or earnest,
the word Academia, University: it was Paul the second, that hearing his Uncle
Eugenius was chosen Pope, changed his profession of Merchant, offered at
Learning, but being dull, and of incurable blockishnesse (says my Author) he
became a hater of Virtue, and Learning, yet after arrived to the Popedom; by
this triplicity of Enemies to Learning, we may guess its opposition proceeds
from any Spirit* but that third Person in the Sacred Trinity: one of whose
Gifts (to say truth) it is; even but to conster Sense; For from that Cloven
Tongue, descends the Gift of Languages, which to learning is but as the Porch
to the Building: examining the kinds of its Enemies. They appear to be blind
Zeal, mistaken Policy, or rustic Ignorance (so justly to be called even in
the gentilest Contemner of it) what they are, and say, I shall present together.

1. Among such as would persuade the world, Religion were too pure to mix with
the Gentilisme of Learning. The Heretic (guilty and conscientious to himself
of Refutability) takes place first. Remove the Smiths out of Israel, and fear
never a Malleus Haereticorum, Hammer to break in pieces the Forgeries of
Error, which then flourishes, when Knowledge and Arts wither.

2. A second sort of them, are the Impotent, or Lazy; such as cannot or will
not reach at the Abilities of others, and therefore would have a level in
Qualifications for preferment, or employment, and all because themselves can go
no further* than such Orators ( Quintilian at the end of Tacitus speaks of)
Equidem fatebor me in Quibusdam Antiquorum vix Risum, in Quibusdam vix Somnum
tenere. When I read some* I can scarce forbear Laughter; when others* sleep.
Or that in Horace de Art Poetica, -- Male si mandata loqueris,
Aut dormitabo, aut ridebo. --
Their Storehouse holds forth nothing but one of those two Simples, Opium,
or Apium Risus (as the Botanists call a Plant.) They bring their Auditors to
that pass, they can scarce hold either their sides in, or eyes up; and
whatsoever is not according to this Directory of dullness, is Popish, or
Heathenish Learning. A sober Scholar (that makes Hagar know her duty, and not
o'retop her Mistress) that makes his Learning serve his Religion is well
used, if he escape with one of these Appellations. If any discourse happen in
honor of Learning, presently they fall on that common place, how much
mischief it may do without Grace (which none denies but the Atheist) and
because it may do hurt, it shall by their consent do no good. If a man cloth
his discourse in a Language that is not second hand English, or but one degree
above the offensivenesse of Caterwauling, why he is affected; if he preach so,
he preaches himself: they are rags of the Whore of Babylon, etc. As if there
were no difference between speaking to a Congregation, and a Teem. Nay, I
believe Banks his Horse was taught in better language, then some would have
Christians taught. I know not how it comes to pass, but many speak to God as
they would not speak to men; and preach to men in courser phrase, than they
would sell their Wares. Were some men's Petitions to men, as non-sensicall as
their Prayers to God, they would need no other ensurance of their denial than
the reading them; and scorn with laughter, would be their best Entertainment.
Some Justices of Peace are preached to, with more Impertinence, than their
patience would endure from a Malefactor; it would trouble their Worships (and
without any other Crime they would make the Offenders Mittimus) if he should
ramble from the purpose (in answering their Interrogatories) as it may be, does
their Chaplain or Pastor from his Text: and I am sure such stuff (from a Boy
in the School) as is tolerable (nay with some commendable) in the Church*
would quickly make his Master set the Psalm Lachrymae to his Scholar. And
thus they get Credit among some, for which at School they should have got a
whipping. What is this, but to deliver the Message of the King of Kings, as if
they came with words and phrase unaltered of some rubber of Horses heels, or
some such Potentate as Massani^llo, whose Messengers, if they delivered only
what he would dictate, must needs speak Mudd* and stinking Fish. But to reason
with the cleanlinest Dull ones of them, if to speak in Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit, be to speak with no more study and deliberation
than good men's discourses (to the edifying of one another) come to, Sermons may
be called in, and each Family may take its own Tithe: Since every godly man's
discourse is as much Sermon, and may be as effectual. I cannot therefore but
believe Solomon requires more in his Preachers than these do: for Ecclesiastes
12. 10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words* etc* (...) words as
good as one would wish, such as would please and delight; to be upright, and
true, (which is the latter part of the Verse) it seems is not al, though the
main required in them; but they must be words sought out (not Extempore) and
acceptable, they must not defy the Polishings of Art, but must be dressed in
some taking Garb suitable to the Audience, Vtile dulci, Profit, and Pleasure
must be the Preachers study, as well as the Poets: And whence such Dresses are
to be had but from Learnings Wardrobes, I know not. Thus you see, some Raylers
against Learning are barking Curs against some other Dog that runs away with
the bone. And that this complaint is not singular, take Causinus his Character
of them, lib. de forma Sacrae Eloquentiae, p. 739. Invenias enim, etc:

2. Another Division under this blind Leader, lazy Ignorance, is that of the
lazy Dispencers of the word, whom the Industry of others does vexingly upbraid.
The people are not more niggardly toward God (that care not for offering any
thing to him but what cost them nothing) than some of these are to the people:
They will afford them nothing that costeth them any pains, and study; to buy
Books, spends money, to read them, time, and truly they can afford neither;
it is not worth while to neglect their other business, to provide better
Provisions, since course fare will even do as well: Specially as these Cooks
handle the matter, that have persuaded them their course Fare is the best
(under that Notion of wholesome) and all other (but what they dress) to be
mere Quelquechoses, made dishes of no nourishing. And thus while they exclaim
against Preaching but once a Sabbath, they pretend themselves Enemies to that
laziness they are most guilty of themselves, for they preach not in the whole
year once, and some scarce in their lives: without such discourse may pass
for preaching, that is civilly used when called prating. The greatest (if not
all) the pains that they take being in the delivery; which are much like the
pains a Porter takes in an Errant from Paul's to Westminster: In Gods Errant it
may be they sweat, but it is with beating the Air, both with, and without a
Metaphor; the industry of their arms, not heads, each Exercise shall testify:
these are they Saint Hierome pointed at in that Character. Qui loqui nesciunt,
tacere non possunt: docentque Scripturas quas non intelligunt, prius
Imperitorum Magistri, quam Doctorum Discipuli. Epist. ad Demetriad. To speak
they know not, and be silent they cannot, and Scriptures they understand not.
They will Expound, they will be Teachers of the simple, before they have been
the Scholars of the wise. Another Character of these lazy Ignorances Causin
gives, with the Reason in the above mentioned place; which take at length,
since a word of it must not be left out. Cum maximarum Artium sint imperiti,
alieni Ingenij Florem aegris oculis intuentur, and malunt (quod cuique facilius
est) bonas Disciplinas Contemnere, quam ad eas Ingenium cum multis qui in eo
Pulvere a viris doctis ex^orbentur laboribus applicare, etc. Themselves being
as ignorant as one would wish, envy the Abilities natural or acquired of
others. And since to rail against Learning is nothing so great a task, as to
attain it, they exercise their Mother wit against Fathers, Schoolmen,
laborious Commentators, etc. or Sermons that smell of the Lamp; no, commend
them to that Giftishness^ can ex Manicis concionem excutere, Shake a Sermon out
of their Gown sleeves, or at Church-door choose a Text though they there leave
it, their Sermon coming not so near it, as the Pulpit is to the Porch; but
remit such Rushers not into the Church only, but Pulpit, to the Philosophy
School to be shamed. Epiclus in matters of less moment was of another mind;
when having the same Object, (as our grave Divines have against their studied
Embasys) that his Speeches to the people were still premeditated; Eras. Apoth.
335.
his brave answer was, Erubescerem optimo Jure, si tantae Multitudini
consulens, dicerem ex Tempore; I might justly blush, if being to advise so
great a Multitude, I should prate extempore. Hear this, and blush thou
irreverent babbler, that railest against him that pondereth, what he says to
God, or for God, to men: And for hasty frequency of Preaching (that is not
furnished from fullness) in the same School let them hear Pollio speak, who
confessed, Commede agendo factum est, ut saepe agerem, sed saepe agendo factum
est ut minus commode, By pleading well I came to plead often, but by often
pleading I learnt to plead worse; and Erasmus his reason is satisfying,
Assiduitate nimia facilitas magis quam facultas, nec fiducia, sed Temeritas
paratur. Preaching of the nature of discourse, for frequency, as well as
easiness, may beget facility, but not ability.

Well, we have seen the Pitiful who is, and in short the slender what is are
against modest Learning in Religious Division; Let us see in the same who and
what are for it; which if impartially compared, there might be some hopes, our
Librarys might be repreived, and our Colleges unsequestred. And that Learning
may be saved by the Book, she can bring that Book that shall not lose an Jota
unperformed, 1. Who for it. The 1. Penmen of God.
when the Heavens shall pass away, and the Elements melt; that Book of God,
the store house of all Arts, were other Books lost: witness Valesius his Sacra
Philosophia, and Alsteds Triumphus Biblicus: as for Eloquence, this Book of God
does so much speak for it, that it speaks in it, and by it. Let them give us
leave to speak for that, God speaks not only for, but by: if the holy Ghost
thought fit to speak to the World made, as God the Father did to the World
making, in Number, weight, and measure; Let the dull Battologist rail as long
as he will against the Logodaedalus, the Ponderer and shaper of his Discourses,
on such a serious Message, in so serious a Place. We may say of the Scripture,
as Vincentius Lirinensis of less deserving Tertullian: Cujus tot pene verba,
tot Sententiae, quot sensus, quot victoriae. Each word is a sentence, each
Sentence, containing somewhat of that Copia rerum and verborum, Spring of Sense
or Words, that Eloquence deriveth all her streams from. What choice and variety
of Figures? What strength of Expressions? that transcend all humane Authors,
you may taste by some Passages of sacred Writ; as that Job. 39. 19. (speaking
of the Horse) have Thou Clothed his Neck with Thunder, an expression befitting
the Majesty of the Speaker. What mighty lines has Isaiah? How does he set
forth the Dis-proportion between God and his Creature, the World? in Isa 44.
12. 15. 22. read, and confess Demosthenes, and Cicero, but Stammerers at
Eloquence; but low the highest Flight of the proudest Fancy. How are al Lyricks
out-gon by David's Harp and how do Salomons Proverbs, (for contracted sense)
worst Seneca? where is Their Conformity with this Book? that Count Silliness
sufficiency, and prating Preaching. Shall that Book contain the choicest of
Expressions; somewhat of most Arts? and in its Perspicuity Art, and Method
couched? and shall it be a crime, humbly to creep after in Imitation of this
rare Copy? Were the choicest Abilities chosen to pen the Prophecy of Christ,
and shall any serve for his History? shall we deliver glad tidings,
pitifully? must Gospel Preachers, (as the word is) make one sigh, or sick to
hear them? so as sometimes it is the Auditors passion, to hear their Saviors
so unworthily related; and it is hard to tell which would try our patience
most, Jobs Messengers, or Christ's Must the bread of Life be ground only by the
wind of every Doctrine? and whimsicall Wind-Mills? or by blind Horses in a
Mill, and not by those streams that flow from those two Fountains of
Learning, and ( absit Invidia) true Religion? God forbid: no, the Endowments of
the Evangelists and Apostles, were as great as any of Christ's forerunners,
although for Oratory, some of them (when chosen,) were no abler than the Fish
they traded in; and were every way fitter to catch Eeles than Souls: but when
called to fish for Men, they were endowed with suitable Abilities, and then no
more remained Dunces, than unconverted sinners; so their very Enemies seem to
confess in Acts 4. 13. perceiving these Unlearned Men to be such now, as it
appeared they had been with Jesus. (But by the way this example of Christ's
choosing illiterate men to this weighty Function of the Ministry, is no more
our Directory to follow, than it is to choose such as we (if possible) knew
Judasses as he did, or men of notorious wickedness of life, because he had a
Devil among his twelve Apostles.) You shall find Peter changing his style he
used, when he writ Piscator; now he lays the wrestting of Saint Paul's
Writings and other Scriptures to the charge of men unlearned, and (therefore)
unstable; And such were some of you* blessed Apostles! true, but now they had
conversed with him that could make them Commen^^able without Time, or Degrees;
and make them Docti without being Doctores, learned, though not graduated. But
look on him that is not ashamed of Learning, but confesses his Education; and
that is St. Paul: and do but hear him at the Bar, beating Tertullus at his own
Weapon, when as all Tertullus his Oratory could then (no more than I believe it
would now) not persuade any before whom he pleaded, so much as to wish
themselves Orators rather than Judges (Learned rather then Powerful) in
aemulation of his able Tongue. Paul's Eloquence went so far, as to make the
Judge tremble before his Prisoners, and almost glad to have changed Conditions.
View his Writings, and see how deservedly he had the Title of the Irrefragable
Apostle: so strong his Reasonings: how tart his Reproofs! winning his
Exhortations! Paternall his Admonitions; Artificial in his plainness,
convincing in his Obscurity: All the Accomplishments of a Divine or humane
Penman were met in him. The other Apostles Writings how knit with one
Methodicall Thread of Persuasion, able to draw even Gainsayers to assent! (as
to Logical and Analyticall heads appears.) But before we come to the following
Centuries, let us examine the Objected Probability of Paul's enmity to Learning.
I count him by (no wise) Preachers mistaken, that think his Ironicall Phrase,
the foolishness of Preaching, does countenance foolish Preaching; in which 1
Cor. 18. 19. he only declineth the reputed wisdom of Philosophy, to assist
necessarily the confirmation of Articles of Faith: or that he disparageth
serving (but sequestered or opposing) Philosophy, or Learning; which when
separate from, or opposite to Faith, or Piety, is but a more guilty foolinesse;
for that reason in the 25. verse: Aquinas on the place does well distinguish
between docere in sapienti^ verbi, quomodocunque modo intelligatur, and uti
Sapentia verbiin docendo, etc. Preaching in wisdom of words, and wise
preaching of the word. The former he does, says Aquinas, that from Scholastic
wisdom will have all, or the main props of his faith. Vtitur autem Sapentia,
but he makes a right use of such wisdom, that if he meet with any thing among
the Philosophers, etc. that is Serviceable, he takes it in obsequium Fidei,
makes it useful in explication, or application of divine Truths. But to
proceed to the following Ages, Clement, Ignatius, Dionysius Areopagita, etc.
prove the infancy of the Church Eloquent, and when she began to speak, spoke no
less learned then her Opposers. In the second Century Justin Martyr, Tatianus,
2. The Fathers in each Century.
Irenaeus, etc. as I find them Marshalled. In the third Tertullian, Origin
(who it is said writ 6000. Books) Clemens Alexandrinus (the Christian Plutarch,
as one calls him) and quoddam Promptuarium mansuetioris literaturae; Minutius
Foelix, Cyprian, who (Saint Austin says) robbed the Egyptians of all their
Gold, and Jewels, their Arts and Learning, when he joined himself to the
Israel of God, and set forwards to the Heavenly Canaan. In the fourth, Basil,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom; with whose name (as the ablest Barrester in the cause
of Heaven, the best Spokes-man for Christ to his Spouse, and who was among the
Fathers, as Paul among the Apostles for all manner of Abilities) I end the List
of Champions for pious Learning, though thence downward afford many more. Even
every Age has had Champions for the Truth, armed at all points against
Sophistry, and men qualified with all Abilities of Ambassadors for Heaven;
that contented not themselves with good meanings toward Heaven, or holiness
of life alone; to be all required in men chosen for such weighty Trusts, as the
Oracles of God, by them to be defended, and explained only by the Scripture it
self, and the private Interpretation of their own Conjectures, but used all
helps of divine and humane Learning; of all whom we may use those words in
Ecclesiasticus 44. verses 4. 6. 7. that they were leaders of the people by
their Counsels, and by their Knowledge and Learning meet for the people, wise
and eloquent in their Instructions, etc. and were the Glory of their times,
verse 7. Come we now to the last and lastingest Friend Learning has, and that
is Reason; which (when it shows the usefulness thereof in defense or
persuasion of Truth) if it leave not its Opposers convinced, it will aggravate
their Obstinacy, and argue their blindness incurable for it.

1. ^. What.
The usefulness of it in the defense of truth, see by Athanasius his want of
it at one plunge against the Arrians, where his want of that part of it (which
is the Languages more particularly) his skill in the Hebrew, put him to
needless, and shifting distinctions. Whereas it is Proverbs the 8. 22. Wisdom
was with God from the beginning (which wisdom by both is confessed to be meant
Christ) And they urged the Septuagints Translation, Created me, and so denied
the Divinity of Christ; he had easily evaded the Sophisme without a puzzle of
distinctions, had he known the word (...) signified to possess, as well as
create. Without question, were one to enter Discourse, or Dispute, it is not
ones Truly, I concieve, this is the meaning of the place (and, I believe it is
faithfully translated by such, and such pious men that undertook the work) will
silence a man (be he friend, or foe to truth) that appealeth to Originals. Then
for Deductions, how easy to impose Sophismes on one that knows no kind of
Logic, or form of Reasoning! which any love, but they that dispute for
Victory, not Truth; that care not how they silence an Opposer, though it be by
Impertinencies, so they be loud enough, and nimbly enough urged. Come to
others, that on good grounds enough, require some concent of History
Ecclesiastical, or Civil, for the explaining of some places of Scripture.
What shall my Friend do? that knows no History but some ten or twelve Sinces
in his Almanac: How long since the World was created, and when Coaches came
into England: that dares not lay a wager whether Edward the fifth was before
Edward the third; tell not him of Counsels that knows none (or at least
believes none) but his Common Council; calls all Popish Traditions but what
the Churchwarden and his Predecessors can remember. Will such a one be fit to
deal with one versed in History Ecclesiastical and Civil, Counsels, Law
Canonical, and Civil; weapons of use for Truth, as well as sometimes against
it, but of no use to our Artillery-ground Man, that never saw any Service,
never read any but his own Sides Arguments; meeting with any other he denies
conclusions, cares not for Councels, Fathers, Schoolmen, Reasons (all useful
in their course) so much as for one ignorant Neighbors opinion seconding his
own (for no otherwise indeed will he like any.) Judge you how fit such a one
would be to defend his Faith against Scholastic opposition: Let Saint Paul's
judgment be taken, who made not more fit by his hand then Pen, by Institution
then Instruction, for this weighty calling. He would have his Bishop (which if
no more then Pastor, the more to our purpose) one holding fast the faithful
word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to
exhort and convince Gainsayers; for both which how (contrary to this Canon)
unfit are the illiterate Rabble? Such whose Giftishnesse in Exhortation
amounts to a persuasive power indeed, but to what? Of their Auditors to
depart the Church, and spend their times better, then in hearing such holders
forth of words that they never were taught (nor ever in themselves can teach)
in stead of holders fast of words taught.

Convinced gainesayers and wranglers they are, in stead of convincers of such,
as the Apostle would have his Bishops; the tenth Verse of that Chapter compared
with Jude, verses 10. 12. 13. sets out to the full the illiterate Towns new
Teacher: there are many (there is a Rabble intimated, not selected ones,
instituted, ordained, rightly called, etc.) unruly, and vain talkers; here is
two expressive Epithets for this Rabble, and those are, rude and ignorant,
unruly and vain; what is wanting in solidity, you shall have in noise. And
because Opposita juxta se posita magis elucescunt, shadows best set off the
lighter parts of the Picture, it can be no digression to follow the Apostles
method in delivery of his Cautions for election of men sufficient for these
things (who I hope in fine, to the unmuddied judgment, it will appear meant
the Literate) which is as in the above mentioned place, to show their
contraries: I will therefore pursue it a little further. Jude limbs,
methinks, these Gospel Dark Lanternes (lights I cannot call them, without it
be Ignes fatui, Fools fires, Wills with a wisp, etc. (as our very Teachers
Meteorology wordeth them) the Apostles words are, verse 10. These speak evil
of the Things they know not: (the latter part of the Verse, belonging
principally to Ranters) Here behold again Ill Language, and Ignorance, as
their Matter and Form coupled; what is it but making the old Adage Canonical;
knowledge has no Enemy but Ignorance. Then in the 12. Verse he says, they
are Clouds without Rain: good for nothing but to keep the Sun from the Earth,
so are these Teachers hinderers of that Light and knowledge they cannot attain
to themselves. To say truth, though some call their profound Ignorances, New
Lights, they were better Anabaptised into the Appellation of Extinguishers;
carried about with every wind. And indeed if Privations could have Rations
formales, the very essence of them, or, immediate consequens Essentiam, (as the
Metaphysitians word it,) that which is but one degree from their Essence) is
their inconstancy. And how can it be otherwise? Since very ordinary Sophistry
turns their braine^, and vicissitude of successes, their hearts: you may know
very well by them, where the wind sits. And the two Poles of their own
Motions are Male-contentednesse, or Profit. Their Judgments leaning to one of
these Cardinal Points (even when we see no wind almost stirring) These are
the weather Cocks, not on, but against Steeple houses (as Churches are styled
in our new Childrens Dictionary) or if Lights, only in that Property of Flame,
that yields to every Puff of wind: but I forbear to swell this discourse
into a Commentary on that Character of St: Judes; (by them whom it concerns
counted Apocryphal) and leave them to the censure of the Judicious, (and their
own Consciences,) in that Character of Saint Austine, Lib. 3. de Schismatibns
(and cited by Calvin) Isti filii mali: Qui non odio Iniquitatum Aliarum, sed
studio Contentionum suarum, infirmas Plebes Jactantia sui Nominis irretitas,
vel totas trahere, vel certe dividere affectant. Hi sunt Superbi^ tumidi,
Pervicacia vesani, Calumniis insidiosi, Seditionibus temulenti. Qui ne Luce
veritatis carere ostendantur, umbram rigidae Severitatis suae assum^nt, ad
Sacrilegium Schismatis, and occasionem Praecisionis: now because we may
subscribe to that of Solomon, Nothing is new under the Sun, and because some
such people have been cast on our Shore, (the Island indeed suffering Shipwreck
(as I may say) when they landed) take the Character in English near the sense
of it; and Saint Austin complained of a Generation, that (not so much to
reform the Faults and Errors of others, as to confirm their own,) having
ensnared the silly vulgar, by the dazzle of their fame, (in some plausible or
other,) seek to engage or divide them; They are (says He) swelled with pride,
madly obstinate, treacherously slanderous, and even reeling with Sedition. Yet
least they should seem to want the true Light, They eat the shadow of
austerity of Life, over their Sacrilege of Schism; and for the justifying of
their separation. Thus far Saint Austine, and I would the Infection had
stopped, with the Period of its Description; or Life of the Describer: but
Christ's oportet, Silenceth our Vtinams: Offenses must come, therefore let vain
wishes go. I now proceed to the conclusion of Learnings usefullnesse in the
defense of Truth. What stout Defenders of the Faith can we expect they should
be? that swound at a Syllogism, purge both ways at a Dilemma and are ready to
make their own Testament, if they see a Greek one. Where has Error s^aled
Truths Walls? but where it found them thus slenderly guarded. Whereas on the
contrary, what defiance to Rome has the Church of England bid, from her
Universities? What Champions able to grapple with their proudest? It were no
Arrogance to affirm, Bellarmines Cause, and Writings have been enervated more
by the Church of Englands learned Fathers, and Doctors, than by any, or all of
the other reformed Churches; and what greater Triumph than to beat Adversaries
at their own Weapons? If they appeal to Fathers, why we have legitimated our
Church, as well as they (if not more:) if to Councels, we decline not those
that are incorrupt; If to Scripture, we are for them (I am sure have been) in
all Languages and Translations. But I pass to that other usefulness of
Learning in the persuasion of Truths: How unfit is he to be the Almighty his
Spokes-man, that cannot Pen a Petition for himself to his fellow Creature,
man? He can doubtless ill Descant (or enlarge) on that Majestic Preface, Thus
says the Lord, that goes to a Scrivener, to make him an Humbly shows;
although to one so illiterate too, that needs (it may be) the same help to
have it read, is the Art of divine Rhetoric, the most easy Trade of all
Trades? must tugging at an Ore, require a Prentiship, and shall Prentise, and
Master be equally gifted for Preaching? We think not Porters fit to send to
(or come from) Princes, and shall such (or those of no higher qualifications)
be fit for Gods Ambassadors? Would no Town choose him Recorder, that knows
not to write, or read his Name? and shall such a one be sufficient to take
charge of Souls? to plead our Cause, we can scarce find any able enough, and
shall any serve to plead Gods? and that with refractory man. Doubtless as
Divinity has much Assistance from humane Learning in this one half of a
Divine; viz. The power of persuasion: so all it can get is little enough to
deal with the Ignorant, peevish, and rebellious sort of men; Whose Godliness
is gain, Creed sense, and Happiness sensuality; with whom in their pure
Naturals, Heaven, and that inestimable Jewel in the Gospel, are Bables, and
Hell a Fable. Consider but the Task of the divine Orator, and judge you what
Abilities are requisite, and whether Saint Paul were not in some such
Contemplation, when he cried out, Who is sufficient for these things? Logic,
must lend him Analysis to make useful division of this divine Bread; Rhetoric
is the hand (as Logic is the knife) to reach it home, when divided, to every
hungry Soul. It is not every one that holds the Plow, can sow this Seed;
whistling to a Teem, and the voice of this Charmer are turned to several
Notes: It must be a search after acceptable words, that must furnish Salomons
Preacher (as has been said) he must have those Mucrones Sermonum, Goades of
the wise, that will prick up the drowsy, and forward the lazy hearer.
Rhetorical Topics are such Whetstones, that even the Sword of the Spirit
(that two-edged Sword) has often used, Nor has it waved the use of other
parts of humane Litterature: you shall find Poetry (despised only by such
whose knowledge arrives but to the understanding, or liking of woeful Ballads)
part of Saint Paul's reading, and by him quoted, Titus 1: 12: out of Epimenides:
(...), the Cr^tians are alwai^s Liars, etc. and let me crowde into a
Parenthesis, Aquinas his reason from the Gloss; ( Doctor Sacrae Scripturae
accipit Testimonium veritatis ubicunque invenerit.) Our Expositor Paul (says
he) of Sacred Scripture takes Testimonies of the truth where ever he finds
them: If among Dicta Gentilium, the Sayings of the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 15. 33. Out
of another Poet; viz. Menander (says Hierome) he has that cited place, evil
communication corrupts good manners. Sure Learning was no such Noli me
Tangere, in the Apostles account, when the Heathen Poets were not only part of
his reading (as may be replied) before his Conversion, but afterward used as
handmaid to divine Truth. Lipsius is of my mind in his Cent. 1. 99. Epist. In
Platone, Trismegisto, Arriano, Epicteto altas praeclarasque voces reperio; quid
refert a quo ^ae profusae, si ab uno illo Spiritu veritatis? Quam inspirasse,
ubi libuit, prisca illa Pectora, nihil ambigo. I find in Plato, Trismegistus,
Arrianus, Epictetus, rare and excellent Sayings; and what matters it by whom
spoke, so long as from that one Spirit of Truth? which blowing where it
lists, I cannot deny but many times inspired them. And a little after
illustrateth Learnings usefulness by a Simile: Vt in Praelio non Gladijs
solum, and gravioribus Te^is Res geritur, sed etia^ Fundatorum quaedam Opera,
and laevis Armaturae est: si^ in hac nostra contra vitia, and Affectus Militia
non solum illo Verbi penetrante Mucrone, sed etiam Philosophorum Hastis, and
Sagittis apt interdum and vtiliter pugnabimus.

In English to this purpose. As in Battle, not the Sword, or other Weapons of
concernment do only do the work, but the Sling, and lighter armed have their
use: So in this War against Vice, we may aptly use Philosophers, Orators,
Poets, besides the two-edged Sword of the Spirit. To exposition of humane Laws
we count University breeding requisite: and shall any (of Learning too little
to be of the Jury) be in divine matters a Judge-like Expositor? Shall the
Lawyer, justly enough, think scorn to be taught by the Cobbler in point of
Laws, and yet hearken to him (or his like) in exposition of the Gospel, with
submissive Reverence, and Assent, if not Admiration? Were not Bedlam larger,
than it is thought; or did not a ( manifest a Phrenesis) a general Lunacy, and
madness rage; men would not be so provident for their Lands, in choice of able
Lawyers (none forsooth able enough) but for their Bodies, or Souls; the name
Doctor, and Fame, gifted, commends any to them: in any thing else not worthy
to be their Clerks, or meaner Servants. Fellows having nothing in them
deserving the word gifted; but their Education, which indeed is very many times
of free-cost; not costing themselves or Parents any thing, but their shiftings
from one Servile Sphere of Employment to another. From the Stable to the
Parlour, and there from holding a Trencher at Tables end to handling a Bible.
Shall a Water-mans, (I conceive the Apostles meaning in this place) be of more
Authority then the Apostles own? If you will believe the whole stream of
Interpreters, (as the Phrase is) I must be excused from ascribing as much to
the Coach Box, as to the Divinity Chair; and cannot believe the Spirit of
Prophecy is quite gone out of Learned men, into Chaplains that wear Liveries,
and Teachers that recieve Vails: In which Rational Infidelity I pass to the
Apology for Learning against its other main Enemies; the selfe-conceited
Politician, and Ignorance, Rustic, or Gentleman, which I quarter in the same
Scutcheon, when they agree in contempt of Learning.

The first Aspersion of the Politician, Objections of Polititions.
is, that Learning does emollire Animos, and Militiae ineptos reddere. Your
Scholar can talk, or if he can fight it is but by Book: Methinks I hear the
Martial Ignorance say. A lie, we need not go so far as Caesar or Alexander, to
confute; our Civil Wars of these late years too sadly do it: Proving Scholars
know how to use all of a Quill. He cannot more Ingeniously use the one part to
write (Monuments that will outlive Trophies, and Memories of Conquests) than
he can as meritoriously wear the other part in his Plume. What Opinion the
Ancients had to this purpose, you may see by their Divinity, couched under
their Poetic Fables. And among other that of Pallas, or Minerva (their
Goddess of Learning) whom they feign born armed: from her Perseus (by whom
they signified War) had a Shield, a Glass to discern the Plots, and Counsels
of the Enemy. To her they assigned the Keys, and safety of Cities, or their
Destruction: By all insinuating, no such Soldier, as the Learned one, either
for defense or offense; what ere the Conjunction of Mars and Mercury signify
in Astrology, or Heavens, it matters not; I am sure at Courcell Board, and
Field, it is of more promising Prediction than their Disjunction, which will
appear in History of former Ages (since envy admits not present examples for
Authentic) where we shall find they have been united in Persons, and Ages,
Warlike, and prosperous. View the Specimens and hints of Caesar's Abilities in
Learning; as my Lord Bacon delivers them in Lib. 1. De Augmentis Scientiarum.
The correcting of the account of the year was no small Testimony of his
Astronomy; and witnessed he was as proud to know the Laws and motions of the
Stars, as to give Laws to Nations. What more effectual Rhetoric would you
desire, than to still a Mutiny with one word as he did? See the Story in the
above mentioned place. But his Commentaries witness enough for all: which when
we look on, we cannot tell whether he writ, or fought his Battles better. I am
sure the former does preserve (and otherwise had outlived) the memory of the
latter, as on another occasion I have penned my Conceptions. Ruined Troys Heroes
still in Homer live.
That Caesar ever was, is better understood
By what he wrote, than did; his Commentaries give
Both Life and Memory to his Text of Blood.


The same hand did use so well the Pen and Sword, he wanted but Life to begirt
this Globe with his Conquests. His Eloquence was such, that to the civiller
part of the World he needed but, Veni, Dixi, Vici; to the more barbarous (of
such expedition was his Sword,) Veni, vidi, vici, the sound of his Tongue, or
Trumpet, were enough to bring Cities to Parle, being able to woo, or force,
surrender. That Alexander was a Soldier, painted Cloths will confess, the
Painter dares not leave him out of the Nine Worthies; and that He was
Aristotle's Pupil, (and that with more Proficiency than many spend some years
in the University) History assures; so addicted to Philosophy, that his
Dinners were Philosophy Disputations: Problems his Banquet, propounded by
Himself, discussed by his Philosophers, (which were his constant Courtiers in
Camp, or other more stately Residence) moderated by his Tutor Aristotle. His
Meals were liker University Exercises than Refections: (it were to be wished
our Universities Exercises were not now Principally Meals, and that in
Natural Philosophy, no part so much debated, as de Alimentis, instead of de
Elementis; or that any part of Plutarch were read, but his Symposiacks! (but
wishes are in vain, I shall nere see it again) view what this great Sword Man
aimed at, and what He attained in Learning (to the shame of all Armed
Ignorance.) His Aim appears by his Chiding Letter to Aristotle, for
divulging his Physics; professing he had rather excel others in Learning,
than Power: and some Discoveries of Him attest, that He fell not short of his
Desires. What a Natural Philosopher He was, witness that Apothegme,
depromptum ex intima naturali Philosophia (says one of the most intimate
Naturalists, the Lord Bacon in the former place,) Mortalitatem suam maxim
pe^rcipere ex somno and Libidine, that Lust and sleep confuted the Dreams of
his Flatterers, concerning his immortality. Since Abundance, (superfluous,) or
want, are Arrhabones Mortis (as excellently the former Author (the Earnest
Pennies of Dissolution of Bodies. In Poetry how does He unflatter Himself, and
at once deride the Poets, and his Flatteries, when being wounded, he said, see
this is not such Blood as Venus Hand dropped when wounded by Diomedes. In Logic,
his Retort on Callisthenes shows his skill, who when desired once, (at Table
with Alexander) to take an extemporary Theme, and falling eloquently on the
Praise of the Macedonians, Alexander desired Him to vary, saying, in so good a
cause it was easy to be Rhetorical; and finding no less, on the contrary
part, Alexander used one of those Strophae Aristotelis (as he once termed Them
in another Case to Cassander) turning the Cat in the Pan, and said, etiam malus
Animus aeque ac bona Causa indit Eloquentiam, would a wicked invention make one
eloquent as well as a good Cause.

In Retorick, what more Rhetorical, than that He used of Antipater? when
commended for his not altering into the Habit of the Persians, at totus intus
Purpureus, inquit, but, says he, he is all purple within: intimating,
Humility was not always in declining the Mode, but as much Pride might be in
affected Gravity, as in changeable fashioning. In Politics how subtle a
Distinction was it he made between two of his Friends, whereof one did amare
andrum, the other Regem, one loved Alexander, the other the King.

Let Xenophon be added, who ex ludibrio evasit Miraculum, going out of Socrates
School, a Voluntier into Cyrus his Camp, after the death of Cyrus (without
Supplication to the Persian, brought the Graecians from Babylon home, when most
of the other Commanders of Cyrus his Army were cut off, notwithstanding his
Counsel of resolution, and making their way (rather than beseeching it) was
jeered by Folinus as Bookish, and gallant School (but not Camp) Advise.

2. A second Objection from Politicians, is, that learning spoyleth men for
Politicians, making them unfit to govern. But this History confuteth by the
unmatcht Quinquennium Neronis, and Decennium Gordiani Junioris. In one of which
Seneca, Nero's Tutor ruled the Roman Empire; in the other Misitheus, entitled
Tutor Reipublicae (as Capitolinus says) that the Commonwealth might better
spare many famous for feats of Arms, than these Learned Mend-faults (in men,
or States.) Take Senecas word, speaking of M. Cat^o Censorinus, who says, Quem
tamen Romano Populo hercule profuit nasci, quam Scipionem: Alter enim cum
Hostibus nostris Bellum, Alter cum Moribus gessit. Rome owes more to the Birth
of Cato Censorinus, than Scipios; for This fought with our Enemies, but the
other with our Vices. Senec. Ep. 87.

Pius Quintus, and Sixtus Quintus among the Popes, though mean Friars in their
Education, were as famous Popes as any nursed in Courts. Nay, such kind of men,
have this more honorable Elogium, or Commendation; that whereas indeed they
are not so crafty to suit with all occasions [ Per fas and Nefas] by wright, or
wrong to bring about their designs: yet they make amends in going the plain,
but sure way of Religion, and Honesty; which they that go, will less need the
pedling crafts of Deceit, Perjury, Dissimulation, etc. nor those Ragioni del
stato, Tricks of State, the mention of which Pius Quintus could not away with,
saying most honestly: They were mera Malorum Hominu^ Commenta, Quae
opponerentur Religioni, and virtutibus Moralibus; Mere Devises of wicked men,
set up against Religion and Moral Honesty. A Pope (if any) truly deserving the
name of Pius. Or grant that Objection in part true, that Learning does make
men's minds sometimes wavering and doubtful, out of a Scrupulosity bred by
reading of diversity of Rules, and Examples; yet the same reading shows them
the remedies of settling and clearing doubts: and as it shows them Rules, so
it shows them Exceptions and Distinctions, to discover what is demonstrable,
what conjecturall again: grant an Imparity of Examples, they meet with in
History, may somewhat wrest their Counsels and Advisos at first, to a
Difformity from the present Necessity: yet on deliberation (or most commonly)
shows them better the Rocks to be avoided, furnishes them with Cautions out
of a comparison of Errors, and ex alienis Periculis teaches a safer Prudence,
than any Politician whose structure of Observations is built only on his own
narrow observation of Occurrences, or of some Contemporaries whom he takes for
an Oracle of Policy. The Policy of such may be compared to Empiricks Practice,
that with some Panchrestum, Catholic Medicines undertake every thing; while
the rational Physician uses reason as his Eyes, and Experience as his Legs;
either solitary must be lame, or blind; so fares it with these Politicians,
that are gone no further, than that King would have his Son to learn no more
Latin, than Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere; these know no more Latin,
nor Policy.

3. But methinks I hear Politicos subsannantes Litteratorum Constantiam, the
shrewd ones of the World (as they would be thought, and called) upbraiding the
constancy of pious learned men, and see them pointing at such, with A there
goes your stubborn Scholar, that rather than alter his pace, or path (that
Conscience or Reason boundeth him in) he will be poor, undone; any thing but
the Ratio formalis, essential of a Suist, or selfe-polititian, that is
changeable. See you not his Perpetuana Threadbare* whereas a more changeable
Stuff and Garb, might prove contrary to its nature Sempiternum, never the worse
for wearing, his condition might rather mend than be worse, if he could but
learn that out of Tacitus, Histor. 4. p. 359. in 160 Lipsius his Edition.

I am the more punctual in quoting it, that you may see the Politicians
Gospel* as (as I may term it) in its Original. He brings in speaking
Marcellus, se meminisse Temporum quibus natus sit, quam Civitatis Formam Patres
Avique institueerint: Vlteriora mirari, Praesentia sequi: bonos Imperatores
voto expetere, Qualescunque tolerare. Such A Spirit were of A Save stake, if
not promoting Prudence, as they call it; but so is it not, not to tread beside
their Book, go beyond their Reason, to gain A Life free from Necessities and
cares: this, say They, was Seneca's Folly, who would live still as He and Nero
lived in that Quinquennio, five years Reign. He will sawcily be a Tutor still,
and check licentious Power, till He bleed for it. And Demosthenes, They take
for a foolish Politician, be he never so good an Orator, when he tells the
Athenians; Mea Consilia si recte attendatis, non sunt ejus Generis, per quae
Ego inter vos magnus, vos inter Graecos despectui sitis; sed talia ut mihi
saepe haud tutum sit dare, vobis autem semper utile amplecti. My Counsels are
not leveld at my own profit, no nor safety; for though they be always
profitable to you to receive, yet sometimes dangerous for me to give. But all
the Machiavells on this little Turfe, (we keep such a deal of stir on, to
lose Heaven) I can silence with that oraculous ingenious Apology of my Lord
Bacon, so often in this Discourse mentioned and yet so necessarily: for, si
quid tamen aptius exit, if any thing of sense or convincing Truth be in this
Apology, I acknowledge my self his Debtour for Hints, and some Enlargements.
The Oraculous Refutation take in its first Language, and second, (or to the
sense of it) caeterum quod attinet ad fidei constantiam, and Offici^rum
Religionem, quas certe Hominum Animis inserit Eruditio, utcumque eae quandoque
a Fortuna mulctentur, aut ex male sanis Politicorum Principijs condemnentur;
tamen palam scilicet apud omnes, laudem referrent. As for that constancy of
Faith, and conscienciousnesse of Duty, which for certain Learning does much
insinuate into the Breasts of Men, how ever some times they prove unfortunate,
or seem ridiculous (according to the wild Principles of some Politicians) yet
at length, with even the most (as well as Best) They will appear Praise worthy.

But I hasten to the Last Brigade of Learnings Enemies, Rustic Ignorance.
and that is clownish Ignorance of its worth, from that such small shot as
These Play, that it is an idle lazy course of Life. An objection I am sure idle
enough if we consider the nature of Scholastic Employments, which is such as
knows no vacation; being the work of that indefatigable part of Man, the
Soul: Employments that they love for their own sake, herein out stripping all
other Bustles, that are Levelled at Gain or Honor.

2. Another is against the, Fortunes of Scholars: do you not see, say They,
how threadbare slighted, contemned, and almost starved Their Bookishnes
keeps Them? the same Petronius Arbiter knew to be true p. 28. Qui Pelago
credit, magno se Foenore tollit:
Qui Pugnas and Castra petit, praecipitur Auro, etc.
Sola pruinosis horret Facundia Pannis,
Atque inopi lingua desertas invocat Arts.
In English to this Purpose.
The Merchant Venturer does thrive apace,
The fighting Swashbuckler wants not Gold lace.
Only the thread bare Scholar beats his Brains
For Arts, and has his Labor for his Pains.


But this is not more the misery of Scholars, than the fault of the Rich.
Those that have counting Houses forget those that have Studies; or if you will,
it is the preposterousnesse of their Day Book, and misplacing of their
Accounts, or misbestowings of their Plenty; the same that Crates, (one of
Diogenes wisest Scholars) observed in his Time, and jeered with these mock
Items. Coquo ponito Minas december, Medico Drachmam.
Adulatori Talenta quinque, Consiliario Fumum.
Philosopho Triobolum.
To the Cookten Minas.
To the Physician A Drachme.
To the Parasite, five Talents.
To the Lawyer Smoke.
To the Philosopher, three halfepence.


Not much differing from the Accounts of Modern Prodigalls, (or Misers shall I
call them, since they are both; the first on Vanities; and the latter to
Desert) what is it with them? but to my Faulconer 10. l. a year, the Curate
10. s. The Physician half a Fee; the Mountebanke more than he asks, etc.
with such like squintings on Desert: so that this objection of the Poverty of
the Learned, they may forbear for their own Credits sake: yet let Them call it
the Scholars Misfortune, not misery: since his wealthy Soul is, Contemptae
Dominus splendidior Rei, raised to such a Pitch, as he with more Gallantry,
Scorneth these admired things of the World, than others do enjoy them: nor is
it a Hermeticall Stoicisme if you believe Livy in the beginning of his History,
aut me Amor Negotij suscepti fallit etc. no Commonwealth was ever happier;
while Poverty and Parsimony was in credit and esteem, and (as Another says) as
Red is Virtues Color, though from a Guilty Blush, so often times, Recte statuas
Paupertatem esse virtutis Fortunam, quamvis a Luxu and Jucuria accersatur.
Poverty is vertutes Fortune (though many times caused by their own Prodigality
and Luxury) bringing Men to prize things truly to be valued, and contemn things
falsely admired; and it is a witty observation, (and solid with all) of one, on
that of Solomon, Buy Truth, (and that is wrapped up in knowledge as the Kernel
(in the shell) and sell it not, as if He thought fit to lay out Riches for
Truth and knowledge, but not Them for Riches. Though every Age have too many
such Merchants that sell Truth; Abilities, Conscience, and Heaven, for
inconsiderable (wealth I can scarce call it) but Salary.

But methinks I hear that objection of Dionysius, if Scholars wealth were so
much to be admired, and their Poverty more in Opinion than Reality; how comes
it to pass, That more frequent Rich Men's Houses than Rich Men their Schools?
to which take Aristippus his Answer to the Question: Quoniam Philosophi norunt
quibus egeant, Divites nesciunt* because they know what they want, and so do
not the Richs: nor will the argument persuade a wise man to wish himself
therefore the illiterate Patron rather than the knowing (though receiving)
Scholar any more than one would wish Himself the contributing Patient, rather
than the receiving Physician; as at another Time, the same Philosopher retorted
to an objection of the like Nature.

A third Topic of the Scorn of the Ingenuous, is a contemptible obscurity,
(as they term it) of life, but for this they are rather to be envied, than
pitied, especially in times disturbed, with Pliny's caution, modo secessus
isti, non Desidiae Nomen, sed tranquillitatis accipiant, if their Retiredness
be a studious Tranquillity, and not disguised Slothfullnesse.

A fourth is against the Behavior of Scholars to others, or for Themselves;
as first, that they do not apply themselves so sutably diverse times, (as were
to be wished) to those they have Business with. They cannot flatter, cogge,
nor dissemble as others: nor admire, (or at least pretend so) every thing for
good, or wit, that this fine thing, and that other painted, utters.

To say truth, (when sometimes They too sawcily peep behind the Arras of
Gayety, and see the Fool, or Knave) They cannot but laugh when they make legs
to Knights. Well, it is out of the Scholars way, but will you have the grounds
of it, and in some sort Excuses? They are two, either Nobleness of Soul, or
honest simplicity: by the first, they look higher, their wonder is of higher
Election. They use not their Jacobs Staff to observe Spangles, but Stars, nor
a Curious Dress, so much as Coma Berenices in the Heavens; nothing attracts
their serious Respect but Wit, or Honesty. By reason of the second, They study
not Men for any other end, than to give every one their Due, and to teach the
unlearned, or the willing to do the like, not to make their ends on any man's
weakness.

Scire volunt ^ecreta Domus, and inde timeri, is torn out of their Sententiae
viriles: They are not Spies, on the Breaches, or imperfections of Men, to make
their advantages of them; which is the part Hominis parum candidi, sed astuti,
and bifidi, not of clear spirited Souls, but Cheats.

Another Imputation is, the behavior of Scholars is sometimes offensive and
ridiculous to those learned ones in Courtship, and Complement; or his Tongue is
not acquainted with the hawking Dialect. He cannot talk to, or of a Hound
(Sciences indeed fit to bestow a Methusalems age on) our despised Scholar has
not the Mode, how ever not the Clothes (which is harder for him to attain) for
to be a Proficient in the former: and for the latter he could allow them
recreations, but not his business, or worthy his talk, or time. He varieth his
sports; his winged time he flies at the bravest Game, Knowledge, Piety,
Immortality. His hunting is of Nature through her several doublings and
Labyrinths: instead of a Horse-race commend him to that Race, and Match of
Senecas making, Lib. de Brevit. vitae cap. 9. cum celeritate Temporis, utendi
velocitate Certandum est; between times swiftness, and his nimble
Improvements, or Attachments of the precious (but posting) Minutes. But in
answer to the former Imputations, he may use the reply of Themistocles, when
desired to play, and sing; I cannot fiddle, says he, but I can make a little
City a great one: He cannot cringe to a Fan, and utter a speech to it, but he
can make one for the thing that must. He cannot it may be speak to a pack of
Dogs (without it be out of Ovid) but he can speak to the purpose: He is not
Critical and exact in Garbes and Fashions, but he can correct a false Printed,
or Translated Bible. It may be to some business (and his own profit too) he
cannot apply himself (because he will not) as other Bustlers can; but he can
profit others, and give what money cannot buy; Such wisdom divine, and humane,
as abundantly recompense his Fumbling in the World, at Wealth, or Honor. He
cannot talk it may be so judiciously on the Exchange, but hear him in Paul's,
and it will do your heart good (or should at least, if it be not past cure)
what he wants of Abilities at the Custom House, he makes amends at a
Steeple-house (as those Sacred Oratories* are in derision called.) Then for
humane Affairs, how is Learning parcelld out, and interwoven with most Trades,
from the Merchant, to the Mechanic? The ones Accounts regulated by
Arithmetic, the others square, rule, and compass by Geometry. The Invention
or Advance of most Arts write the despised Scholar Creditor, as borrowed from
the Bank of the Encyclopaedia, or general Learning; and shall the same Wares
be of esteem in the Pedlars Pack, and of little or none in the Merchants
Warehouse? A Surveyor of Land be more esteemed, than a Geometrician? an
Astrologer than an Astronomer? Nay, any one of these, before the general
Scholar? But by the way, in my reply to the Imputations against Scholars
Behavior, I would not be thought to excuse the Cynicall Solaecismes of any
Scholars Behavior, that remembers not that he is among men, and not in a
Desert, or Platonic Commonwealth. Only much excuse may be allowed his
intention of mind on Studies, that he is impatient, should be interrupted, by
the Impertinencies of being great rich, fine, or somebody in the eyes of
Nobody; or such as to him appear little better, for sense or judgment. This I
am sure of, on an Impartial survey, and comparison of his Abilities, with his
cannots (as I may term them) and these, or such like Imputations, seemingly
black and dark, will discolor into Encomiums and just Commendations. But I
draw to a conclusion with these mixed Apologetick and Encomiastick Assertions
sertions, that the Learned with sobriety^ and zealous with understanding, are
hated by none but such as understand them too well, or too little. The first is
the Devil, that knows there cannot be a better Agent for Heaven, or Engineer
against Hell. The other is the ignorant World, whose blindness misseth not the
Suns light, and stupidnesse feels not his warmth. And for Fortune, grant she
be not the Scholars Mistress: I am sure the World is but his Slave, nor
better respect has it from him, than to drudge to his Necessity, and the like
lower Designs. This Apology for Wisdom divine, and humane, divine Writ has
furnished us with, that Wisdom is justified of her Children: And such as are
matriculated in Albo Sapientiae, have not Wisdom for their Mother, can make no
great brags of their Father. Let the Herald give them never so rich a
Scutcheon, I am sure it will be but a Fools Coat^, let him wear it on his
Finger, Barge, or Coa^h. It is too much Ignorance has made people mad against
Learning; for it cannot be from the Spirit to rail against his own Gift (which
he that will deny Learning to be, is an Atheistical Dunce.) It is without all
question a Beam from the Father of Lights; and when serviceable to divine
Truths, part of Goshens Privilege above Egypt (when it was the Emblem of
Hell.) What to think therefore of its Enemies, I am confirmed by this Truth
(with which I conclude) that Rebellion against Knowledge, is but Allegiance to
the Prince of Darkness.

The Apologists Apology.
AN Apology for this Apology may be requisite, both to the Unlearned, and
Learned.

To the former that are unlearned, but rather Friends, than Enemies to it (for
to such the whole Discourse is an Apology) the visible ruin of Learning begun
by some (and by more desired) may serve for my just defense, in that I
undertook to speak a word or two (how well or ill soever) in its behalf; since
it cannot be objected I fear shadows, or defend what none opposes. As to my
self I am satisfied, if no more follow but a Liberavi Animam meam, to let the
world know I voted not with those Philistimes, that plotted the putting out our
Sampsons eyes, once seeing Englands (as it may be called, and has appeared
heretofore, against all the Enemies of Truth.) For I fear after it, it may act
out the other part of the Story, and pull Ruin upon its self. Who sees not
that Prediction (of Psellus his Grandfather) not far from being fulfilled.
(...). That time will come, men will live worse than Beasts. D^us omen avertat,
God prevent our fears, and put into the hearts of those that sit at Helm, to
preserve our Land from being an Island merely of speaking Beasts.

My Apology to the Learned is, for handling a good Cause so weakly: But with
this comfort I will satisfy my self, (and I hope them,) I have not spoke so
slenderly for Learning, but the best of its Adversaries speak more pitifully
against it.

The happy Match.
LArge is Cornelius Agrippas Regiment of Declamatores contra scientias (as a
worthy Imposer of names calls him) Railers against all humane Arts and
Sciences, though his Followers do it in a worse sense than he; who proves them
vain in the Apostles sense, in comparison of (or sequestered from) the knowledge
of our Redeemer. But he perhaps will appear singular* that shall bespatter
Gospel Revelations (as some boldness calls even Ignes fatuos suos, their
fools fires) with the least blemish of Culpability; though with his leave that
so thinks (or without it) I cannot but bewail (not admire, or reverence) the
so much boasted Light, in Deeds of darknesse-dayes; or those two sad Divorces,
that excellent French man, Charron de la sagesse, has bewailed before me:
viz. Of Probity and Piety, coming from the first divorce of Knowledge and
Practice, or (as he terms them) Science and Sagesse, that is, Knowledge, and
Wisdom, be it humane or divine; whiles separated from Moral, or Christian
conformity in Affections, Passions, and Actions. These days of ours are not so
far from Adams in days, and time; as near them in Knowledge, say some, in
Disobedience say I. We boast Revelations of such brightness, as if some in
these Gospel days might be able to preach the second Adam to the first, and
be his Schoolmaster in the Mysteries of his Salvation. But show me the Fruits
of this Tree of Knowledge, or where the Tree of good life stands; for they are
both in Gods true Eden. How comes it to pass, that French Proverb is true in
English? Ange en l' Eglise, Diable en la Maison. An Angel in the Church and a
Devil in the Shop; no exercise of the following day, witnessing our presence
at the Morning Exercise; as too well know those that deal with us: never was
more verbum vitae in ore, the word of life in our mouths, nor less vita verbi
in more* the life of the word in our lives: Our former complaints were against
times of Popery, because zealous without knowledge; our latter and present may
be against Popery inverted, or knowledge without zeal; but hard it is to
determine which is sadder, their blind zeal, or our lame knowledge; since we
cannot tell whether Bedridden Sight, or walking Blindness advance least in the
paths of Virtue, or that narrow way that leads to life. The first cannot so
much as start in the Christian Race, the latter not run right; dark zeal
moves too fast, and benumbed knowledge too slow. How does Experience witness,
that Generation is not quite extinct, that God complains of; Labijs me
honorant, sed cor ^orum long, They honor me with their lips, but their hearts
are afar off. The Christian Isle of man (as well as the Jewish (has too many
Leagues between the heart and mouth, or between the heart and Cape, or head of
it. Which that it may appear shameful, hear the light of Reason, and
Philosophy School complaining of knowing Do-littles. Seneca in his 108. Ep.
Quae Philosophia est, facta Philologia est, and gives the causes, Aliquid
Praecipientium vitio peccatur, Qui nos docent disputare, non vivere: Aliquid
Discentium, Qui Propositum adferunt ad Praeceptores suos, non Animum excolendi,
sed Ingenium. The Doctrine of Manners is turned (says he) into Discourse, and
that through fault of both Masters, and Scholars; they teach to dispute, not
to live, and these come to them to mend their Wits, not their Manners. And in
another of his Epistles, that many made Scholas Philosophiae Otii Diversoria:
One would have taken the Philosopher to have been one of our Supervisers; he
has so lively expressed our case. Does he complain they came as much moralized
from the dancing School, as Philosophy Schools? Change the word School into
Temple, and may not even Christians complain, men come as much altered from the
Bear-Garden, as Church. And whereas he complains Philosophy was turned into
Philology; may not we too sadly complain, most of our Christianity is become
Discoursive noise? our most gloried Abilities but attempted expositions of
Sacred Mysteries, (too deep for the Elephant) wrangings against clear Truths,
almost as much as Practicing against them; if we do afford the truth our good
word, how do our Pharisaicall Cottingtons mix the commendations of good
Sermons, with those of their bad wares? or in praise of Men, how familiar to
honor you with the commendations of this Teacher, and that good Man; till your
Bargam shall testify, they brought away more of Mr. Foxley's Name than Sermon.

Thus while their Tongues only are Confessors, and their Ears Professors;
their Practice of Piety, and of moral Honesty becomes Martyr's. Thus does
doing of Gods will (as that exemplary Doer of his Fathers will between two
Thieves) suffer now between the Gnostique, and Solifidian. One will father all
it does against the written will (even its shameless Libertineisme) on clearer
Illuminations, than David's Lantern to his Paths can give. The other his doing
nothing on his sufficient to Salvation Faith; beleiving indeed all Christ
suffered, but nothing He commanded. Beleiving and Knowing does so share the all
of some new modeled Christians, that there is nothing left for that (now
impertinent) Question, Mr. what shall I do to be saved? the very Question is a
work of Supererogation, and he is condemned for a Meriting Over-doe, that
reckons good works, and keeping the Commandments, any part of the whole Duty
of Man. Auricular Profession has made good works Popish, and that in the
practice (if not opinion) of Guides and Followers.

1. As for Guides, what ever of truth was complained against them for
Disagreement of Life and Doctrine, if there be not as much Cause still, give me
my complaint again. It is never well, where the Preachers Hand leaves off to
Preach (as well as his Tongue) by examples of Piety: easier by far will Men
hearken to his Exhortations to Charity, at whose Door the Parishioners may see
the Poor releived, than to any two hours breathed Miser that is free of
nothing but his language. the most ordinary Auditour can censure him (as
blamable, as that Actor that cried O Terram, O Earth, and pointed upwards, O
Caelum, O Heaven, and pointed downwards) that Preaches contempt of the World,
and practices Love of it. No doubtless, He that hops to be a Converter of
Souls, must be A, Polycarpus (one bearing fruit) as well as A Chrysostom, (a
Golden tongued Orator) He that is both, it may rightly have a third Name added,
to signify him; and be termed justly A Holds-worth, near which character, as
well as Name, (I dare affirm,) came a reverent Divine of our own, Si quis
alius, (absit invidia) (with Envies leave) if any of late times. One that
seemed so well acquainted with this Match of Knowledge and Practice, as he might
be esteemed both the Priest and Bridgeroome, matching them first in himself,
and endeavoring the like in others. So that his Name seemed an Imposition more
of merit than Nature, having it no less justly from his spiritual Mother (the
Church) than truly or primarily from his natural Father: of whom, and his
like, I shall ask no extemporary Commentatours concent (with my Gloss) to
presume that Text is meant, Math. 9. 37. 38. The Harvest truly is ple^teous,
but the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he
would send forth Laborers into his Harvest: That true Laborers are few, our
multitude of false pretended, and pretending Laborers do argue, whose call
entitleth them not to the Work, or whose Lives answer not their call. But I
wish the People were exempt from this Crime of Crosse-Practise: no Sermon they
hear, but implicitly bids the Bands of Matrimony, bebetween the Ear and
Hand; but common Practice has clapped up a more monstrous Match, the Tongue and
Ear now are joined: what is heard, (if no more perhaps) shall be rather
Preached again than practiced. And would you know what Music, (and fitly too)
is at this Wedding? the Apostle tells us, a tinkling Cymball. Let People
complain of Parsons, and Parsons of People; I am sure neither are Canonical,
neither the mere vocal Preacher, nor the Preaching Auditor: happy were the
first couple before these, knowledge, and Practice, were divorced; a Divorce of
sad consequence; whose least curse is that of Barrenness, the danger far
exceeding.

1. For its Barrenesse, what is unpractised Knowledge in any Art? but Pedantry;
as what is Practice in all Arts without that of Living well? but shooting at
Rovers; as in Instances may appear. What if Men (like Broughton) can compile a
concordance of years, in the sacred story? and make even a Conformity, between
the deformed Gapings, Chasmes, and spaces of broken times? and yet skill not (I
wish I could not say like him) a due conformity with present times. How long
might we still complain of bad times, if Scalligers were as frequent as
Pamphleteers, or Tracts like his, de Emendatione Temporum, rectifying of
Computations, as familiar as Diurnals: a truer way doubtless for every one to
be Emendator Temporum, were to turn over a new leaf in his own History, and
amend his own Erratas. I will pursue a little Senecas Instances, in the next
Quaeres, as that in Music. Monstras mihi (in Musica scil.) qui sint modi
flebiles, ostendas potius quomodo inter adversa non emittam flebilem vocem.
What booteth us to know, or play, a sad or cheerful strain? If I have not
power of being cheerful in the saddest discord of my Affairs, or Fortunes
descant on Lachrymae.

Arithmetic enableth thee for Accounts, larger than ever any one, (J, or all
the world together) did possess: Better Accountants are they that number their
days, or are skilled in the Apostles Accounting all things but Dung, and loss
to gain that Gospel Pearl. Or better were the Arithmetic, Quae potius deceat
nil ad Rem pertinere istas computationes, and non esse feliciorem cujus
Patrimonium lassat Tabularios, as Seneca ibid. that could teach us all those
Accounts to be of none. Geometry, it may be, teaches me Wisdom, not to lose a
Perch of my many Acres, through imperfect Survey. At ego discere volo quomodo
totos hilaris amittam ibi, but teach me the Art whereby I might learn to lose
all with chearfullnesse; give me not an Art that teaches me to measure, or
admire any of the wandering Atoms of the circumference, but a steady motion in
my Aims and Desires, to that Center, whose Center is every where, and
Circumference is no where, even him whose name is all Quiescents, that Jehova
himself. And in Astronomy, what should I trouble my self whether Saturn or
Mars be opposite or no? potius hoc discam, ubicunque sunt, propitia esse, ih.
rather let me learn where they are, they shall be propitious: that is, they
never shall cross my will, because my will shall never be cross to Events.
And therefore let us learn Senecas Resolve (in the same place) Ego quid sit
futurum nescio: quod fieri possit scio, ex hoc nihil desperabo, totum expecto.
What will be I know not, but what may be I do, and therefore expect any thing,
but despair of nothing. By all which we see, the Philosopher takes away the
Title of wise man from the lazy Speculator in Arts, and Knowledge, and gives
it to the active vert^ous man, though never so illiterate; take it in express
words, Magno Impendio, magna alienarum Aurium Molestia laudatio haec constat: O
Hominem litteratum! simus hoc rusticiore Titulo contenti, Ovirum bonum! A great
Coil it costs, and an offensive one (to some ears) it keeps, to have it said,
there goes a Learned man: Let us be content with that plainer Commendation,
there goes an honest man. But well it were if mere Speculation were only
barren: its mischiefs are no less in church and State; In the Church it
spawneth Heresies; as to the State, it undermineth the structure of a
well-setled Policy. In the Church it is Pestilentiall, in the State Gunpowder:
Moses his Zeal broke the Tables against some stones (it may be) or some hard
bodies, but blind or lame Zeal break them against one another.

T^ntum Religio potuit suadere Malorum, being true of the pretense of Religion,
which passes over all Ties of Nature, and Laws of the second Table, to
maintain but some Opinion in the first. He that agrees not with me in all my
Tenets, touching Religion, shall not be protected from all I can do to his
Ruin, by being either my highest Superior, dearest Equal or the most
innocent inferior. Thus while Profession of Religion, and Practice of Charity
are asunder, Confusion and Mischief go hand in hand. It is a saying among
Divines, that Hell is full of good Intentions, and Meanings; but I think it may
be inverted; good Meanings rather pretended* than intended, are full of Hell, and
Mischief. It was some such good intention sure, Ravilliacs Zeal had its fire
from, for the Catholic Religion; when no less than the King of France's blood
could quench it. And on this Score none more against Christ's, than Jesuits,
against the Lords Annointeds, than they that bear the name of him whose
Anointed these earthly Kings are; and all from no reason so much as the
Nunnish, or Monastic life, (which you will) of their Knowledge, being as yet
never married to Practice, than which (as by all that has been said appears)
no Match more desirable. What busttle is there in the World about inferior
Matches? Romants, and History bear witness in the first: how must a whole
Book full (of Adventures, Justs, Tournaments, Monsters killed, Enchanted
Castles surprised, etc.) be read over, before Hymen light his Torch? In the
other, what Consultations, what Embassies, and a whole Councell-Board of
Banes-Wrights, or Match-brokers, must go to the knitting a Princes Love-Knot;
whilst in the mean time the most Non-pareille Beauty of the World, Beauteous
Knowledge stands unregarded, or Cloistered up in mere Speculation, though
long ago contracted to Practice by him that has made her Jointure (Christ
himself) and that such a Jointure as sure might quickly match her, were his
word taken; even Blessedness it self. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if you do them, Joh. 13. 17. And because it is for the most part the Method of
these Discourses, to let you hear the concent of the other part of the Quire (
viz. Nature and her enlightened ones) Let Senecas vote pass toward the joining
of this couple, Knowledge, and Practice. Haec alijs dic, ut dum dicas, Ipse
audias; Scribe, ut dum Scripseris, legas, etc. stude, non ut plus scias, sed ut
melius, Epist. 89. speak good things, that thou may be thy own Auditor,
etc. Study to grow better, rather than more knowing: Nay he will call it no
knowledge that is not impregnated with Practice. Tantum scire se judicat
Quisquis, quantum non concupiscit, quantum non timet, Ep. 115. Let no man
(says he) think he knows farther than he restrains his desires, or fears.
Then take this Paradox for a Truth, no Scholar to the active Religious man;
not he that defineth^Passions, but mastereth them. Doing well is Rhetoric; the
liberal hand has more Oratory than the Tongue of Demosthenes, or Cicero, and
speaks more comfort to the hungry Belly, than the best penned Oration. Let
then the same be writ over our Churches, Closets, Studies (and all such like
Marts of Knowledge, and Improvements of our Intellectuals) that is writ over
the Schools at Padua. Sic ingredere, ut Teipso quotidie doctior, sic egredere,
ut indies Patriae, Christianaeque Reipub. utilior evadas. Let every Ingresse
into such places, make thee more knowing, every Egresse, more practically
useful in Church, or Commonwealth. For (to conclude with the most forcible
Reason) Doing well is not only the best of knowledge, but also most of
Religion: Alms are the best Prayers, and the poor man's Prayers if heard, the
richest Alms (making the Rich the Poor man's Debtor) In sum, the active
Christian is the only Seraphicall Doctor, the just Dealer, the best Casuist,
the good Example, Master of the Sentences, each good Action speaking more
effectually, Imitation, or Conviction to Spectators, than any (though the
subtlest worder) could ever arrive to. The best Physic is to have Men's sana in
Corpore sano, a sound mind in a healthful body: the best Philosophy is to
live well; and to dye well* the best Divinity.

Reasons INDEPENDENCY.
IT is no less Prerogative of that noble Creature, Man, that no worldly Force
from Men, or Angels, can command or conquer his Assent, than that his Will
cannot be compelled, to choose or dislike. The Liberty of this latter, I know,
wants not Patrons, beside Experiments in every one^ own breast in all
premeditated Acts of the Will, demonstrating so clearly, that they confute all
Opposers as plainly as Diogenes did Zeno, disputing against Motion, by rising
up and Walking. But this Liberty of Judgment is neither maintained, nor
ordinarily observed, and seems almost lost, either in Lazy, or blind
Sequacity of other men's Votes: Our Opinions coming more by Contagion, than on
Deliberation; thus breaking our Allegiance to that sole Commandresse of our
Reason, Truth, while we do -- jurare in verba Magistri. Swear submission of
Judgment, or Assent, to every one that Invadeth our understandings with those
great Names, Aristotle, Plato, Domocritus, etc. Whereas it were a Temper not
only leading to Wisdom, but were wisdom it self, to read all Authors, as
Anonymo's, looking on the Sense, not Names of Books, or to hear Oracles of the
Chair blind fold, not regarding who speaks, but what is spoken, examining
all, by the compared collections, or Reading, or experience has made; (
Wisdom being nothing else but an Induction from several examined Judgments,
and on occasion to draw out Pertinencies to some emergent, that either
Discourse, or active Consultation propounds.) Had this been used, Truth had
had more Friends than Plato or Aristotle: and Sects in Philosophy been quelled,
whose motion (like Seditious Multitudes) are as well continued, as raised by
their Leaders. Hence that Learned Iconoclastes, that Image-breaking Enemy to
Intellectual Idolatry knew no better Furniture for Truths Temple, than the
broken Images of Aristotle, Lord Bacon in his Novum Organon.
Plato, Democritus; or any other of the Ancients set up in men's Minds, as the
only Idolized Oracles of Truth. How many fling their Eyes off a Book, having
but spied the Name? so true is that Complaint once fatherd on the Council of
Trent, that they damned not so much Books, as Authors: what ever such a one
writ must be condemned (though perhaps he would undertake merely to transcribe
that Council it self) for Haeresie, and prohibited view. In Pulpit-custome,
what other is the first Question, (almost) of every Congregationer, but, who
Preaches? I am confident, should a truly dull Battologist, that is of Ausonius
his Character, ( Quam pauca, quam diu loquuntur Attici?) that an hour by the
Glass speaks nothing, should such a one I say, and a deserving eminent
Preacher change Sermons; People would not only come thicker, but return
satisfied, and even to admiration, commending the weakest sense, from the
lowdest famed Preacher. In humane Learning I appeal to every Man's own
impartial Breast, whether he can boast an unbiassed Judgment: and why not?

Doubtless for some of these Reasons.

Causes of Intellectual slavery.
1. The Marriage, (or Espousall, as the sage Frenchman) of our Fancy, or
Judgment to some Notions, or Men; and this has begot that peevish Morosity
among men; that the more knowing Man, is to the very Ignorant, Heretical, and
to the Smatterer in Knowledge, Paradoxicall. When he delivers any thing New,
though but some clearer Illustration of old Truth, for that we must allow old
and one, as well in Nature, as Divinity; Subject and Predicate being in Nature
coupled, before the first Logician ever worded a Proposition. How few are they?
whom Education, in the Esteem of an Aristotle, A Ramus, etc. has not so
tainted, that the Name of any other Author, or Philosophy, seems Heterodoxe
without examination, thus sentencing them; I like not these new fangled Fellows
that will be wiser than their Forefathers: pretty Somewhats they would mean,
but sure They understand not themselves any more than I do: thus lazily
sleeping on Traditions Pillow, into a Lethargy of Ignorance: which breeds an
obstinate peevishness against any Man's light, not lighted at their Candle.

2. A second Cause is mistaking Authority: what more familiar, than to call the
worlds Infancy, Antiquity? and its true Seniom, or Age, Novelty? which if it be
the Brand of this my Assertion, I have a Patron that took it from Reason. But
it may be, according to my Assertion, his Name will sooner still opposers than
his Reasons: to them I name that ( oculatissimus Bacon (Learnings Chancellor,
more than Englands) but to the Rational I set down his Reason, with
uncontrollable Demonstration; proving that which we call New, and upstart, to
be the truest Antiquity. Take it in his own words out of, Lib. 1. Novi organi:
Aphorism: 84 Rursus vero Homines a Progressu in Scientijs detinuit and fere
incantavit Reverentia Antiquitatis, and virorum, qui in Philosophia magni
habiti sunt, Authoritas. De Antiquitate autem, opinio quam Homines de ipsa
fovent, negligens omnino est, and vix verbo ipsi congrua. Mundi enim Senium and
Grandaevitas pro Antiquitate vera habenda sunt; quae Temporibus nostris tribui
debent, non juni^ri, qualis apud antiquos fuit. Illa enim Aetas respectu Nostri
antiqua and major; respectu Mundi ipsius, nova and minor fuit. The Reverence of
Antiquity has arrested men's Progress in Sciences, yet that very opinion
concerning this Antiquity has nicknamed the Ages of the World: for the Last
ages are to be taken for the Worlds old Age, and so its true Antiquity: old age
is not the first, but last of a Man; and truly we may hope for riper
Judgments, more and better examined Experiences^ from the latter Ages in
points of humane Litterature. The Orbis Intellectualis, intellectual World
meeting with daily, and fresh Circulatours, and Discoverers, as well as this
material World, has with its Drakes, and Magellans. It is good I confess to
use the North Star of the Ancients, till through Progress in later
Discoveries, that Guide dippeth under the Horizon, as the Pole Star does to
Voyagers beyond the Aequinoctiall: that is, use it so far as it gives
Direction, and not in Peevishness leave off all Observations, because out of
the sight of that particular guide.

We are not to be angry at Stra^o, or Ptolemy etc. because they did not write
of America, or not to believe Magellan saw those Straights, because more
ancient Geographers heard not of them. Most true is that of Englands
Philosopher, in the forementioned Book, and Aphorism. Summae Pusillanimitatis
est, Authoribus infinita tribuere (Authori autem Authorum, atque adeo omnis
Authoritatis) Tempori jus suum denegare; to give Authors more than their due,
and rob Time, the Author of Authors (and so of Authority it self) of hers, is
but degrading of that great Master of Art^, Time, according to the Spanish
Proverb, Tiempo es Maestro en todas las Arts; Time is Master in all Arts; and
Knowledge, and Truth, not the Daughter of Authority, but Time. Solomon says,
Deus Mundum reliquit Disputationi Hominum, Eccles. 3. 11. God left the World to
the Dispute of Men. To some it is a Primer, only wherein to spell a Deity, that
ought to beloved and feared; to others a large Polemicall Body of controverted
Quaeres; left to the Decision of Time, and Experience; so true is that Greek
verity, (...),
(...).
Among Men's Notions, naught exact appears,
What one man wonders at, Another jeeres.


What seriously exercises one Man's Brain to defend as a Maxim, tickleth
another Diaphragme no less than an Epigram: how far so ever men's words will
go in civil Contracts, no taking one another words nor Hands, in
Disquisitions of Reason; and where the Diffidence is not the Child of Ignorance
or Pride, it is more commendable than easy Credulity, which is the third cause
of Intellectual slavery. The Tyranny of which credulity appears 3d. Cause 1.
(for instance) in a beleiving Admirer of the Furnace, who will believe more
than an Alchymist will promise, and slander over the sins of his whole Life;
which being cause of miscariage in their Attempts; when one single sin of
theirs, called Cheating, might more justly bear the blame. He will sooner part
with his Belief of the Trinity in Heaven, than not believe Paracelsus his
Trinity of Principles omnipotent, while Himself proves an inverted Chemist,
(with the wrong side outward) making of that which was Gold, no Gold. He
trusts more assent to the bare word of a Philosophus per ignem, (even in
Projections of Impossibilities) than the greatest Oracle of Reason could
borrow, or Demonstration enforce. Nor less vain is the credulity Judicial
Astrology gains; but from whom? none sooner, than those that believe the Moon
no bigger than their Cart wheel; such as would scarce believe their Horse would
ever be found, by that Astrologer that should tell them the little Dog in
Heaven were bigger than their Gelding. The less they know in Astronomy, or
Philosophy, the more they believe in Astrology; and none sooner believe their
Star book, than such as know not a Letter in any other. They are of the same
File with a third sort of easy Souls, with whom Romants are Chronicle: that
believe, the Sun has had his Knights as sure as his Luster, or Heat; and will
afford so reasonable a Penniworth of Belief to the Homer, or Historian, (if
Poet fit not better the work) of the seven Champions, that he will believe St.
George for England did all the feats of the other six, and his own too.

Nay this Credulity was the first corruption of Judgment, else a Creature,
(and that in such a shape, as a Serpent) had not gained belief above its
Creator, in that, non moriemini, Ye shall not dye. And consider the
nearenesse of it to those bright Irradiations from God himself, it appears
to be far Sillyer, then any of the forementioned, and ridiculous Credulities.
But another extreme to this, 4. Cause.
and a fourth Cause of this slavery of our understandings, is obstinate
adhaesion to false rules of belief, and Topics of Probation: and that either
taken from others or our selves. One will believe, nor like, nothing but what
is transcribed from Seths Pillars before the Flood, or such broken Antiquities
(to retain the Word in its received acception) like doting Antiquaries, that
will keep Moses his broken Tables with more diligence than the whole ones, and
more admire the rest, or Fragments of Coins, that their Splendor, or
entireness. So he deals with things stamped for Truth; he embraces those
Books, whose Authors Names are lost, or stand first in Fastis Temporum, are
leaders in Times Calendar; none so perfect in his esteem, as Authors with many
Plurima Desunts, many Chasmes, and vacancys: if any thing fall under his view,
nearer his own Times, he uses Jobs words; He is but of yesterday, and
understands nothing, king Horace his complaint true, Epist. 2. 1. Indignor
quicquam reprehendi, non quia crasse
Compositum, illepideve putetur, sed quia nuper.
It vexes Me, when I composures view
Condemned, not 'cause ill writ, They are but new.


Such will approve Authors by the Chronicles, as in the same Epistle he sets
them out. Qui redit ad Fastos, and virtutem aestimat Annis,
Miraturqne nihil, nisi quod Libitina Sacravit.
That by its Since, an Authors Sense commends:
And's wonder does begin at the Authors End.


Or which is the most spreading Infection men raise their belief and Assent,
from what is oldest in them selves; and has been longest by them believed:
what we hear, or read, Ad^lph. Act. 1. 2.
as it agrees with that, we will like, or dislike; so true is that of Terence.
Homine imperito nunquam quicquam injustius, qui nisi quod ipse fecit (liceat
addere) vel credit) nihil rectum putat: Tell men any thing not dropped into them
by their Schoolmaster, Parents, Pastor or Tutor; how ready to cry new fangles,
a singularity deserving Micaiahs Box on the Ear, and Question.

Which way went the Spirit of Prophesy into you? How come you to be wiser then
all before you? To light therefore on the healthful neutrality, I will observe
the Politicians Rule; (as being useful in the Imperial Court of Reason) to
steer a steady course between deforme obsequium, unbecomming servility and
abruptam contumaciam, and abrupt obstinacy. I will not greedily embrace A
Novelty on the insinuation of a Proverb barely, that a Child on a Giants
shoulder, may see farther than the Giant. No, I will examine first whether He
see, and then believe he sees farther. Last writers are not, because Last, the
best, but so far as they have perused the old, and so truly stand upon their
shoulders: otherwise dreams of the Ignorant, or whimseys of the Smatterer in
Learning, might be stamped for current. It is an observation even here useful,
as well as in Divinity, to obey that Text, Jerem. 6. 16. Stand in the way, and
enquire for the old paths. Stand in the old ways, or enquire for them, before
we enlarge our Discoveries of new. And that inimitable Poets Rule is true in all
mending of our Intellectualls. Dr. Done.
-- Doubt wisely, in strange way
To stand inquiring right, is not to stray:
To sleep, or run wrong, is --


Augmenta Sientiarum, Advancements of Learning are not merely Destructive of
the old, but for most part additionall, Progressive, not deviating. J will not
so despise the Worlds nonage (vulgarly called Antiquity) to youth, as to think
it might not have Vigorous Endeavors, and Performances, in the Recovery of
newly lost Light. Nay had not the Deluge of Time drowned their Traditions, and
conveyances to us, I know not why I might not believe the ( Crepuscula) Evening
of Adams created light, brighter than the Noone of our acquired. And as in
wealth, Solomon will allow it the Industrious rather than the slothful; So we
may, ( Caeteris Paribus) believe the Primitive Times more knowing because more
Industrious. We must deal with Truth (not as with Beauty but) as with Virtue,
honor it in Age or Youth. For a general Rule that of the Divine Oracles is
best: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. No Notion
should pass unexamined, though few have admission into the Penetralia, and
inner Chambers of Assent. Look on Authors not as Dictatours, but Senators; not
Commanding, but Counselling my Judgment. If Copernicus move the Earth; it
shall not presently turn my Head with Astonishment at it; because Opinion has
fixed it (it may be more than its Creator) no, we shall do well thus to carry
our selves to things Existences, or their Causes; to the first, let us not
affirm their existence, and (...) on the Fallacies of Sense. The Sun may be
really beneath the Horizon when apparently above, nor deny a things existence
upon its escapes from Sense. The Rays that dispersed will scarce warm,
collected may burn. In the Parliament of Pernassus Resolved upon the Question,
is not to be understood irrevocable, or unpassable: had Christophorus Columbus
tied himself to Hercules his Pillars; (which they say were fixed at the
straights of Gibraltar, as the Western Limits of the World) the Spaniards had
never converted, the Indians; Gold (in the next verse) to the faith and trusty
keeping of their Exchequer. I am persuaded nothing has more continued such an
Ignorance in the World, as Men's setting these terminating Bounds, and Pillars
to their Discoveries, My Sense, My Reason; So far will I go, and no further:
calling Obstinacy to an Opinion, Solidity; and humble Ductility after further
Reason, and Discovery, Sceptick Inconstancy. From hence I believe it was that
that Synods Geography was as ridiculous as a Cockneys: (to whom all is Barbary,
beyond Brainford; and Christendom ends at Greenwitch, (because Kent there
begins) when they banished a Bishop for saying there were Antipodes, as if
the World and their Diocese had the same limits; in the extremity of which, an
Alehouse might not only be called, but be the Worlds end: a little more would
make them assign, (with that Rabbinicall Geographer) where Heaven and Earth
met. A learned vote that any Tarpawlin Mariner might have nulled, had the
straits of Magellan sent him to that Synod.

Secondly, as to the Causes of things, how warily must we conclude their
Identity, from a Homogeneity or likeness of Effects. Causes per se, and Causes
per Accidens working the same Effects; the case of Obstructions in Physic
proves it: Hot things, because opening, may cool. Take the Oven Lid away,
with hot Tongues, or cold, and the Oven shall cool. Old Physicians, and Modern,
that prescribe Cichory, and Violets for coolers, may both at^aine their
purpose; though one would have them hot, as many degrees as the other cold. For
cooling may be effected,

1. Either by that Picklock Leptomeria, or subtlety of parts, by opening the
Pores (those doors of grosser parts) and so letting out that heat, or Vapors,
that are strangers to Nature. Or

2. By arresting of that impetuous motion of the Spirits, Archives; of Nature
(call it what you will) as those things do, that pass for narcotically cold.

Lastly, let us avoid that denying of Experiments, or Existence unquestionable
of Effects, because their Causes, or their modus operandi (which is but the
Application of the Cause to the Effect) does not fall under Demonstration. In
this regard who ever pronounced, quod nihil scitur, for the greatest
Demonstration straied not far from that Text (of the greatest Searcher of
Nature, Eccles. 8. 17.
Solomon) Then I beheld all the work of God, that a Man cannot find out the
work that is done under the Sun, because though a Man labor to find it out,
yea further, though a wise man think to know it, yet he shall not be able to
find it: that shuts up all our endeavors for Knowledge under an
Acatalepsia, impossibility of certainty, or full discovery, even of Nature,
while we look in this Glass of the Body, till we come to do as Seneca wordeth
it, Cum totam lucem totus aspexeris, quam nunc per angustissimas oculorum vias
obscure intueris, which differs not much from the Apostles English, now we
see, as in a Glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then
shall I know even as I am known, 1. Corinthians. 13. 12. True therefore is that of
Scaliger, exerc. 307. Vlterior aequo disquisitio, morosi atque satagentis est
animi: Humanae Sapientiae Pars est, quaedam aequo Animo nescire velle, it is an
useless Peevishness to be too strict in Disquisitions and trackings of
Nature, where she will be hid: and a modest wisdom to be willingly ignorant
of some things. Nay according to the same Author, Exerc. 1. Sect. 1. Sapientia
nostra est Vmbra in Sole, or, (as Cusa.) Valesius Sac. Phil. c. 64.
Docta Ignorantia cum Sientiae Appetitu Conjuncta. A Learned Ignorance,
endeavoring Knowledge, is all our knowledge; and our reason discharges its
duty, if it neither sleep nor serve. But now for its deportment to Moralls or
Politics, (and its assent, or Approbation, respective;) That Liberte d'
Esprit, that Charron mentions, is the best Temper, a true Patron, and President
of this Independency of Reason, and that freedom of Spirit, is that deserving
Author of Religio Medici, with whom in this I agree. I look not on the Flemish,
Italian, or French, with Prejudice, or Wonder; but as Socrates, (that counted
himself (...)) as one of my fellow Citizens. Nor does their different Garbes,
or Customs, (the Garb of their Minds,) with me, at all disguise that Common
Image (wherein we agree) of God and Immortality, any more then antic Clothes
to a skillfull Eye, the likeness of Pictures: indeed an unskilful eye will
quarrel at a Picture, whose Band and Dublet is not like the Prototypes, or
man's, for whom it is made.

I allow Idiosyncrases, particular Constitutions to Politic Bodies as well as
natural, as some have that Antipathy to Things; Cheese, Cats, etc. so some
Nations their hatred of Customs, beloved by others: the Spaniards constancy to
his Fashion, would have continued Him in Fig Leaves, had he been the first
wearer of them. Whereas had Adams Sons and Daughters had the French Levity, he
might have been harder put to it, to have named his Children, than the
Creatures: yet can my Charity, (without casting Ignominy on either) call the
one a wise stayednesse, the other a witty variety. I am not bound to think the
Trunk Hose of our forefathers ridiculous; because Fashions cross the Seas as
often as the Packet Boat, into this Island, the Nursery of Noveltys: nor think
the worse of these; because old Age, overweening their own fashion, makes
them peevishly severe against any other: in all things of this nature, it is
rather Shismaticall Novelty not to be a sociable Innovator. Bring them to the
Scrutiny of Reason; and that it self will be so changeably indifferent, as to
Judge them indifferent, not requiring Sentence or Absolution of Them, their
Authors; or Imitatours. I will look on this Hamlet of the Creation (be it the
only, or but one, of the inhabited Worlds) the Earth, as one Corporation,
differing it may be in the private Oeconomies of their Families, and look on
all the changes of Common wealths, Ragioni's del Stato, Aims, and Interests of
Men, at Council Board, Exchange, or Market, but as a Mass of Uniform
Deformities: and that without espousing my Reason so to any one, as to think it
already so good, as none other like it; or may not be (if he has not been
already) bettered: this suspense, ( Surseance de Judgment (as that excellent
Frenchman) Met L' Espirit a L' Abri de tous Inconveniens, it shadeth the
mind from the inconveniences of Quarrels, Charr. de Sagesse. Lib 2. c. 2.
Disputes, Sidings with Opinions, being cheated by Sophistry, etc. Et hoc
liberiores and solutiores sumus, quia nobis integra Judicandi Pot^stas manet.
It is a liberty maintaining the understanding Chaste, neither prostituting her
self to, or suffering a Rape from any Opinion.

Nullius jurare in verba Magistri.
To be of Truths Jury, not Knight of the Post to any Opinion, or Interest: this
temper Serenes the Soul from Passion, clears its Intellectualls, and
restores it (in part) to its first, and best Independency.

THE TEARS OF THE PRESS.
THE Press might be employed against, or for it self, according to the good,
or hurt its Labors have spread abroad in the World. Look on them on the one
side, Its faults.
you will confess the Tears of the Press were but the Livery of its guilt,
nor is the Paper stained more than Authors, or Readers. That House at Harlam
(too justly may be styled a House of Mourning; notwithstanding it boastingly
would justle the Chinese out of their Invention of Printing, which whether as
mischievous as their other of Guns, is doubtful. That Ink has Poison in it,
the Historian, as well as Naturalist will confess: for empannell a Jury of
inquest, whence Learning, or Religion has been poisoned, and scribendi
Cacoethes, dabling in Ink will be found guilty. For, First Learning has
suffered, Vt omnium rerum, sic Litterarum Intemperantia laboramus. Tacitus
says, among other excesses even that of Learning may surfeit us; and this was
true before Printing: when the cure of the Disease, (most are sick) nisi te
scire hoc sciat alter) of publishing, or if you will have it in Horace his
words: Sat. 4. Sermon. 1. Quodcunque semel chartis illeverit, omnes Gestit e Fur
no redeuntes scire, Lacuque, Et Pueros, and Anus.

Notionellas (as I may term them) was harder, by reason of ^aborious
Transcription, Vanity or contradiction, employing the pen even then. Of the
former, let Dydimus the Grammarian lead the Van, of whom Seneca says, quatuor
millia Librorum scripsit, miser si tam nulla supervacua Legisset, Its vanity.
that he writ four thousand Books, miserable Man if he had read so many
Pamphlets; and in those, Controversies about Homers Country: whether Anacreon
offended more in incontinence, or intemperance, etc. Most of them being stuffed
with such, or Grammatical Questions: A Desease continued, if not increased
since Printing, too much declining things, for the Declension of words.
Witness such Laborius works in Criticismes needless. ( Jasperse not the wise
choice of useful Quaeres in that study) the Result it may be of many Pages, is
the alteration of a word or Letter, its Addition, or Substraction. O painful
wast Paper! how empty is the Press often times when fullest? empty we must
acknowledge that, which vanity fills, as we may well think it, when it
issues some Poetic Legend of some love Martyr, or pious R^mants of more than
Saints ever did. What Pamphlets the World in these latter times has swarmed
with, the studious Shopkeeper knows, who spends no small time at the Bulk
in reading, and censuring modern controversies, or News: and will be readier to
tell you what the times lack, than to ask what you lack. We live in an Age
wherein never was less Quarter given to Paper: should Boccalines Parliament of
Parnassus be called among us, I fear our Shops would be filled with printed
wast Paper, condemned to Tobacco, Fruit, etc. No Charta Emporetica, Cap Paper,
(or what else they call it) would be in use, till Legends, Romants, Pamphlets,
etc. were spent. How justly may we take up that complaint in Strad. lib. 3.
Praelect. 1. where He brings in Printers complaining against the Riming
(Poetic they would be called) Pressers into the Press: Qui quae noctu
somniant, haec mane Lucem videre illico gestiant, all ready what danger are we
in of eating up Antichrist confuted, in the Bottom of a Pie? or to light
Tobacco with the dark holdings forth of new Lights?

To see the Antinomian Honey Comb, holding Physic (at second hand) in a Stool
Pan; sure argues a surfeit in the Press, that thus swarmeth with vanity, Its
Mischief.
or Controversy: which is its worse fault, as being the mischief of a sadder
and engaging consequence. Alas what now is the Press but an office of
contention, issuing rather Challenges, than Books. When Pulpits grow hoarse
with Railing, then does this take up the Quarrel, that often admits of no
Arbitratour, but the Sword. Books are subject among other Chances to fire, and
the Worm: Such as are of this nature, prevent the Worlds Doom, and their own,
not staying for the general Conflagration, but beginning it: setting it on
such a Fire of Contention, Schism, and Haeresie, that that Blood which can
quench Hell Fire, cannot totally extinguish this: for the shedder of that
Blood, has foretold the inevitable Necessity of it. As to the other Fate of
Books, it is to be feared these feed their Authors never dying Worm. How
miserable is truth torn by Antilogies, and little better than scolding, and
suffers more by this Pen and Ink war, than by Pike and blood shed. Truth
divine.
By how much more captivating of assent, Sophistry is, than success among
Reasoning Souls (that coming nearer Reason, than success, does Ii^stice) and
we know Truth is often water^d by Martyrs blood: receiving more strength from
the red letterd Days in an Almanac, that whole Tomes of Pro's and Co^'s. And
what Truths Politic, or News suffer by the Press is weekly experienced: it is
nothing to kill a man this week, and with Ink instead of Aqua Vitae fetch him
alive next: to drown two Admiralls in one week, and buoy them up again the
next. Each side save its Knight and kills the Giant: but more assuredly
Truths, so that many of those Pamphlets, may better be termed the Weekly Bills
of Truths Mortality; than faithful Intelligencers of Affairs. Nor fares it
better with Peace than Truths; The Feathers and Plumes seconding the Quarrel
of the Quill, from Inveighings to Invadings, Declarations to Defiance;
Remonstrances, to Resistance; and that to Blood The Press rippeth up the
faults, and Disgraces of a Nation, and then the Sword the Bowels of it. What
Printing begins by way of Challeng, its contemporary Invention, Guns answers
in Destruction accents. The Causes.


Now the Causes of these enormities of the Press are either in Writers, or
Readers.

1. Among Writers, first some that write to eat, as Beggars examine not the
virtues of Benefactours, but such as they hope or find able, or willing they
ply; be they good or bad, wise man or Fool, so do they beg of any Theme that
will sell; true or false, good or bad, in Rhyme or Prose, and that pitiful or
passable; all is one, Ink must earne Ale, and three Penny Ordinary's; write
they must against Things or Men (if the Spirit of contradiction prove saleable)
that they can neither Master, nor Conquer; Sparing neither Bacons, Harveys,
Digbys, Brownes, or any the like of Improvement COLLEGE (as I may term them)
though (beside some little somewhat for the venture) they get nothing, but such
a credit as he did, that set Diana's Temple on fire, to perpetuate his Name.

2. A second sort are Discoverers of their Affections by taking up the Cudgels
on one side or other, and it is come to that now, that Author scarce passes
that writes not Controversies, Ecclesiastical, Politic, or Philosophical.
Though far better it were for Public good there were more, (deserving the
Name of Johannes de Indagine) progressive Pioners in the Mines of knowledge;
than Controverters of what is found: it would lessen the number of
Conciliatours: which cannot themselves now write, but as engagedly biassed to
one side or other; but these are, Desiderata, vereor semper desideranda, things
wanting, and to be desired (I fear) for ever.

Second Cause are Buyers, the Chapmans vanity, and weakness of Choice, makes
the Mart of less worthy Books* the bigger. Such is the fate of Books, of all
other Ware, the courser the Ware, the more the Seller gets by it; examine
the truth of it at Stationers Hall, and it will too truly appear in these
latter times, the Bookseller has got most by those Books, the Buyer has got
least, being not only the Luck of Rablais his Bookseller, that was a looser by
his Book of Sense and Judgment, but abundantly repaired by that Ingenuous
Nothing, the Life of Garaga^tua, and Pantagruel. What Age ever brought forth
more, or bought more Printed wast Papers? to read which, is the worst spending
of Time (next the making them) and the greater Price given for them, and far
above their worth. But now what Cure for these Distempers of the Press? The
Cure.
why truly for them in Fieri, no such Correcting the Press as breaking it, but
the chiefest help is Prophylacticall, a care Preservatory; and so an Index
expurgatorius, an expunger of the vanity, or Contention of originals, would
save the labor of the Index EXPVRG ATORIVS* of Copies, and to save Paper from
being so stained, would keep it from after burning by the Common Hang Man. It
had been better if some Haeresies had been concealed, and never confuted in
Print, and better Darkness* everlasting had been the Fate of that Book called
the Three Impostors; (as in sad Probability it is the Portion of its Author)
than by being burnt, Printings benefits.
to emblem the endless Punishment of the Compiler.

But not to make our Eyes sore by looking only on the hurt; let us turn them
on the Benefits of the well employed Press: and we shall see it a Mint of Solid
worth, the good it has done (and yet may do) being inestimable: it is Truths
Armory, The Bank of Knowledge, and Nursery of Religion, never suffering a want
of the sincere Milk of the Word, nor Piety's Practice to be out of Print (and
that not only in one Book) weekly issuing forth helps to doing, as well as
knowing our Duty. But the worth of the Ware house will be best known by the
Wares, which are Books, of which see further in my Essay of Books.

THE BEST FURNITURE.
Books looked on as to their Readers, or Authors, do at the very first
Mention, challenge Pre-eminence above the Worlds admired sine things, and more
than Riches in ( Homer) are truly (...), Homer. (...).
dropped from Heaven: and (such as are Directories to Heavenly wisdom,) as
Ladders for our Ascent: most useful Books, are Comments on one of Gods two
Books, that Hieroglyphicall one of Nature and the Creatures; or that precious
Book of Life, that Verbum Dei, (to be esteemed next to Verbum Deus, that was
pleased to be bound up in the course Cover of Humane Nature) I say, that
written Epistle of the Creator to the Creature; In qua quicquid docetur
veritas, praecipitur Bonitas, promittitur Felicitas. Now what Benefit Readers,
what Glory Authors may reap from such Labors in comparison of any other labor
under the Sun, is d^^onstrable to those prudent Chapmen of the World that
know the just value of Things-Look on other labors of Men for the Necessities,
or superfl^ities of Life; they are tainted with that Creature vanity (mentiond
by Cornclius Alapide on Eccles. 1. 2. Insensibilitas, quod omnis Creata
voluptas vel Commoditas animam non pervadat, nec penetrat, imo in se non
attingat, sed tantum Corpus, sensusque afficit; and per eo^ Animum obiter
perstringens. A Tastlesnesse (as it were) that is in all created pleasure or
profit external, not reaching the soul immediately, but through the senses,
(imperfect, when not deceitful Judges) they are like Sodom Apples, enduring
the Eye, not the Touch, or the Feasts of Witches* which (according to most,)
are but Dreams, the very word the Psalmist sets them out by, Ps. 73. 20.
where he brings in the gay things and preferments of the upper end of the
World, to be but as a Dream when one awaketh, leaving more vexation, than
content.

On the other side the excellency of Knowledge, (the Quarry out of which these
Jewels, (Books) are dug, and the wealth they bring) hear from Solomon:
(the best Cash-keeper of Providence, having not only seen, but had in
possession the best of sublunary Enjoyments) he tells us it is as far
above folly (be it rich or mighty) as light is above Darkness, the greatest
Antithesis Nature, or Poetry ever found out. Solomon thought his Titles
slender, until he could write the wisest Prince: and for wisdom, (though a
King) he was constrained to become a Petitioner; as if until he obtained it
he were but a Beggar; and if we will believe History; (notwithstanding his
immediate Inspiration.) His Library; was not the least piece of his
Magnificence. Such Furniture thought he necessary, and stately the Queen of
Sheba thought it, who (as Historians relate) among other favors, had some of
his Library bestowed on her, and without doubt esteemed it equal, if not above
any other Treasure, since her Errant was more to hear his Wisdom, than see
his Court. In a true verdict, no such Treasure as a Library, and (if all be
true) the Hill Amara in Aethiopia, out-vieth either Indies with their Diamonds
or Gold, the Library of which place, some assure, is so famous, as to have in
it writings of Enoch, Job, Abraham, Solomon, Titus Livius whole: nor for number
is either that Library comparable of Constantinople, containing 120000 Books,
or that at Pergamus that had 200000. or of Alexandria in Aul. Gellius, lib. 6.
c. 17. wherein were 700000. Books.

Look no further than our own Country, it more Arresteth the wondering Eye of an
understanding Travailer, with Bodleis Library in Oxford, than all the stately
buildings to the Humility of Devotions or Pride of Men, Temples, or Noble-mans
Houses and in a just esteem is Englands rich-Ware house, though the Covetous
Mole see no such worth in all Paul's Church Yard, as in one Lumbard street
glittering shop. I am sure from the former, they may better furnish (and that
with more comfortable Notes) their Account Books that must be opened, when Shop
Books are burnt. I mean the Book of Conscience, (I wish I could call it an
Enchiridion, or Pocketing, but it is so little in men's hands or Pockets, (if
taken in a good sense) it wants some other Name.) The Book which in that
grand reading day according to its contents, will be Licensed or burnt: and
when God makes up his Jewels, it is thence Rate Books will be made, and he
richer, (than one ignorant of its worth) that has no other worldly goods he
can call his own, but his Bible; if a well studied and practiced Bible: (but
that and a fighting Sword, (according to the Jest) are rare commodities) which
(scarce Digression (brings me to that Book, which is the glory of the well
employed Press, and Redemption of all the Mischief that comes by it ill
employed. But me thinks I hear no small fool cry (...), just contrary: No one
Book has done more mischief than the Bible in the Vulgar Tongue; and he
shows me the sad Gashes in Poli^y, and Piety, this Sword of the Spirit has
made, in the hands of Mad Times: and since every one pretends a Key to this
Padlock hung on this Sword. (So it had for Peace, and unity of Faiths sake, in
the Apostle Paul's time, he locked it from Women, they must be no Expositours,
and these Mysteries in another Place were under Commission, committed to Thee,
2. Tim. 1. 14.) ever since I say, there be so many Keys, and those differing:
what arises from it? but breaking the Wards and Lock into so many pee^es, that
the Interpretations of some one Text in this Book will equal almost the Number
of all the Texts contained in it, and these Interpretations maintained more
than the Text; Explications of Faith breaking its unity (as if Bonds of
Charity, and Publication of Truth could not consist) and that with such Study,
faction and at last violence, that both Truth and Love lie a bleeding. Again,
from these Religious contentions, begun in private dissenting Breasts, till
they engage Church and State, (what fair Pretexts arise? for your Magni
Latrones, armed invading Potentates, to enlarge their Territories? by invading
their Neighbors to settle among them Truth. But what Truth? that They would
feign take up a little larger Room in the Map. They like not the scarce
Legible confines of their Dominion, and feign they would have their Earth;
while they pretend they bring them Heaven for it. A sad and true Scroule of
Church and State Inconveniences* occa^ion'd (if you will) not caused, by this
familiarized Book; but the true cause is, our Leaven of Pride, Hypocrisy,
uncharitableness, that causes such poisonous Fermentations and not the Bread
of life; the foulness of our Stomachs prevailing above the goodness of the
Food: Nor therefore to be denied the good, and honest Heart, any more than
Light to busy men, because denied to mad men; or the Sacrament to be declined,
because the Emperor Henry the seventh was poisoned in the Eucharist (an Act,
Transubstantiation cannot excuse from a double Murder, by poisoned Christ* to
kill his Anointed.) The woe (and so the blame) is the Portion of* by whom, not
by what Offenses come; plainly pointing out, the Faults are from Rational
Agents, and Mis-interpreters, as the Cause, not from the dead Letter in any
Languages whatsoever.

This Book of Life now quitted (I hope) from its impudent Mischief)
challenges our Love, Praise, and Study from all other Books, they being no
other way of Price, but as they Comment-like refer to this. To enter on the
true and right use of this and other Books, would make one it self, and that
of bulk; only in general: They use them not aright, that have them for
Ornament chiefly, and are more curious (as they are more acquainted) about the
binding and strings, than Insides: Or proud of their Number, a Pride better
befitting a Bookseller. No, they are Household Stuff intended for Furniture of
the Mind, more than Study, or Chamber. Believe one that knew the use, and
usefulness of Books as well as any; The Lord Bacon refers it to these heads.

1. Pleasure mixed with Profit, best tasted in solitude by the Mind sequestered,
to whom doubtless all other company is of small account; there is more
Content, as well as Instruction in the company of the Dead, than of the Living;
their Converse is Li^es Enlarger, non tantum suam aetatem ben^ tuentur, omne
Aevum suum adijciunt. Nullo nobis Seculo interdictum est, in omnia admittimur.
A man in his Study lives all the Ages of the world, that are (not (...)
concealed and lost: or (...) Fabulous) but (...) Historical: which some reckon
from Thucydides, and he travelleth all Regions, and with his Mind, (the true
lofty Traveller) surveyeth them. The Worlds Declination is so far from
shortning a learned man's Age, that the Book-worme is of all Creatures the
longest lived, the last in every Age living all the former, to whose Age
Methusalems was but Nonage. Historical Faith will make thee live with thee
first Adam; it floateth thee in the Arc with Noah. It will thus at any time
make nine Persons in the Arc, five in Nebuchadnezzars Furnace, two in Daniels
Den, etc. Seneca sure understood somewhat of this Magic of Historical
Belief, Sen de brevit. c. 14.
when he said, in omnia admittimur, it associateth us with all Times and
Persons past, Scias cum Rerum Natura in consortium omnis Aevi pariter incedere.

2 Usefulness is Ornament: knowledge gained by books, tippeth the tongue with
familiar, or solemn Eloquence: The great Magnes Animorum, Loadstone. Nor has
it only Attraction, but Conquest, in regard its surprisall is scarce
resistable. And such has learned Eloquence, or power of Persuasion, over
unlearned Minds: Since in Examples, or Philosophical Characters (as in a
Glass) it setleth the Passions of men, most usual, and meets tacitly with
their Objections, or brings some unexpected Topic of persuasion. And to
improve this head of the Lord Bacons, of the Ornament coming by Books: Let me
add Seneca's Heraldry that is in them. Thou may adopt thy self into what
Hero's Family thou will (such are chiefly the learned Tribe) Nobilissimorum
Ingeniorum Familiae sunt, Senec. de. b^evit. c. 15.
elige in quam ascisci velis; non in Nomen tantum adoptaberis, sed ipsa bona*
thou may mend thy Pedigree, nay, thy Inheritance, not only of the name of
Pythagoras, P^ato, Aristotle (or any such Monarch in the Empire of Learning)
but their real goods of the Mind, that become greater by thy expending them
on others.

But thirdly for dispatch of Business, Books are the Glass of Counsel to
dress our selves by. So true is that of the Lord Verulam, Sermon de Studijs,
48. Homines Rerum gerendarum gnari, ad Negotia exequenda f^rtasse Idonei sunt;
and in specialibus, Judicio non malo utantur: verum Consilia de Summis Rerum,
eorumque Inventio and Administratio recta, felicius a literatis promanant.
There may be men that skill the Knack of some particular performances, and the
Rode of some Affairs; but Consultations, and the grand Turns of weighty and
public Concernments, are best managed by men of Learning, that may consult
with the Antecedents, and Consequents of Occurrences, like, if not Parallel.

To sum up more benefits of Books, Books are life's best business: Vocation
to these has more Emolument coming in, than all the other busy Terms of
life. They are Fee-lesse Counselors, no delaying Patrons, of easy Access,
and kind Expedition, never sending away empty any Client, or Petitioner; not by
delay, making their (...), Courtesies Injurious. Marcus Antoninus may sooner now
be spoke with, than when he lived, though of so open a Majesty: Caesar may be
now consulted, that before admitted none (it may be) but his Counsel of War:
No Threshold among these to be worn out with Attendance on their leisure, from
business, sleep, or Riot. I may now come to the speech with Saint Austine
(though a Bishop) without a leg to the Porter; would I converse with the
ultimum Naturae, choicest Powers of Nature, and see how far they went beyond
many Christians, thy access to them is easy. Seneca and Plutarch as thy
Contemporaries communicating their best parts (their minds) with thine:
Would thou be a Spectator of the Market of the World, and see what the Trade
of the world has been from the beginning, what bid, and for what? on the
Temple of History thou may stand, and see the lives of thousands bid for some
petty Crown; of dearest Relations for an Inheritance, of husbands, for an
Adulterous freer Embrace; thou may see Actions of greatest Note, as done
before thy face, live with the first Monarchies, and traverse their Courts, and
view their Exploits; what can r^der Societies afford me in comparison? that are
immersed in more sordid sweats, and labors, and that for no higher Design (as
Solomon says) but the Mouth (and whether after we know) as if one Goldfinder
did but labor for another) how much below the extract of man's Soul is it? to
busy it self, in thoughts for nothing but that the body be fed and fine.
Correct O my Soul! thy esteem of things, and admire thy Study, with thy Bible
in it (eenough indeed alone) above all Places and Societies, valu^^g no
speaking or living Society, but as it agrees with these dumb and dead
Instructors. Count thy Books in the Inventory Jewels, wherein a variety is the
most excusable Prodigality, and right use (though but of a few) the best
Husbandry. They are for company, the best Friends; in doubts, Counselors; in
Damps Comforters: Times Prospective, the home Travelers Ship, or Horse, the
busy man's best Recreation, the Opiate of Idle weariness, the Minds best
Ordinary, Natures Garden, and Seed-plot of Immortality. Time spent (needlessly)
from them is consumed, but with them twice gained. Time captivated and snatched
from thee, by Incursions of business, Thefts of Visitants, or by thy own
Carelessness lost, is by these redeemed in life, they are the Souls Viaticum;
and against death its Cordial.

To Authors how beneficial Books are, will appear, when we consider all other
A^chievements by the Sword, or Sweat, are but in Titulum Sepulchri, for some
Title on our Tombs* Books are not only Titles on their Authors ^^^numents,
but Epitaphs* preserving their Memories* be they good, or bad, beyond
short-lived Pyramids, or Mausolaean Piles of stone.

A Lecture for Readers, what they are, and should be.
HEre will be some need of Assistants in this live (and to the quick)
Dissection, to deliver me from the violence of the Anatomy; every one past his
Horne-booke being concerned, and almost that every one faulty in head, or
heart, the principal seats of Readers Infirmities. Nor can I tell which to
begin at, it being as in Catarrhs Circulation (as described by Helmonts
Predecessors.) The foulness of the stomach ^illeth the head, (the top of the
Alembick) with Rheumeingendring Vapors, their Descent again re-increase a
Digestion-corrupting foulness: So is it with Readers; if Detraction be in the
Heart, Prejudice will be in the Head; if Prejudice be first in the Head, it
will much biasse a man's like, or dislike. The faults of the Head I shall
principally treat of. Among Readers I find Heads, either too empty, or too
full. First, those that are empty are either the invincibly Ignorant, or the
Affected.

1. The first cannot, the other will not give Authors their due; what can the
first sort judge? whose reading never arrived higher than an Almanac, or
Diurnall (the States weekly Almanac a Posteriori) I forgive him, if he admire
nothing but the hits and misses of Weather, or of the former Almanac and
latter. Is much Judgment to be look for from one whose knowledge in divinity is
more from Church Windows, than Church Bibles; and whose Ethics are taken from
Cheese-trenchers and painted Clothes with false English? is he fit to judge a
Poem? that admireth only such Poetry as corners of streets, or the Milk paile
sounding in his Ears, and believes Ballads equal with Homer; but such
Readers we rather pity than chide.

2. The affectedly Ignorant are worse, that will like nothing they cannot reach
themselves. The gayer sort of Know-littles, call any thing above Horse-racing,
or hawking Dialect, Pedantry, with ruder Ignorance, and blind zeal; what is
above the level of extempore Nonsense, is Popery, and Learning such an Idol,
that Bell and the Dragon were but Puppets to it (only Bells Commons set before
him, were better I believe than they would allow this Idol.) A Greek word is
Conjuring with them, and Latin they know no use of, since the Law is in
English; nor therefore any of Grammar Schools. Such Readers must have bald
sense, and course language, which they cry up with, This tends to
edification, this a man may understand, etc. They call contracted Sense
Obscurity, avoiding of Tautologies, affected Phrase, Language of a finer
Dress, Ends of Plays, as if there were no medium between High-shoon Language,
and that of the Buskin and Stage: or if you will be above their understanding,
they will best like it, or believe it; according to that of Tacitus, Hist. 1.
Cupidine Ingeny humani libentius obscura credi, In words that never did, never
can, nor ever will signify any thing; so they be new and in Fashion; a whole
Dictionary whereof would hold forth but Muchnesse, of Nothingnesse. Again, too
many there are that are resolved to like nothing from the Pulpit, or Press
that smells of the Lamp, that cost the Author pains, because it upbraideth
their Laziness: they like that of Persius; N^c Pluteum caedit, nec demorsos
sapit ungues.
They never buffeted a Desk for these,
Or bit their Nails. Such lines are writ with ease.
Give them Sermons easy as familiar talk, and printed Labors like those
Sermons; commend them to such as can undo a Text (as they term it) with as
much ease as a bow-knot, and Commentatours without Pen, Ink, or Paper; that
neither know, nor care to use such Implements; though to ordinary Reason it
were a prudent resolve, to say, I would be loath to preach, no otherwise for he
manner, than my Parishioner were able to say to me at Table. (Though both
Pulpit and Table discourse should be for matter good) or to say, I would print
just as I preach. Since this is Sermo manens, a lasting Sermon, to more than
any one vocal can be. Besides, in Sermons must be allowance for the capacity
of illitterate men, and such whose all of knowledge depends on the Priests
lips. These labors fall (most probably) under the view of the more Judicious,
and liable to the view of the most Judicious; therefore too much care can
scarce go to the compiling of such lasting Discourses, with present and after
Ages. But we will leave these kind of Readers with nothing in their Heads, and
come to them with too much, the Severest Censurers of Authors: Such whole Heads
are filled with those Principles of Prejudice (the true english of the Lord
Bacons Idola, in that excellent Directory of Sciences, his Novum Organum) which
are either falsely receptive, or morosely exclusive.

1. Falsely receptive, that corrupt any Notions mingled with them: of these
true is that Aphorism. Habet unusquisque (praeter Aberrationes Naturae humanae
in genere, seu Idola Tribus) Specum sive Cavernam quandam individuam, quae
lumen naturae frangit and corrumpit, every one has a secret and individual
Caverne, or dark Cell in his understanding, which breaks the Rays of the
light of Nature, and falsify the shives of Truth: among which that is no small
one, to setup one particular Science for a commonplace Book of all our
Notions: to espouse our selves so to one part of truth, as to endowe her with
all our Assent, bringing almost all other Notions to this for their Pass. Thus
while Aristotle doted on his Logic, he made his natural Philosophy
contentious, and almost useless. Chemists (if merely so) are the plainest
instance of all, out of a few experiments of the Furnace, making a Philosophy
that vanishes into Smoke. Doctor Gilberts justly to be-commended labor about
the Loadstone so crammed his Fancy with Notions touched only with that, and so
moving toward it, that his Philosophy will scarce abide Experiments* or
Re^sons Touchstone in all Points. Hence so many Corruptions of diving Text,
because men endeavor to make it speak their own sense; use it as their
Pleader, not Counselor; if it will speak for us, none so ready to fee it (as
it were) with the Resignation of our Reasons, or will: but if it Oracle
contrary to our Interest, or Humor, we will create an Amphiboly, a double
meaning where there is none; and make it speak our meaning, or conclude it
defective. Other Books fare in the like manner. What Author so ever denies the
undeniablenesse of any of our received Tenets, we gloss him with Invectives,
or damn the whole Book for Er^^^as. It is enough with the Astrologer, for a
Divine, never so solid to lose his Esteem for Divinity, if he have none of
Star-prophesie.

2. To come to the second Bench of Censurers, fitted with peevish exclusive
Notions, or Idola made by Education, Tradition, etc. (of which somewhat has
been said in the Essay of Reasons Independency) Look how, what you write,
agrees with these: You shall hear that grand Sophos in Martial. Ep. 1. 4.
good, rare, excellent shall be their vote; but if you bring any thing clearly
new to their Antiquated understanding, or contradictory to their Creed of
Notions (as I may term them) then, Ibis ab excusso missus ad Astra Sago,
They fling you further from them, than Hercules did Cacus, blurre all, with
new fangled, whimsicall, shallow; the most candid Dash, will be So, So. He is
one of audax Japeti genus, the bold ones indeed, that will like a Book his
Master, or Tutor condemns, and he is held Heretical, that shall aver any
thing defective, or superfluous in his all-knowing Aristotle; he that will deny
the four Elements, shall have the Italian fifth bestowed on him (according to
whom Il mal dire d' Altrui, e quinto Elemento. Ill Language is the fifth
Element.) The fire Philosopher will quickly reduce that Book to Ashes (and its
Caput Mortuum) that subscribeth not to its three Elements: whithout a third
comes with his one single Element, and quenches the other three. Thus has
difference about the Number of Elements caused as much disturbance* almost, in
the lesser, as their jarres and Combinations have in the greater World; and
such severe and sharp usage is enterchanged between dissenting Brethren in
Philosophy. But come to the Vatinian hatred of Books and Authors in Religious
and Politic Differences, and we shall see it scarce possible for a Book, writ
on any Subject, that will please two seveall Readers: merely because men's
understandings are Garrisoned before with old Soldiers, old Notions of
undoubted Authority. He that teaches, as having Authority, he that speaks as
never man spoke, he alone can storm Assent: It is not a work for the learned
Scribe, nor strictest Pharisee. Nay, he himself that was Truth Incarnate
(where he used not all his strength, and irresistible Battery, I mean, his
Spirit of Persuasion) met with as bad Entertainment from the gainsaying Jews,
as any that ever writ, or dyed for him. In Divinity, Morals, and Naturals, true
is that rule of the Lord Bacon, in his Novum Organum, Aphorism 49. lib: 1.
Intellectus humanus Luminis Sicci non est; According to that significant Phrase
of Heraclitus, Sed recipit Infusionem a voluntate and Affectibus, and quod
volunt recipient. We receive only those things for Truths we have a mind to.
Difficult things we endeavor not, sober things we despise, (as streightning
our Hopes) Secrets of Nature, timorous Superstition frighteth us from: In Pride
we decline Experiments, as fixing us in low and changeable things. Paradoxes
our Master, the People, will not let us admit, so much as to examine. So many
ways does Affection stain our understandings. But before we leave our
complaining Character, of what Readers are, take this as an unobserved secret;
Bad Readers make bad Authors, which are fain to please bad Judges, with
Deformities instead of Beauties: an excellent I^lustration, whereof is that of
Polycletus, who setting a new made Statue in the Marketplace, and over-hearing
the Faults the common people found, made one according to their Censures, as he
could remember when he came home. If one said the Nose was too little, he made
it bigger: If another said the Eye, or Lip was too b^gg, he made it less. By
that time he had done, you may guess what a piece it was: Putting both again
to view, his first made by Art, and that made by Opinion of the vulgar; seeing
his last derided, and the former applauded, said, Know good people that which
you commend I made, that which you discommend you made.

So fares it with Books; the various Pallats of Readers, and multitude of
Correctors of the Press, streightneth writers of that freedom of the Spirit,
that should be in Authors; who while they strive to please all, become neither
Friends to Truth, nor reconcilable to common Sense.

Well, we have seen what Readers are, let us now see what they should be; to
bring Rasae Tabulae, clean Tables to every Author, is the advice of no small
Philosopher. Super-writing (being scribbling) makes neither the old, nor the
new legible; a good course therefore it is to sponge out prejudicate Notions,
or Opinions, received on any ground, but that Scientificall Syllogism, where
Reason is the Major, and Experiment the Minor: In making of which, all our life
will not exclude any new reason, or experiment, but it will help to make the
Conclusion so much the truer, though we come not to the Ergo of our knowledge
until we come to the conclusion of our days, and studies.

I will not slightly forgo any Notion, (delivered me from the Reasons of
others, received deliberately by mine own, confirmed by both our Experiments)
For a Novelty diametrically opposite, without it bring so convicting a Ray of
Truth, that (as that one Dissenter in a Synod) it confutes the whole Synod of
Opposers.

Thus I would behave my self toward Positive Assertions, and Tracts of
Reasoning. Now to Authors of modest Advice, profitable Pleasure, useful
variety, etc. I will dislike none, because he is not the best, or slight all,
because none perfect. I look not for any Soule-like Composure, among the works
of men, that (according to the wordings of some Philosophy) should be Totum in
Toto and tota in qualibet Part, Comprehensive of all I can expect. I believe
that no frighting Proverb (from circuiting the Zodiac of Learning) unus in
omnibus, Nullus in Singulis) he that is some body in every thing, is nothing in
any thing. For I believe there is no ullus in quovis Singulo, perfect; no
culminating Writer, in any one Subject; so lofty as out of the reach of
Imitation in some point or other. I look on Libraries, and Books, as a Garden
of Nature, not of Art, where useful Plants find a room, as well as gay
colored Flowers. And amongst Writers, I look not every one should do by Themes
(as he did by virtues in Pindars high Line) top only the choicest expressions,
or descriptions of them, in the same Author (though many times dull) there may
be a Diversity that may excuse, being not equally bad. Scarce any one Book that
is all a Parenthesis that may be left out, and the Reader never the less
knowing. The Elements of Books Martial excellently summeth up in that Epigram.
Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mala plura
Quae Legis hic, aliter non fit Avite liber.
These Elements to Books Composure go,
Some good, some bad, and some So, So.


The Metaphor of Cooks and Guests (familiar in Prologues) may direct the
Deportment of Readers, who are to come to Books as Guests, not Cooks, it being
a Squeamishness to forbear satisfying his Appetite, as a Guest, because
somewhat may be wanting in some Dishes Preparation that cannot satisfy the
curious Criticisme of a Cook. Martial dressed his to Readers, not Critics. --
Cae^ae Fercula Nostrae
Malim convivis, Lib. 9. Ep. 82.
quam placuisse cocis.
-- I Would have my Books
Content the Candid Guests, not curious Cooks.


Lucilius was of the same temper, that said, Nolle se sua scripta legi nec a
Doctissimis, nec ab indoctissimis, quod hi nihil intelligerent, illi plus
saperent quam ut posset illorum Judicio satisfacere. He would not his Writings
should fall under the perusal either of Dunces, or great Scholars; the former
would not understand enough, the latter too much, for to rest satisfied. And in
vindication of Authors, I may safely commend, him whose Resolution is, non
nimium curo, because of that quidam exactos esse Poeta negat, not to be
troubled, because their works do not satisfy the Captious Critic. It were a
cruelty, but one degree less then Pharaohs, to kill all the Males that were
not handsome [Fabula de te narratur] It is true of thee O Reader, that
condemnest issues of the Brain, as are not such non pareilles, unmatchable. Let
men examine but their own breasts, I am sure they would expect more Mercy as
Authors, than they afford as Readers; But Justice requires candid censure of
any thing (if innocent) that cost the Author pains, and was minted in a
public Spirit (as they word it) he that will not be merciful, let him be
just: For rash Censure is an unobserved Injustice, and on the same File with
Defamation: For what upbraideth any ones weakness, does but call him Fool;
what thou can not mend, condemn not, what thou can not imitate, reverence;
what thou can but equal, I know thou will be favorable to; but what thou
art many stories above, look on as equal with some step thou did rise by: Or
as Elevated to the Meridian of others, if not thine. Books are like Letters; if
they please not) think them not sent to thee, but some other, and there is no
hurt done. Look on Writers as aiming to please themselves, or others, not thee
alone. Take not all Books as Epistles dedicatory to thy Fancy, or Approbation:
and if things are not bad that attain their End; If he have had his End, to him
his work is good, though it appear not so to thee. To Readers of Obscurityes
(where Censure is most unjust) let Socrates be their Example; who when
Euripides asked his opinion of Heraclitus his Book (he had lent him) he
answered (...). What I understand was gallant; I will believe the like, of what
I do not understand. To conclude let readers think, every Author confesses his
Writings not Canonical, by an implicit Apology that they are but men; from
whom it is as unjust to exact perfection, as ridiculous to expect it.

THE WISE CHAPMAN.
QVam necessarium est Rebus Pretia imponere? (says Se^eca) how necessary is it
to set a right Estimate on things? since there is not a higher point of
Wisdom, than to know the real worth of things in themselves, and their prizes
what they must cost to obtain; Senec. Ep. 81. nescimus aestimare Res, de quibus
non cum Fama, sed Rerum Natura deliberandum est. It was an old complaint, that
the World was in nothing more foolish than in Marketing: For we judge of things
not according to their real, but reputed worth. It is this loses Mankind, in
those many Inventions Man's blindness has groped out, since he lost his
Integrity God had made him in. I have as harsh an Opinion of man's Corruption
since his fall, as any; yet cannot believe his Perverseness such, that if he
did see the hole of the broken Cistern, he would leave the Fountain of living
waters. No, his Blindness and Infidelity betrayeth him to this Stupidity, and
Witchcraft-adhaesion to the Creature. Inconsiderateness of what we buy, and
give, Cheats our Souls into such losing Adventures, and Bargains of Dotage.
It is reckoned for the sad condition of mankind, that its happiness here is
for the most part Imaginary, (but its Griefs real) just so are his Purchases,
the things (be they Favor, Wealth, Honor, etc.) he buyeth, empty or
inconstant; the price Blood, or Sweat: It is Epictetus his advice (seconded by
the best Adviser, CHRIST himself) in all our Enterprises, to set down and
reckon the Charges. Would I be entertained at such a man's Table (says he) why
he sells it for flattery, while there, or Rehersall, (and Bill of fare) to
strangers when gone, or the Humility of a Retainer, and such like rates. Now if
thou will go to the price, proceed: will thou be rich what ever come of it?
Can thou afford lying, Dissembling, Cogging, watchings, moylings, abiest, and
servile unselfing thy free born Mind, or Body? give these, and much good may
it do you with your Bargain. Is the Impropriation of some rich Beauty thy
Design? Scorns, tedious Attendances, Frumps (as their Reward) Joyntures, and
such like Geere, are the Prizes of its Pursuance, often times; Brangles,
Jealousies, Resignations of the Charter of the Male, by unworthy
Obsequiousness, and are the Prizes of its Fruition. But amongst all the
foolish Chapmen of the World, none to him that buyeth the Pleasures of ^in for
a season, with the loss of his Soul for Eternity. To buy a Lease of short
uncertain life, with an Inheritance of Perpetuity, would be contemned for the
Fools Purchase: And yet it were well if the worlds Wiseman were not this
Fool. I will therefore study to know what I buy, and what I give, and
endeavor the wisdom to observe Proportion, and the Justice, not to be angry
with the World, if she deny me her Ra^tles, and Toys (for such are the best of
her Wares) because I will not go to the price of them. Let her keep Wealth, or
Revenge* if necessary s^eepes, and quiet safety must be exchanged for them. I
will not change the Poets Murus aheneus, brazen wall of Innocence, for her
golden Mines, nor the Feast of a good Conscience, for all the choice Delicates
of the most inventive Luxury: and it were a shame it should not be a Christians
Resolve, since the Philosophers Reason plays the Clerk of this great Market,
and gives no less true then ingenious Estim^te of sublunary Desirables, Ep.
81. Nil habent Ista magnificum quo Mentes in se nostras trahant; Praeter hoc,
quod mirari illa consuevimus. They have no such huge matters in them, to
bewitch our Desires; because our blindness Idolatrously bestows on them the
Homage of wonder: For such is the irregularity of Custom, it does not extol
things because worthy, but thinks them worthy, because they are Extolled.

THE BLOTS OF HISTORY.
THat the Truth of History is so much blurd, Tacitus (the subtilest of
Historians, if Strada will not allow him the best:) Histor. 1 Principio.
gives us the Reasons, because their Ink is either too thin and pale, through
the Flattery of the Penmen, or too thick and black, through its Gall and
Malignity: ita neutris ^ura Posteritatis, inter Infensos, and obnoxios.

The Hand will shake where Interest holds the Pen. Were it not for his third
Impediment, Inscitia Reipublicae ut alie^ae, ibid. unacquaintednesse with our
proceedings, Foreigners would be our best Historians; could Affairs be
faithfully transmitted to their view, not more loose in Sheets, than from
biassed Engagements, or Inclinations to either side.

It were the only way to have it Narratio vera, and mera, true and naked
Relation; (as Strada seems to desire History to be) and to wear the only
Ornament Tully would have History wear, which was nil aliud, quam ut mendax
non esset, only that it should not be fabulous. And what Garb is it less in?
men writing not so much what was done, as what they would have Posterity
believe; and so between the dangerous Obnoxiousnesse of latter or present
Times, and the uncertainty of more remote; The truth of History is much
impaired: that my Lord Bacon might well say (in 4th. of his Advancement of
learning, the cap. 5.) there is not a greater Rarity among Humane Writings,
than an everyway complete History: but either tainted with ostentation of their
wits, or cloudings of Truth; Partiality in Judges of the Facts of men
(Historians) being as frequent, (I hope more) as any could complain in ^udges
of the Law: and truly, give me leave to say more mischievous in some
re-respects; the one injuring (sadly enough) the Living; but the number and
concernment are less than what are injured by corrupted Historians, injuring
both the Dead and the Living; falsifying that Glass that should faithfuly
present Predecessors, for Successors to dress and instruct themselves: by
neither Ecclesiastical or civil Historian, escapes this Imputation. One
rela^eth the same Person for an obstinate Haeretick; that another Kalendars for
Martyrdom; nay this Partium studium, Siding, has crept into Historiam Nemeseos
(as the Lord Bacon calls it) the Chronic ^les of divine execution, of that
decree, for all men once to die (by ^om called the Theater of Gods Judgment) in
which the Writer, and (by his infection) the Reader is often too subject to
censure what fell out inter ^ontem and Fontem, between the Bridge and the
Water, with a Censorious blast, sometimes removing the Tree from the Place it
fell in; (as to the Eye of divine Mercy) as I believe on Revelation Day will
appear in civil History) than what more usual, than to make its own Sides
wisdom the Politic Cause of successes: or the Justice of its Cause so the
Darling of Providence, that scarce a Bit of Daily Bread must fall beside their
Mouths: nay thus have many cunning Makers of work for Historians contrived it
themselves, rather ascribing their Victories to the care of the Gods than their
own Prowess or Policy, thereby insinuating a greater Reverence of their
Actions; Sylla choosing the name of Happy, rather than Great, which whether
more humbly, than politickly, is left in Dispute. On the contrary they use
their Adversary, according to the Proverb, painting the Devil blacker then he
is, and now how to guide our Historical faith between these Rocks were worth
the Enquiry. Consider the Charge History is ordinarily entrusted with; and
according to that must our Demeanor be: the Cabinet of History (according to
my Lord Bacon in the forementioned Place) holds Examples of our
Predecessors, Changes of Times (and in them of things) Rules of wisdom
deducted, or deducible, Names and Fames of men. 1 For Examples of virtue, or
vice, and changes of times, I will not look on them as incredible, because
strange to me; for that Solomon assures me, there is nothing new under the
Sun: their strangeness and singularity not being in the things themselves, but
in our Ignorance of History.

2. But for the other part of their trust, the Fames and Names of Men; my
Belief shall tenderly proceed to Sentence: for fear of that Taint the
Historian hints, ill natured Detraction; which Men's corrupt Disposition calls
Liberty. Obtrectatio and Livor pronis auribus accipiuntur, quippe Malignitati
falsa species Libertatis inest. Tacit: Histor. 1. It is, I confess, the
happiness of some Men's Memories, that they are got above those two vices
Tacitus speaks of, (mingled as it were with the Mortar of Cities Walls, and
inseparable from Bodies great, or small:) Ignorantia Recti, and Invidia,
Agricol. Vit. Praef. Ignorance, and Envy, forceing from care less and
regardlesse Times, Observation; and from even the malevolent, Reverence:
whereas on the contrary some are, non tantum Aliorum, sed sui superstites,
Tacit. ib. Outlivers not of others only, but themselves, as to any Eminence or
note for virtuous Deeds. So much of their Lives passing deservedly, without
observation of others, because their own; from whom their Time and life stole
into that Abyss of Forgetfullnesse: but we may believe many have escaped our
Knowledge, not through want of Deservings to be eternized in the Temple of
Honor, (which is History) but through the Last (and which is not the least)
defect of History, a custom of not preserving the memories, but only of Active
Men, when the lives of famous Men, in Learning and Piety, are Desiderata,
things left out of the Archives of History. For the Memories of truly deserving
Men, even Almanacks seem to have made a wiser choice; that preserve, not the
Names of Alexander, or Caesar, (the worldly valiant) but of the twelve
Apostolical Champions, with their Regiments of Martyrs (as I may term them)
in scrutiny of Reason more truly valiant, nay Victorious in their Death, than
any of the other in their Lives. The fault of Time, is too much the fault of
her Registers, that (like deep Rivers) suffers weighty things to fink, its
Stream bringing down only lighter and more worthless Matters.

But since to call back yesterday, and to correct yesterday, are a like
impossible: let us mend the faults of our private Historys, our Consciences;
and in them corrected* be conversant. Comparing our selves with our selves
being of use, both in worldly Prudence, and Piety. In both, the discreet Study
on past Miscarriages, may, (in great Probability) prevent their Repetition in
the future.

THE POLITIC Weather-Glasse.
WEre the Complaint of every Age hearkened to, there never were good Times; and
the very first were worst, should the Querelous dis^ontentednesse of Men's
Natures be believed, with which a Peoples sins are full sooner than in Gods
account: nor will it allow those Spiramenta Temporum (as one calls them)
Pawses of wickedness, that give breath to gasping Piety or Justice: which to
deny were injurious to Providence; that does not so dishearten the good, as to
let vice always bear sway. I believe Salomons Rule, Nothing new, and what is,
has been, and shall, is meant as well of the Corruption of Times, as
Occurrences of Providence. National Sins there are scarce new, though some
personal Crimes, or single Acts may have no Parallel, but still to be crying
out, never worse Times, all is naught, sometimes makes the Devil blacker than
he is, that we may appear whiter than we are: for it is but a lazy fathering
even our own Misdemeanors, or Misfortunes, wholly on a forceing stream of the
Times, and a current, (as it were) necessitating them; when the Blame is often
more truly the Complainers faults; that are Fathers, (and we as it were the
Godfathers) to those bad times; they making, and we calling them so; so that
strictly enquired into diverse times, these accusings of the Times, is but
excusing our selves. Better it were to study a prudent behavior in them, than
a fluency of railing against them: To do which, we must first learn which are
bad, and then how to mend them (at least to us.) I shall only refer you to the
Politicians Weather-glasse, whereby he not only foreseeth (but discerns
aright (when fallen) the unseasonable weather of his respective Place he lives
in. Pliny thinks it foul weather when men must speak or write (as his Uncle
Pliny Senior did some Books) dubij Sermonis, Ambiguities, too subtle for
exception; and Tacitus secondeth it with that, Rara Temporum Felicitas, ubi
sentire quae velis, and quae sentias dicere licet, Rare is the happiness of
such a Toleration (says he) whereby men may think what they list, and speak
what they think. But in this I must dissent from this Oracle of Politic
Truths, (though I do as seldom, as from any in the like kind) and cannot but
attribute Matchless Infelicity to the freedom of Conceptions (or their
Delivery) of any thing pleases our humor, though never so disturbing Church,
or State.

Now go on in the same Author, and methinks I see a Tempest indeed, which has
the very Operation of a Storm: It drives me to my Prayers never to be in such
a one. Haustae aut obrutae urbes, Consumptis antiquissimis delubris, Pollutae
Ceremoniae, magna Adulteria, plenum Exilijs Mare, Infecti caedibus Scopuli,
atrocius in urbe saevitum. Nobilitas, Opes, omissi gestique Honores pro
crimine, and ob virtutes certissimum Exitium, nec minus Praemia delatorum quam
scelera; cum Alij sacerd^tia, and consulatus ut spolia adepti, agerent ferrent
que cuncta odio and Terrore corrupti in Dominos Servi, and quibus deerat
Inimicus, per Amicos oppressi. Miseries I hope never to see in English. Well
enter Aristophanes with his Character, it is this; -- (...)
(...).
Act. Plutus.
1. Sc. 1. It is in short, the times are not over laudable, wherein not to be a
Knave, is to be a Fool. And in the second Act. 5 th. Scene, he has a larger;
but take the close in Latin (as the more facile) -- Hodie bona pars Hominum
prava and scelerata,
Divitijs per Fas and Nefas corrasis, affatim abundat.
Multi autem justi and probi inopia atque Fame oppressi, male vitam peragunt.
(Which sort of bad times are not unusual, nor will sound incredible in
English.) The greatest, but not best part of men (says he) scrape up Wealth by
Hook, or by Crook; while the just and upright man has many more Fasts then
Festivalls in his Calendar. Let Us have Senecas vote, and he is sick of such an
Age; Saeculo quo magna Pietas, nil impie facere: Consol. ad Marc. c. 1. wherein
not to be a notorious Publican (as I may term it) or Villane, is to be a strict
Pharisee. Goodly Times indeed! And what think you of Tacitus his twenty years:
Exin continua per viginti annos Discordia; non Mos, non Jus, deterrima quaeque
impune, ac multa honesta exitio fuere. Annal. 3. It was a twenty years wherein
all things were lawful, but nothing safe. But I conclude with his description
of Domitians times, which was so strange, it is a wonder divine Patience it
self made them not the last, being so like the worst. I am sure by his
description they would extort Hesiods wish, -- (...), To have dyed sooner, or
been born later. The former, Tacitus reckons Agricola's happiness in the close
of his life, saying, Ita festinatae mortis grande Solatium fuit evassisse
postremu^ istud Tempus, quo Domitianus non iam per intervalla, ac Spiramenta
Temporum, sed Continuo, and velut uno Ictu Rempub. exhausit. It was the timeing
of Agricola's untimely death, that he lived not to those days of Domitian,
wherein Ruin did seem to ride in Triumph, and (before the invention of that
No-quarter-giver) even Gunpowder Enormities and Desolation did blow up all as
at one crack. But the Storms we have seen; now for the Harbor to repair to,
in perilous times. Why (to keep still to the Politic compass) it is to steer
a steady course between those two Rocks, deforme obsequium and abruptam
Contumaciam. Annal. 4. page 97. Mis-becoming Slavishnesse, and abrupt
Contumacy, so as to do nothing against Rules of Honesty, or suffer any thing
through Refractory Indiscretion, or unadvised Distastings. But some will say,
hic Labor hoc opus est; this is scarce possible, but Tacitus shall answer them,
Sciant, quibus moris illicita mirari, posse etiam sub malis Principibus magnos
viros esse, he begins it with a Noverint universi; let such know, says he,
whose humor it is to admire and commend all Attempts against settled Laws,
and higher Powers, that there may be good Subjects under bad Rulers; though
there be that affect Eminence by suffering Singularity, and count no Grace
equal with popular Applause for their merited Disgrace. It is that Politicians
Text, that men prudentially submissive and modest (if likewise of active
abilities in the Sphere, or Employment they are in) may gain as just, and
lasting Memorial in Times Calendar, as any that have provoked their Destinies,
by vain and useless Resistances of Power. The more satisfying Original is
this, Obsequium ac Modestiam, si Industria ac vigor adsint, eo laudis excedere
quo Plerique perabrupta, sed in nullam Reipub. post usum, ambitiosa Morte
inclaruerunt, Tacit. Agricol. Nor by this prudential, and quiet Deportment,
does he countenance cowardly compliance, that will not suffer, but ( do, if you
will) any thing: for his Annalls, and History, often mention Laudatas mortes,
Histor. 1.
renowned Deaths of many, especially when (in his Judgment) such only were
adjudged to death, that were most worthy to live, and on that score suffered.
But Rules of this nature cannot reach us in Christian Commonwealths: from the
Politic. Schools therefore, I must lead you to the Temple, where you will
find David taking a turn on this very Errant; with whom and able Casuists I
leave you. Only by what has been said, Moralls, and Policy, can advise you
this Resolve, that in times never so bad, we must as carefully beware we do not
fall in their Miseries, as resolutely bear them, when they fall on either our
Constancy, or Integrity.

THE FALSE BALANCE.
ILL succeeds that Judgment that judges by Success, whether we look on
passages of Providence, or Actions of men; delayed punishments (and such is the
Prosperity of the wicked; for Quisquis videtur dimissus, dilatus est. Senec.
cur bonis mala, c. 4. They are not dismissed, but deferred) not acquitting the
guilty, nor present over-bearings of the Enemies of Goodness condemning the
Innocent. 1. As for the delay of punishment, it is not the least part of their
punishment; and Plutarch gives a reason in his Morals, divine enough, Atque
adeo non video quid utilitatis adsit ijs, qui sero tandem molere Molis Deorum
dicuntur, and de his qui sero a Numine puniuntur. I see, says he, no such
great cause they have to brag, that grind late in GODS Mill (viz. Of
Affliction) for they are thereby more miserable, because delay of Justice
obscureth it, and they feel not their Guilt; reckoning Afflictions out of the
noise of the offense, rather Mis^hances then Punishments, etc. the consequence
whereof Solomon tells us, Eccles. 8. 11. Because Sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil; Which continued Carriere to Destruction, is a
Prosperity to be delivered from, according to my Let any. It is not Stoicisme,
but Christian Philosophy, to account a Sinners not being called to Account in
this life, the saddest Sentence; in my Judgment the Curse, that (like a sad
Clapse) almost closes Gods Book, REVEL. 22. 11. He that is unjust let him be
unjust still. He that is filthy let him be filthy still, etc. is a sadder,
then any other in Old, or New Testament. But that rare Moralist agrees not
only with Salom^n, but also with Peter; when he scarce affords the uncheckt
Current of the Affairs of the wicked, so much as to be a delay, but only in
the apprehension of us Momentanean Ephemeri, and span-long-lived Accountants.
De Tempore longo cum dixi, intelligendum est hoc ut ad humanam refertur
naturam, nam Dijs quidem omne humanae vitae spacium pro nihilo est, and quod
nunc, non ante triginta Annos, tale est atque hoc quod non mane etc. de his qui
sero a Numin. etc. What rare Harmony is here between the outward Court of
Nature and inward Quire, that Sanctum Sanctorum of divine Writ. Pet. 2. 3. 8.
says, One with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day. And Plutarch says, when I say a long time, it must be understood of men's
Account; for in Gods Houre-glasse the longest life is not so much as one Sand.
An Offender not punished thirty years hence (says he) is but as if God should
say, I will let him alone till Noon, or Evening; but if it be a kind of delay,
and seem tedious, the same School affords a satisfying Reason, as humane
Policy (says Plutarch in the same place) forbeareth execution of a condemned
Pregnant (or woman with Child) so divine Justice forbeareth some that are not
yet delivered of some secret Villainy besides, by confession; or of some Good
they may yet be Authors of, before they dye: And for his last Reason, they
cannot be called late Punishments, because they are Medicines; the time of
administering which is not to be called late, or early by any others Estimate
than the Physicians; he proceeding therein not by striking of Minutes, but
Seasons, as his Regulaters in administration of Remedies: These may in short
lessen our wonder at the delayed punishments of the wicked, and teach us
another name for them than Prosperity; even out of the Philosopy School; only
so excellent an Anatomist as Saint Austin, we will make bold to borrow as an
Assistant, in showing us the inside of worldly Prosperity and Success. It is
his Account, that Prospera hujus Mundi asperitatem habent veram, Jucunditatem
falsam, certum Dolorem, incertam voluptatem, durum laborem, timidam Quietem,
Rem plenam Miseriae, Spem Beatitudinis inanem, Epist. 36. The Prosperous
Affairs of this World have Thorns within truly vexing, false Joys, certain^
Grief, uncertain Pleasure, toilesome Labor, timorous Rest, and as full of
Misery, as empty of solid Happiness. 2. But on the other side, if we rightly
examine the righteous man's troubles, they are but what Seneca says of
Socrates, his poisonous Potion, Medicamenta Immortalitatis, not so much bitter
Draughts as Healths to the Immortali^y glorious of his Soul and Fame:
Afflictions joined with Innocence ( imputative scilicet) being but Martyrdomes;
whereas Exemption from them with Guilt, is Execution with a stupifying Draught.
Hear this Opinion seconded by Seneca, concluding his perfectly moral Epistles
with this Rule of Perfection. Brevem tibi Formulam dabo, qua te metiaris, qua
perfectum esse jam sentias: Bonum tunc habe^is tuum, cum intelliges
infelicissimos esse Felices. Ep. 124. Then, says he, count thy self perfect
in true wisdom, when thou can account nothing so great Misery as unruffled
Prosperity, or uncheckt Current of Successes; or if we will judge by this false
Balance flin^^ Time into the Scales, and we will judge so too, by David's own
Rule: Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is
peace, Psalm. 37. 37. What a Symphony may we hear with David's Harp from the
Quills and Muses of the Heathen! In Prose let Ammianus Marcellinus (being a
Soldier as well as Historian) but lead the Van (and put but justam for
Romanam) and we may say with him, in Praelijs quibusdam raro Rem titubasse
justam, in Summa vero Bellorum, nunquam ad deteriora prolapsam, Lib. 17. In
some Battles, and at some times the just Cause it may be has tottered, nay
been worsted, but never in the upshot Sat down a Looser. Lucan sings it out,
Lib. 7. Causa jubet Superos melior sperare secundos.


The just Cause, bids us hope the just Gods aid. And Claudian sings the same
Note, 4. Cons. Honor. -- hinc Secula discant
Indomitum nil esse pio, tutumve Nocenti,
Non dabitis Murum Sceleri, Qui vindicat ibit.
Omnia subsident meliori pervia Causae,
IN ENGLISH.
-- Learn after times,
Naught keeps the just Cause out. For Crimes;
Walls cannot keep them in, safe from the hands
Of just Revenge; whose Pass through all Commands.


Notwithstanding so many unquestionable Truths against the false Balance, the
Vulgar will weigh the Warrior, Politician, and Physician in it, do all you can.

1. For the first take the former Souldier^ word for it, Ammianus Marcellinus,
lib. 17. Prosperos omnes Laudari Bellorum Eventus, The winning side all will
commend, and all share in the Praise; according to Tacitus. Iniquissima haec
Bellorum Conditio est, Prospera omnes sibi vindicant, Adversa uni imputantur.
It is the sad Fate of War, all will share in the Honor of the Success, but
one, and that the Commander in chief must bear the blame of miscarriages; and
the Conqueror is always a wise, able, valiant, and gallant Commander; when it
is often true, that some are more gallantly beaten, than others do overcome: for
a Chance ( as to us) may give Victory, but it cannot give Courage, or Counsel.
In the Epitome of Battles, Duels, we allow him that is worsted, as gallant as
the Vanquisher; and shall we deny it in those larger Tracts of Destruction,
Pitch-fields?

2. The Politician must into the same Scales, the Successful, Culminant in a
Prince^ Favor, takes all the Honor from the Lord of his Ascending, and has
it given to his own Shrewdness and subtle contrivances. It is not the Princes
Goodness, so much as the Favorites Abilities of working on, and into the
Inclinations of those they apply themselves to: If he fall, it was gross
Dotage could not forsee such, and such alterations; or at best a weak
oversight. No Statesman sinks indeed under Misery, or Dis-favour; but the
blind judgment of the world censureth him either Knave (and so suffering it as
from the hand of Justice) or one Embarked in the Ship of Fools, that has
sprung some Leake, betraying it to unpittied Shipwreck.

3. But in that most censurable Profession of Physic, this false Rule does
most of all overruled men's Judgments. Let a Miscarriage come from any point of
the Circumference (as scarce a Poin^ but it may) viz. From Tenders, Patient,
Morbi malo Dolo (the Jurist^ may lend the Physicians the word) the jugglings of
the Disease, late Application of means, or inconstancy under the timeliest,
etc. as from any of these besides many more it may: yet it shall be surely
centered on the Physicians weakness, Inadvertency, or Rashness. On the
contrary, blind Success shall carry the Credit from the most knowing Advice,
as my Lord Bacon in Lib. 4. de Augment. Scient. Where he joyneth the Statesman
and Physician, in the same unfortunate subjection to such Censures. Omnes aliae
propemodum Arts and Scientiae virtute sua and Functione, non Successu aut
Opere judicantur. Advocatum ipsa agendi and dicendi Facultas, non exitus causae
commendat; Gubernator Navis, etc. at Medicus and fortasse Politicus vir habent
aliquas actiones proprias, quibus Specimen Artis, and virtutis suae, liquido
exhibeant; sed ab Eventu praecipue Honorem aut Dedecus reportant, iniquissimo
prorsus Judicio.

A Catholic verity, fit to be translated into all Languages where the Art is
cherished! it amounts to this, almost all Arts, and Sciences are censured
according to their able, or faithful undertakings: The able pleading not
fortunate speeding in the Cause, commends the Lawyer; the Mariners skill
joined with care frees him from all the blames of miscarriage: Only the poor
Physician, and very often the Politician have no Actions truly so much their
own, as might render them esteemed, able, and wise; but their Credit be it
good, or bad, depends chiefly on the Success and Event; but through the
Injustice of their Judges. Thus far that wise Observator. And truly does not
Experience vote with him? The word Fortunate Physician comprehends all
abilities, and is enough to make a Tooth-drawer, or Corn-cutter pass for a
general Physician, and a Carduus Posset for a universal Medicine.

4. But lastly in private men's Actions, what are the usual Censures? and how
worded? Let an Enterprise be never so discreetly undertaken, or followed, if it
fall short of Success or Expectation, presently you may here, I wonder a man
would be so indiscreet, and rash; or so blind as not to foresee the Danger,
Inconvenience, or Inevitable Miscarriage. I wonder he could think it would
prove otherwise. Here that of Pliny (as indeed it holds in all the former
Instances) is of Probatum-Authority, and unquestionable verity. Est o^nino
iniquum, sed usu receptum, qnod honesta Consilia vel turpia prout male aut
prospere Cedunt, ita vel probantur vel reprehenduntur. Inde plerumque eadem
facta Diligentioe, modo Vanitatis, modo libertais, modo Furoris nomen
accipiunt. Lib. 5 Epist. 21. It is a custom not less usual then unjust, that
the same Counsels, good, or bad, are so ^alled, only as they succeed or
miscarry: Hence it comes to pass that the same actions are variously named,
diligent, or vain, bold, or mad. But bring this Balance to the Quest of
Reasons Examination, and we must confess no false weights injure more, in the
mutual Commerce of Tradesmen, than this false Balance does, Providence, and
Merit. To make Job the poor less Innocent, than Job the Wealthy, we see did
displease God, and injure Job.

Cato was of so constant a judgment as to pass it for the Conquered against
the Successful Conqueror. Nay, the Gods themselves herein truly verifying
the Character. -- rigidi Servator Honesti.


For the Poet testifies of him, Victrix Causa Dijs placuit, sed victa Catoni.
Though on the Victors smile the Gods,
Cato in the Cause allows no odds.


And Tacitus will bear him out in the constancy of his Judgment, with that in
Histor. 1.

Nam saepe honestas Causas Perniciosi exitus consequuntur. A good Cause and
Miscarriage, meet oftener than Hills; more agreeable therefore to the Scales of
the Sanctuary it is, to invert the Rule, and to account Goodness, Success,
and Prosperous Impiety, but a deplorable Impunity for a Moment, succeeded by
Miseries as easelesse as endless.

Essays.
THE BEST HUSBANDRY.
VIndica Te tibi, and Tempus; Reserve thy Self, and to thy self thy Time; One
would think were the beginning of Saint Paul's, not Senecas Epistles. So little
does it vary from the Apostles charge of us, to Redeem our time; And the
Arguments wherewith he enforces this best Husbandry, are the several strokes
of his Watch, (by which he gives us notice how time passes.) Magna pars vitae
elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihil agentibus, tota aliud. Great part of our
lives is spent ill, most idly, all impertinently; some of our days Business
snatches from us; others Necessities of life subduct, too great a part we dream
away; sadly lessening the wonder of the seven Sleepers: Many of us, (though but
less Time) sleeping more, because all our lives long, which they did not.
Mischiefs on the bed, or sleep in the bed, or Actions as vain and light as the
Feathers of the bed, share our most precious time, in which only we have a
propriety, and are most prodigal of that, which alone authorizeth a
Covetousness, and whereof a greediness is not illiberal: Vainly we complain
of shortness of life, when we complain of want of Passe-time; a word Pliny
Senior would have blessed himself to have heard, when he chid his Nephew for the
idleness of walking, with a Poteras inquit and has Horas non perdere, P^^n.
Ep. L^b. 3. 5.
You might (one would think, says he) spend your time better; as if he would
allow none to walk in Fields, or Gardens, but Herbalists; none, but such as
viewed the Earth as a Book, to whom the leaves of Plants were as instructive as
those of Paper: But not only Pliny, but every useful Book seems to upbraid
the ill Husbandry of this truest Treasure, our Time. Were not the business of
Eternity to be done here in this Moment of life; even, to a Rational and
Nobly aiming Soul, the enriching of our Intellectualls were far a Nobler
Employment, than the T^iler of Selfe-applauding Husbandry, or the most pleasing
variations of Sensuality and Delight. At the former part of which Paradox,
methinks I hear some Mammonite Cavell, saying, What Bo^k-worm dares tell us
of ill Husbandry? I, of time? since our subtle Interest impregnateth each
Minute, with Emoluments accrewing to us by their multiplication. We let slip
not a day, without being tributary to the Heap; till (like Progression in
Arithmetic) the Successor is able to purchase all the Predecessors, and the
last year of our lives out-liveth the Improvements of all the former. Sure too
much Learning makes them mad, that call us ill Husbands; but Aquinas dares do
it to the proudest Mihi plaudo, Selfe-approver of them all, who defines
Prodigality, 22 Questi. 119. Artic. 1.
to be Peccatum non principaliter proper Quantitatem, quam inordinationem dandi
Quibus non debet dari, and propter quae, and Sicut debet. A fault not so much
in the excess, as inordinate bestowings on them, on whom, or what we should
not, etc. If so, the great Husband himself is in the List of the vainest
Prodigalls. If to purchase the Barley-corn with the Jewel be an Act of as bad
Husbandry as can be instanced, de te Fabula narratur, It is true of thee thou
waster of thy time, upon Nocitura, certe nunquam satiatura, what may hurt, not
satisfy (as Seneca says: uncertain Riches: or him that lays out the
inestimable Sand of the Houre-glasse, on Tagus Sand, or the Golden Ore; what
does he but lay out most precious on most vile? and that constrained, which
will be great part of the Day-labourers Excuse, that spends through necessity
twelve Hours for a course Repletion of his Hunger, the Pleasure whereof it may
be lasts but two half hours, and the strength thereof but for to labor for
the next days food. Whereas this Avaricious Plenty, is its own Tasker, its
own Pharaoh, whose Druggery and Time to serve God cannot consist together.
These are they Seneca speaks of, who consume Omnes suos Annos, ut ab ijs unus
numeretur, all their years, that the year of their Maioralty may date the
building, or repair of some Conduit. A poor account of this Talent of Time, to
say they wrapped it pu in a Scarlet Gown, or hid it in their Coffers: and that
this Thriftinesse (the worlds admired Wisdom) is prodigal of Gods Time, and
their Souls, we may believe; when Lucians Cock will show them us, depriving
themselves of their sleep, vigilant in Plumis. Since they will not let Plutus
rest in the secret Cavernes of the Earth; he will not let them rest in their
Beds. But I leave these Prodigalls to the lash of their own Cares and
Discontents. Your Politician will agree with me that no such Fool, as the Time
Changer for money, while he thinks well of the sharing of his Time, inter
Clientium Greg^s, etc. (as Seneca) between flattering Clients Countermining
Emulators, and Egyptian Taskmasters, whom he striveth to please with the ^osse
of his own Liberty and Quiet: What a short lived greatness do thou endeavor
for, thou Ambitious Busie-body? How sm^ll a room will thy name fill in a
Chronicle? when the most famous of thy Exploits will not be eminent enough to
to make an Almanacks Since; which a blazing Star, Earthquake, Plague, etc. or
some eminent misery of mankind will do: how far Nobler a Thrift is the care of
being good, than great? even upon Earth the perfume of a good Name will
out-smell the Disparagement^ of thy Fall, and Rot tenness of thy Corruption in
the Grave. Look on the most judicious Historiographers Chronicle of the Worlds
great ones, what a slender Account are they summed up in? One Generation
passes and another comes. Eccles. 1.
What no more, Solomon, to be said of the great Nimrods of the World? that
bustle to enlarge their Quarters, by thrusting out the weakest; No mention
(with him) so much as of the Names of those Heroes, that fill other Histories:
Is all their Glory Galaxied (as I may term it) into such a one confused
Luster, or mention? Nay, not an honorable mention neither; but with Terminus
diminuens, that despairing Term passes; it is gone, justled out by another.
Seneca voteth with him, in Lib. de brevit. vitae c. 19. ^^uosdam inquit, quum
in Consummationem dignitatis per mill Indignitates erepsissent, misera Subijt
cogitatio, Ipsos laborasse in Titulum Sepulchri. How has it saddened many?
when they have arrived to some Honor through many Toiles, servile enough,
Affronts, Repulles, etc. to think at last they have only toiled for some
longer Title on their T^^m^stone, which also Time is not long eating out; as
the same Author in the same Book, Cap. 15. Honores Monumenta, Quicquid aut
Decretis Ambitio jussit, aut operibus extruxit, cito subruitur, nihil non longa
demolitur vetustas, and movet ocyus quod consecravit. Honors Monuments
Ambition has striven to ratify by degrees, or structures, quickly moulder
into a doubtfulness whether ever they were, etc. Alas, quota Pars Historiae
eris, what a unite (or it may be Cipher in History will thou be? when Cinis and
Manes, and fabula fies, Worms are Revelling in thy forgotten Carcass; a
pretty upshot of all ambitious Designs, and various Scenes of life, to be made
at length a Winters Tale, and Chimney-corner Discourse; that a Clownish
Whistler to his Teem, will not afford leisure to hear, but between sleeping
and his weary waking. Is this worth a Minute of the Creatures Time, that is
born to Eternity? A Fool and his Money, nay, Time (which is far more precious)
is soon parted; will bespatter the Ermins Purple and Scarlet, as well as the
sordidly Covetous Moyle (whom we have already proved to have title to the
Proverb) and be verified of the Ambitious; for indeed all three, the Luxurious,
Ambitious, and Covetous, are but varied Prodigals, laying out their best Wealth
on most vile exchange; the Proverbs Chapmen that buy Bartholomew Bables, with
the Tower of London. Let any that sits in the Scorners Chair, think as
slightly as he will of it; of all the Talents entrusted with the Sons of men,
none of more worth, or more strictly to be accounted* for than this of Time,
the first Truth departed Infidels believe, and is universally subscribed to,
the first Minute any droppeth into his unchangeable Eternity; but we may take
up Senecas complaint, Cap. 8. de brevit. vitae, Re pretiosissima luditur
(Tempore scilicet) fallit autem Illos, quia Res incorporalis. Men sport away
most precious Time, which because Invisible, is of no esteem. Did any but hear
Saint Hieromes Trumpet sounding in his Ears, Arise you dead and come to
Judgment, Sure he could not but more seriously observe when Plinys Clock
strikes, that I mentioned before, Poteras and has Horas non perdere. Sad waste
enough of Time we see is aliud agere, impertinent employment of Time, only, or
chiefly in the Pursuit of Honors, Riches, Power, etc. But exculelesse is the
idle man's nihil agendo, sleeping out his Lamp, or as vainly burning it. I know
not whether among those nihil agentes, Idlesbys, or male agentes, ill spenders
of their Time, I should place the Complementall visitant Athenian,
Newes-monger, and Amorous Trifler, that spends his Forenoones on his Glass,
and Barber, his Afternoones in discourse with Paint, or Lust, tributing most
precious Minutes, to the Scepter of a Fan. On whose Tombs Neroes Jest on
Claudius his Folly will be serious enough for an Epitaph, desijt inter vivos
m^rari, producta Syllaba prima in morari, (says my Author) he left fooling,
that is, he left to live; his life deserving but the Register of Seneca, diu
fuit, non diu vixit, he abode here a while, but lived not. But the Debaucht
burner out of his days, (in the Phrase of Plautus, Sepulchrum quaeramus ubi
hunc comburamus Diem, etc. is an undoubted Spend-thrift of time, and not the
least of those male agentes, wicked Consumers of it, measuring his Artificial
day by wine (not hour) Glasses, his Natural Day dividing by unnatural
Distempers, and surfeting Sleeps, and are those Home Antipodes (as Seneca very
wittily) Quorum contraria omnibus non Regio, sed vita est, sunt quidam in eadem
urbe Antipodes, non orientem solemn videntes, nec occidentem, nec ante diducunt
Oculos hesterna graves Crapula, quam appetere Nox coepit, That sleep by the
Sun, and drink by the Stars; from such sad Divisions of Time, what can be looked
for in the Quotient, but sottish and sickly stupidity? for where only
Impotency, etc. to exceed beats Taptoo, head Dieases, and such like dolorous
Pulsations beat Travaille. Hastening sickness making the span an inch:
Accidents of Life, Labor, Diseases, daily Repletions, and Inanitions, play the
wind, to the speedier consuming of our Lamps of life. Q^arrells and Distempers
(the subtlest, and therefore most dangerous Murderers) prove Extinguishers.
Seneca ranketh these amongst the worst of Prodigalls of the best of Treasures,
Time. De brevitat. vitae, c. 6. Imprimis illos numero, Qui nulli Rei, nisi
vino, ac libidini vacant. Caeteri etiamsi vana Gloriae Imagine teneantur,
speciose tamen errant: licet avaros mihi, licet Iracundos enumeres, vel
Bellatores, omnes isti virilius peccant. I reckon (says he) them the chief,
that spend their Time in Lust, or Riot. The Ambitious, Covetous, or
Contentio^s, trangresse more vainly. Our life is of it self co^tracted; our
longest life scarce enough to read the Diurnalls of Methusalems years, were
they compiled into a Chronicle. Yet how much shorter do our vain Employments
make it? so that (in comparison) Seneca is bold to say, Satis longa vita, and
in maximarum Rerum Consummationem large data est, si tota been Collocaretur:
non accepimus brevem vitam, sed fecimus, nec inopes ejus sumus, sed Prodigi. De
brevit. vitae, c. 1. We have life enough allowed us for the finishing of the
most weighty Designs it was destined for, if we did husband it, it is not
given, but made short: nor are we scanted, but profuse of it. Resolve we then
on Saint Paul's Cure, even of this past Prodigality; Redeem the time. Jacobs
Account of his life to Pharaoh, gives a double reason, Few, and evil have my
days been; make the motive few, to look Janus like to the future as well as
past, and it will be resolved thus, let us redeem our Time, because our former
days have been so evil, and our. future are we know not how few; and if we
would know how Time may be redeemed, the Rule is short, by doing, or receiving
good. For the former, the bounty of Titus the Emperor (who cried) diem
perdidi, I have lost this day (wherein he had not listed by Courtesy some new
friend.) And for the latter, diverse Heathen (who with a Commendable Impudence
thrust themselves into the Pupillage of Philosophers) will shame the floth of
Christians, that in a Supine Negligence let slip higher Advantages of both
doing, and receiving good: None being so empty but he may do good, nor so full
but he may receive good. For the former, by Prayer the most Impotent may do
the Ignorant, or unwilling good; and for receiving it, besides the divine
Oracles, there is not a Creature but is a Preacher: its Creators Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness the Sermon. So that a Christians Diem perdidi is
inexcusable: And yet alas! how many have Silvanus his fault in Tacit. Histor.
3. Dies. Rerum, verbis terentes, wasting days of Action, in talking; or which
is a degree lower, cross the Calendar of the Mexicanes, that Acosta speaks
of, Lib. 6. c. 2. (that dividing the year into eighteen M^nths, allowing each
twenty days, excluded the odd five days, calling them days of nothing which
they spent only in visits) making the 360. days of their year days of
nothing, but Riots, visits, Services of the world, or men, and such like Exiles
from themselves, and vacancies from the business of life: which is to
contemplate whence we came, and to prepare for whether we are going. A fault
aggravated by the variety of Graples a Christian has for time; there scarce
b^ing a minute of his life, but through faith, and sincerity of Aims, may
convey to himself, or dispense to others, blessings enough to be termed the
Ransomes of Time. Nay, to aggravae our misspending of Time, it is almost as
hard as to improve it. What variety of useful Books (like Pipes conveyed to
our private houses) may fill up those blanks of Time, that shamefully are
filled with vain Di^courses, idler Thoughts and fruitless Actions. Neither Sex
(though they cannot dive into the few Demonstrations, or many Controverted
Conjectures of Philosophy) but may take a Turn in the Temple of History, and
there meet with instructive Lectures of Providence, overruling all according
to the foreknowledge of its Counsel; or else in the instructive Paths of
divine or Moral Tracts. I look not on any useful instructor after his death
(and such are Books) but take them as come from the Dead, with concerning
Truths that they now fe^le, and I shall. And can time be beetter spent then in
fitting us for their and our Eternity? But how unexcusable has God left even
the Illiterate, since (as I have said) they may spell the Hieroglyphick of the
Creature, or their own active Soul can busy it self in Meditation, which to
a reasonable and Religious Soul is Business requiting it self; or else that
Anchoret is scarce to be believed; that being immured between two Walls, said,
his day did not seem tedious. Since then to loose Time, is almost as hard as to
recover it: Let us not be so industriously prodigal, as to find out ways to
loose our Time.

THE GRAND IMPERTINENT.
THE truly serious man Plurali caret, has no Plural, is so far a Heteroclite,
that as he is the Worlds best Furniture, so in this agrees Supellex, not
admitting a Plural Number: If he multiply in Individualls (as God forbid but
he should) yet the Kind of serious men is singular. When Solomon audited the
Accounts of the World, and all done in it, or suffered by man; his total, his
totus Homo (according to the vulgar Translation) all of man, was, to fear God,
and keep his Commandments, to live to his Creator, and end of his Creation. As
for the other Elements of miserable man, what are they, but vanity, and
vexation of Spirit? Actions of never such weighty concernment, public, or
private in the Worlds account, if it respect not some way this whole duty of
man, have that handwriting (and that by the finger of Gods own Spirit) Mean
Tekel against them, and are found too light. We will begin at the Philosophers
School, and that will discover Madness, or Folly, in most of the Worlds
N^ise, and Bustle that it keeps, so long as it is excentrick to Wisdom, and
Virtue.

Seneca makes Childrens Employments and Delights, to differ (in impertinency)
from the greatest, (of the greatest part) of Men, only ( secundum magis and
minus) in degrees. Maiore ludimus, et grandioribus Pupis; Men busy themselves
(or play rather) with greater Babies, and are carius inepti, Fools at a dearer
Rate. Children prefer their Bables before their Parents, or Brethren, it may
be before their meat, or Sleep: true of Thee that preferrest Enlargements of
thy Possessions, empty Titles, gay Precedence in Fashions, Superiority, though
in petite commands; before Justice, Religion, Kindred, Conscience, Quiet,
Lawful Contentments, and sweetnings of Life. And in that, the Misers --
Manifesta Phrenesis,
Vt locuples moriaris, egenti vivere Fato.
(Juven. Sat. 14. is a madness far surpassing childish Folly, to live
miserable, to dye rich, or that forgetting and unthankful Heirs may live
plentifully. The whole world keeps Volupiae Sacra, Volupias Solemnities, in
which the Actors (as Calcagninus says) were Fools, or Mad men; and every
hour changed Habits, or took what came next. The Business of the world
(though as mad as the Bacchanalias) are according to the Proverb, (...). Nil
ad Rhombum; little considering, Quod sumus, and quidnam victuri gignimur:
nothing less than to the Purpose, than living to God and themselves; nay,
scarce to any determinate, or justifiable De^igne: Persius may put his Question
to them, Sat. 3. Est aliquid quo tendis, and in quod dirigis Arcum,
An passim sequaris corvos testaque lutoque,
Securus quo Pes ferat, atque extempore vivis.


What would ye then? or next? may be urged to most men's undertakings; as
Cineas to Pyrrhus, who (when he would divert his mind from the Troubles, and
hazards of War) asked him, when we have overcome the Romans, what then? then
says the King we shall enjoy all Italy. What then? still the Philosopher
urges him with; why then says Pyrrhus, we will have Sicily, and then Libya,
then Carthage, etc. and when he had reckoned Enterprises enough for a
Succession of Alexander to have achieved, our Philosopher puts up to him once
more with another What then? Why then says he, thou and I will enjoy our
selves in uncontrouled Frolicks, and Discourse; what forbids, O King! (says
Cineas) that we enjoy not them now? nay, we do, and still may without the
hazzards of so many besides our selves? What plainer proof of man's vanity in
his Designs, that goes thus about for Contentation of Mind, which is in
himself, if himself be within?

He were an arrant Mayor of Quinborrow, that should send to the Indies for
Kentish Oysters. A Folly that may be laid to the charge of many Busy men in the
world, that put another kind of rate upon their Wisdoms, and would be very
loath to be numbered among the Triflers of the world. And what are they else
that seek the Cheerfulness of their own Countenance from the Serenity, and
smiles of Anthers: If he frown, must my Forehead be clowded? Must I ask
another Humor whether I shall sleep soundly, or eat contentedly? That Liberty
of Mind, and Body, that I should tremble to think the freight of a Turkish
Galley, I willingly surrender to the Tyranny of Humor: ad alienu^ dormiunt
Somnu^, ad alienum comedunt Appetitum, says Seneca, de brevitate vitae, c. 19.
No less do many live from themselves, that are above others. Ille Reus quot
Dies abstulit? Senec. de brevit. vit. ^. 7.
quot Ille Candidatus? Omnes Illi Qui se Tibi Adducunt, Tibi Abducunt. c. 17.
This Client, that Candidate, this Petitioner, that Offender; how do they take
more from Thee, than their Cringes, verbal Obsequiousness and Flatteries, can
add? nay, more share Thy life (that is thy time) whom thou would be loath
should share thy Estate, or Rival thy Honor. Nemo invenitur Qui Pecuniam suam
dividere vult, Senec. lib. c. 3.
vitam unusquisque quam multis distribuit. How may these? Quos magna Felicitas
gravat (as the same Author phraseth it) whom such kind of happiness has
overcharged, justly complain, Mihi vivere non licet, my life is least my own?
whilst thou art another Advocate, becoming against thy self a Plaintiff; too
much business shorten my Meals, break my sleep^; my very death, it may be,
will be bewailed, not so much out of love to me, as that I have left men's
business undone. Doctor Donnes high Praise of Ben Johnsons Works, Page 207.
in one expression extolleth them, and justly enough depresseth our Admiration
of the Worlds business. The State, and men's Affairs are the best Plays
Next yours: It Is nor more, nor less then due Praise.


To a Soul placed vulgati supra Commercia Mundi, looking down on the world as
an Ant-hill (as in Lucians Icaromenippus) The Purch^ser, Merchant, and Soldier
himself, will seem as idly busy, as to them seem Children about their
houses of Cards, counterfeit ^hips. Horses, etc. only with this difference,
that among the latter is less of Malice Hatred, ^ousenage, etc, and so of
Guilt; nay (so far as hereafter is forgot) the Exchange, or Faires (Places
wherein it is seldom seriously remembered) are not any thing more seriously to
be admired, than the Pictures of the one, for Men indeed? or Puppet Plays of
the other, for State Affairs: But Exploits of the Sword seem to cloud
Democritus his jeering Countenance with the sad one of Heraclitus, and instead
of smiling, make us with sorrow behold the lives, and blood of men trifled away
as well as their Time, and sweat. View the Quarrel, you cannot tell which is
the most serious Book. Homers Iliads, or his Batrachomyomachia, his History of
Troy, or the fight of Frogs, and Mice. In that great day of Revelation of
Realties (wherein Ignorance and Infidelity, both shall subscribe to Truth)
Caligulas ridiculous Enterprise upon the sea, and triumphant bringing home
shells of Fishes from the shore as her Spoils; will prove as serious (and I am
sure less injurious) as any Conquest or Invasion the Roman Emperors could
boast of; If you will hear a Soul departed, inter sidera vagantem
discoursing. To this effect Seneca brings it in, totum Terrarum Orbem superne
despicientem, and sibi dicentem, Praefat. lib. 1. Not. quest.
Istud est Punctum, quod inter tot gentes ferro and Igne dividitur? Looking
down upon this scarce discernable Globe of the Earth, with this Question; Is
that the Spot so many Nations divide and share by Fire and Sword? O quam
Ridiculi Mortalium Termini! How Inconsiderable are the bounds of the largest
State, Possession, or Kingdom, that they thus cut one another Throats! For
Socrates used this very Argument, to prick the Bladder of Pride in Alcibiades,
and bid him seek his Possessions in the Map: which when Alcibiades told him he
could not find; Horum inquit Possessione Te effers, Qui nulla Pars Terrae
sunt? Aelian: Var. Hist. 3. 28. He replied, art thou proud of such Possessions
that are scarce a part of the Earth? not much unlike the grand Seignior among
the Turks, that enquiring where England was in the Map, was desired to remove
his Thumb that hid it; which made him break forth into wonder at its narrow
extent, and large bustle it kept in the World. To say true, how many men's
Possessions can I cover with my Nail in a Map of England? In a Map of the
World, how many Provinces and Kingdoms with my hand? which yet bear more
Proportion in the Map, to the real extent of them, than some of them do to the
Earth, or all of them to the Universe: Hear Buchanan de Sphaera lib. 1. page
442. Nec levior labor est Caelo Componere Terram,
Vt collata simul cum sint Ratione Sagaci,
Percipias Rerum sit quantula Portio, verbis
Quam Nos magnificis in Regna superba secamus.
Partimur Ferro, mercamur, sanguine fuso
Ducimus exigua Glebae de Part Triumphos.


Of which take the significant (though not Critical) Translation. 'Twere worth
the while if we would Earth compare
With Heaver; that when the differences are
Examined well, we might perceive how small
And scant a part o'th Universe is all,
We parcel into Kingdoms, with proud words
First; then into shares, divide by the Sword,
Or Purchase; and for one poor Turfe think good
To Triumph at the Expense of our own blood.


Which Folly, and scambling for linquenda Tellus and Domus and Placens uxor.
Lands, Palaces, etc. (that we must forsake, if they do not forsake us) makes
him justly exclaim, in the end of the first Book of the Sphere, page 444. O
Pudor! O stolidi praeceps vesania voti!
Quantula Pars Rerum est? in qua se Gloria tollit,
Ira sremit, Metus exanimat, Dolor urit, Egestas
Cogit Opes, Ferro, Insidijs, Flamma, atque veneno
Cernitur, et trepido fervent humana tumultu.
Rare sense! if but scurvily englished; such as it is take.
O Shame! and Bedlam Folly of our Aims!
How almost nothing, and scarce worth a Name,
Is this same Stage, on which Ambition swells,
Rage Storms, Fear kills, and want compels
To care for Pelf on earth, and for it what Coil?
By the Sword, and Snares, Fire, Poison, and Turmoyle.


But to conclude (as the Apostle says, all under sin) so say I, all, or most
under aliud Agentes, Impertinent busy-bodyes. St. Bernards golden truth
sentenceth largely, but take it amongst ye Worldlings. Totu^ est vanitas, totum
est Stultitia, totum est Dementia quicquid facis in hoc Mundo, praeter hoc
solum quod propter Deum facis. It is all Vanity, Folly, and Madness, that thou
do in this world, but that thou do for GOD.

A Doom believe it, that touches the uppe^ most and greatest part of the
world. Nor can my poor Reason but assentingly pronounce, since man's inventions
have brought him to this sad loss, that his speculations are but a comedy of
Errors, and his Employments Much ado about Nothing to borrow our Comedians
titles) that the worlds busy man is the Grand Impertinent.

THE CHAIRE-MAN.
AMong the whole Committee for Impiety, David makes the Scorner Chaire-man.
Ps. 1. 1. Nor Sits in the Chair of the Scorner, that talis, qualis meeter
usually sung (such as it is) renders it so, and more agreeable to the vulgar
latin) and doubtless, He of any deserves it, among the Negociatour^s for
Destruction; such Saint Gregory mentions, Qui ridentes Negotia Mortis
peragunt, that in the Souls Tragedy play the Fool: even such Fools as make a
mock of sin. Too frequent is it to meet such as scorn and deride seriousness
in Discourse, Books, or Business: it is no unusual thing to reply to Reproof
for swearing with A. P -- on your seriousness, how long have you been so
Godly? no worse byword is for Books that are but even morally serious, than to
call it a goodly Book, or a duli melancholy piece; and among Employments, none
more derided than Bookishnesse: it deserves it indeed. Are there not vaulting
Schools, Drinking matches, Horse-races, etc. to spend our time in? besides
Mistresses that must have each day two or three Hours spent in speaking to
them Nothings; and receiving Favors as weighty. Let your black Serge pore on
Books, it is not for Scarlet Boys, to task themselves to such serious
spendings of their time: and for any calling, it is Mechanic Votes indeed fit
to be ratified did I not hear a selfe-denying Vote, (Can^nical^ doubtless in
the Truth of it though Apocryphal for Authority) it is in Wisdom 5. 3. 4. etc.
to the tenth. This is He whom we had sometime in Derision, and a Proverb of
Reproach. We Fools counted his life Madness, etc. Where we may see a sad
changing of their Note concerning Men, Acti^ns, and Things: to a serious
perusal of which, I refer the Scorner; from which when he returns, He
shall have my free leave, to call the well employed Man, or sober Adviser,
Serious Coxcombs.

THE LOAD-STONES Touchstone, trying, who is THE MAGNETIC LADY.
AS I am none of those Admirers of the outsides of any things, and among others
of those things (so much admired not only by others, but themselves) Women; so
I am none of those vulgar-Reasoning Despisers of that Sex; which we cannot deny
to be^ as habitable a Part of the Microcosme or little World as any, for
abilities or virtues, though not so Populous; and cannot (because I find Truth
among the She Is) but afford that Sex its due Honor, finding as I say her on
their side, whom, in all these discourses I have chose as my Mistress to
dedicate them to, viz. Truth; whether voted with, or against. Nor need I
Preface their Commendations with that Paradox, that some virtue may be in some
Women (which by some opiniative Maintainers of Masculine Monopoly (of any thing
called worth) seems enough to allow them) for the same Pen in his learned
Anniversary confineth virtue not only to that Sex (and so gives it away from
himself and party) but to that particular Mrs. of his Fancy, which (though
writ not so much as an Historian, as Poet (by his own Confession in his Letter,
p. 285) may serve for Pattern, or Rule to try the real worth of Feminine
worthies by, that is, who deserves to share in her (or the like) Pr^ifes, who
to prescribe Imitation to others of their own, or attract the Affections of
the other Sex. Such is the Purpose of this Essay. The hardest Task is to
persuade the erroneous obstinate Misogynist or Woman-Hater, that any Discourse
acknowledging their worth can go beyond Poetry, or that any confirmations from
History can un-paradox the worth (do I say? nay the equal worth) of that Sex:
but Champions in Philosophy, Law, and History, are not wanting to answer or
confute opposers: and some of them to say truth have not undertook the Cause
effeminatly. Plutarch counted it worth his pains to bestow A whole Book, de
virtutibus Mulierum, of the virtues of women; and I cannot conceive a better
way to rectify the conceits of Men concerning Them, or their own concerning
themselves, than to let them see what the wiser part of the World have Thought
they were, or should be; and out of both History and Precept, Example and Rule,
no doubt we shall dig a Touchstone, to try this Load stone by, that is to try
who they be deserve truly the Title of Magnetic Lady (whether the Herald call
her Madam or no) begin we with some few Intimations from History. For the
Female-policy of the Trojan women (Plutarch fronts his examples with) who can
but acknowledge its double Wit: cunning in the Design, and Subt-lety in the
Excuses, when being Sea-sick after their Romings from fired Troy, and how ever
wandering-sick set their ships on fire, where their Husbands Landed, there
Resolving to fix their abode, as burning up likewise all hopes of Return: but
look on their Wisdom in quenching the other Fire they had kindled in their
Husbands passions (and justly) by unwonted Embraceings, and ( never till then
used) Kissing Them on their Return from their discovering the Land. The first
Kissing (as my Author says) had, it seems, honest Plot in it: it is by many
suspected to have Design in it still, both good, and bad, viz. Endearings
minted current, according to the lawfullnesse or unlawfullnesse of the Love
they would procure. Here was an Act at first out-witting men; and then
seconding it with an over-winning them to Pacification, and having nothing so
ready besides, offered their Lips to the Goddess Viriplica, or
Appease-Husband, which the Roman Dames sacrificed to upon any domestic
Differences between them and their Husbands:) and to their offended Husbands,
with wished Success. For Fortitude in Women (which the Male Braggadocios think
entailed to the Breeches) the same author brings those Women of Argos: who on
Instigation of a valiant She wit, and Poet, Telesilla, took up Arms,
maintained the Wall^, and repelled the Enemy with loss. Was not here both
Mercury and Mars, Wit and Valor, Poetry and Fortitude, and all in Long Coats?
And it is observable what Solemnity they kept in Memory of it, even those
Hybristica Sacra, in English, their upbraiding Festivalls wherein the Women
wore the Breeches, and the men their Wives Apparel. Will you have them
preaching, and that to some purpose? (otherwise than our She expositours in
these Days,) peruse a following story of those Persian Dames, that seeing
their Army give ground (with that known circumstance) asked them, whether they
would return into their Wombs again? with w^ch short Lecture they shamed them
to a Rally and Victory both: in honor of which, Cyrus, when he after obtained
the Town, ordained the King should never enter the Town, but should give each
Woman in it a Crown; which Alexander twice performed. Will you have them
Counselors? our Author shows, they stood not out at that too. The Celtae
falling into Civil broils were (when no other means could) by their Wives
Arbitration reconciled; on which that compact was made with Hanniball, if the
Celtae had any thing to say against the Carthaginians, they should appear
before their Judges and Officers of the Army; but if the Carthaginians had
ought against the Celtae, the matter should be debated before the Celtun women.

That they can command as well as counsel: We may hear crowde in an Example
to be found in the same Book of Justin, (that our last Story of the Persian
women was in) it was Tomyris that defeated that great Conqueror Cyrus, giving
after it his headfull (when cut off) of blood, with that known Saying, Satia te
sanguine quem sitisti, take now thy fill of blood, thou Blood-thirsty man. For
Modesty, to go on with Plutarch, what men ever paralleled that of the Melesian
Virgins, that through some strange Morbificall Distemper of the Air, and so of
their Brains (as was conjectured) or some Discontent of Mind, did make away
themselves in Numbers, notwithstanding the Entreaties of Friends, till at last
a law was politickly made, that they that made away themselves, should be
carried naked about the Marketplace. Haec lex sancita non inhibuit modo, sed
and abolevit omnino illam, qua virgins laborabant, Mortis Cupiditatem. We
would wonder, says Plutarch, how suddenly this Law did not only abate, but
abolish this Frenzy in the Virgins; so much did they fear shame, before a life
bitterer to them then Death and (as it appeared) more dreadful: Valerius
Maximus.
But into those Historical Evidences take some out of Valerius Maximus, who
abounds with exemplary Conjugall Virtues in Women, of which take a Taste. How
affectionately did Portia take the News of her Husbands Death? when wanting
other Instruments of Death, by burning Coals swallowed down, she put out that
Lamp, that Grief alone could not quench: that novum Sacramentum Pereundi, as
Quintilian, that new way of dying was counted among Conjugall Virtues where its
Scene lay. She was indeed a truer Mourner than the Widow in Petronius Arbiter,
that (notwithstanding that obstinacy in grief begun, for sometime continued,
and for longer resolved) drank Consolation, Petro. Arbiter, page 57.
and new Nuptial Heates, out of the Soldiers Bottle of Wine. Hipsicratea
presents her self next a rare Example of Matrimonial Association, in bad, as
well as good Fortunes, trooping with her Husband Mithridates, in man's Apparel,
ruffling her incomparable Beauty with Hardships of Weather, venturing her life
and ^endernesse through Perils, that might daunt even Masculine Courage. A
Comfort, says my Author, to her Husband, when beat out of his Kingdom. Cum
Domo enim and Penatibus vagari se credidit, Vxore simul exulante; Thinking
himself at home, as long as she sweetened his Exile with her Company. A
Parallel to this Camerarius affords in his Historical Meditations of one
Bona, that first served the Eminent Commander Brunor, whom I only name,
because her Name may serve for all such Wives (for such her faithful Services
preferred her to at last, that at first served him in the Wars, upon a liking
he took to her Spiritednesse) the Story more at large see in that Author. But
the example of the Myniae in Valerius Maximus presents us (as some former
Examples in Plutarch) with Virtuous women by whole Sale, especially in that
Conjugall Affection; who when their Husbands were condemned, and they went
under pretense of taking leave of them, changed Apparel, whereby their
Husbands escaped, leaving their Wives to abide what ever might follow. Lib. 3.
c. 11.
To which Story Camerarius likewise has a Parallel above Parallel. At that
Siege wherein Guelphus was hemmed in by Conrad the Emperor, and at last driven
to miserable Conditions; viz. That none should pass out of the Town but some
Women, and that with no more than they could carry; whereupon the Duchess took
up the Duke upon her shoulders, and the rest of the women on her example, their
Husbands, Children, and Fathers, etc. a Sight that so pleased the Emperor, that
it melted him into not only Pacification, but friendly Reconcilement with his
deadly Enemy. But to conclude with the Evidences from Valerius Maximus, he
reckons that Patience of Aemilia, Wife of Africanus Senior, above fellowing,
by any either Sex, and that was the Conquest of her Jealousy, the most
Tyrannical Passion in either Sex, conniving at her Husbands entertaining her
unappointed Official, and maid; and all ne Domitorem Orbis Impudicitiae reum
ageret, that she might not stain her Husbands Triumphs, with the Imputation, or
Accusation of Incontinence; an Act wherein some women have outstript all men,
says Cornelius Agrippa (the women's Professed Champion, and whose Muster of
Reasons and Examples we shall next take view of) as he instanceth in Sarah,
Lea, Rachell, etc. who finding themselves barren, entreated their Husbands to
entertain their Handmaids; sed quis obsecro virorum? etc. and what man pray,
says the Author, would give way to Deputies in the like case, though never so
old and decrepit? But I pass to Agrippa's Defense, not only of the Female
excellence, but Pre-eminence, a word and Cause distasteful, I confess, to the
Masculine Interest; but I shall present this Plea of that Attorney general for
Women, leaving it to the scannings of more leisurable Enquirers; what of Truth
there is in them, I will do the Right not to conceal, keeping the Delivery of
others Opinions and my own several: What they say, and my Assent, not being
Combined any further, than Reason contributes to the Conclusion. He begins his
Arguments from the very name (...) Chauva, signifying Life, and Adams but Earth
(though the Rabbis sport another Derivation from (...) Chiva, signifying to
tatle.) Then the order of her Creation, says he, argues her excelling
Perfection; she was created last of all, and so admitted into this World, as he
says, tanquam Regina in Regiam paratam, like a Queen into a ready furnished
Palace. Besides her matter was not of so low an Extract as Adams; of finished
Man (whose Materials were ruder Dust) was this rare piece made. Hence a greater
Eminence of Beauty generally in that Sex than the other; so as what Beauty the
world it self contains in severals (says my Author) seem to be contracted
into this Meddall, that all Creatures might reverence and admire this
completed Piece. Nor is it fabulous, that Spirits themselves have been
enamoured on some Women: We read their Beauty spoke of throughout the whole
Book of Truth, with more signal Observations than that of Men. Again, is not
Woman in Sacred Writ called by Solomon, Corona viri, the Crown of Man? the
Consummation and Perfection of him? Idcirco illam omnis Homo amet, necesse est:
quam Qui non amaverit, qui odio habuerit, ab omnibus virtutibus and Gratijs
alienus est, nedu^ humanitate. Who therefore can but love that Sex? who ever
hates it, must needs be a stranger to Virtue, Grace, and very humanity. Can any
Lady forbear giving this their Attorney his Fee? In the first Sin (as he goes
on) her fault was least, because her Temptation strongest, as beguiled by that
subtle Serpent; but man, by a deceived woman. Christ in his choice of Sexes,
took Man's as the lowest, being he was to expiate man's Pride in the lowest
Condescentions possible. What Heresies, or Errors ever were broached by Women?
By Man, CHRIST betrayed, abused, and Crucified; by his very Peter denied, only
by Women accompanied to the Cross. Nay, no small part of the Schoolmen
affirm, Ecclesiam tunc non nisi apud solam Mulierem, puta Virginem Mariam
mansisse. That the Church of Christ remained then only in the Virgin Mary. If
men object from Aristotle, that men are more wise, Valiant, Noble, General,
etc. than Women: I ask of them, whom of those that have been most Eminent has
not this Sex worsted? who more knowing than Adam, circumvented by Eve? valiant
than Sampson, overcome by Dalilah? Chaster than Lot in Sodom, overcome after
by his Daughters out of it. But a great Evidence of this Sexes Pre-eminence, is
an Argument taken from Aristotle; that Kind or Rank of Creatures, whose best is
better than the best of any other, even that Kind it self is better than any
other Kind: But such is the Virgin Mary (the best in that Sex.) above John the
Baptist, the greatest of the other Sex (according to our Saviors own Verdict,
Matthew. 11. 11.) so that but naming the Virgin Mary, the Cause is carried for
that Sex against the Divinity of the Male. To go on, how many men do we read in
Scripture condemned to those eternal Torments, but not one Woman? Whence came
the first Original of Vices? did we not in Adam all dye? not in Eve: did not
his eldest Son, Cain, first open Hell Gates? Lamech primus Digamus, primus
ebrius Noe, etc. Lamech was the first that was double-Wived, Noah the first
drunk, Nimrod the first Tyrant; the first committed Incest was a man, the first
compacted with the Devil were Men. For Arts, it is known Women have been
Inventours of most. What Countries receive from them their Names? as Furope,
Libya, etc. Run through all the Virtues, Women have been as Famous, as in some
excelling Men. For Virginity the Virgin Mary, for Prophecy Moses his Sister,
for constancy in the Faith, Esther, Ruth, Judith, Mary Magdalen, that believed
when the Apostles doubted; Priscilla for Knowledge, that instructed Apollo,
after Bishop; and for Martyrdom that rare Example in Machabees 2. 6. nay have
not Women in Martyrdom, equalled the Numbers of Men? and to complete the
History of that Truth, ne cui dubium sit Muliores ea omnia posse quae viri,
that Women can, and have done whatsoever Men have done, in Priesthood, was not
Melissa famous among the Heathens? Hyppecaustria, Minerva's Priest, Mera to
Venus? Iphigenia to Diana; and in nostra Religione licet Mulieribus Sacerdotij
functione interdictum sit, scimus tamen Historiis proditum, Muli^rem aliquando
mentito sexu, ad summi Pontificatus Apicem conscendisse, even in our own
Religion, though we forbid Women the Priesthood, yet History assures us of a
Woman that arrived to the Popedom. I cite this in both Languages, because it
is the Confession of a Truth (and that by Agrippa, a Papist) that the Catholic
Historians would feign deny. In Philosophy, to go on with my Author, how
famous was Thaeana, wife of Pythagoras; and his Daughter Dama, for expounding
her Fathers Principles? how famous Themistes so admired by Lactantius? In the
Christian Church, Saint Katharine outstript most of the learned men in her
time, for Poetry and Oratory, Androgenia, Valeria, Sempronia: to say true,
Orator nuspiam tam honus, aut tam felix, ut suadela vel Meretricula superior
sit; what Orator more persuasive, or Retoricall than Salomons strange woman?
for Arithmetic; who can misreckon a woman ( they can men) in payments? for
prudence, Opis, Plotina, Trajans wife, in sacred story, Deborah. How did
Semiramis govern the first Monarchy 40. years, after her Husbands Death, etc.
thus, says he have I proved the Pre-eminence of women by their Name, Order of
Creation, and Place; Religion, Nature, etc. ne debitas ill is lauds ut
Talentum mihi creditum suffodiend o, etc. Least I should hide a Talent
entrusted to me, if I should conceal what Truth has said for them. And thus
have I given you a Summary of this Attorney Generals Plea, only to complete
the Argument ab Authoritate, from Authority: you must likewise hear an opinion
or two of the opposite party, that out of Comparison a righter Judgment may
result, before we progress in the Discussion by Reason. Among Philosophers,
Secundus may claim the first place for, his Severity against that Sex; that
said (being asked what woman was) a woman was viri Naufragium, Domus tempestas,
Quiet is impedimentu^, vitae captivitas, quotidianu^ Dam number, voluntaria Pugna,
sumptuosum Bellum, Leana amplectens, exornata Scylla, Malum necessarium: Man's
Shipwreck the Tempest of the Family, Disturber of quiet, Life's Prison, etc. for
I fear, some are ready to call this Philosopher, Terrae filius, and to say,
sure he had no Mother. The Apothegme of Protagoras seems to confirm this
former opinion; who being asked why he gave his Daughter in Marriage to his
Enemy; because, says He, I think I could not do him a greater Despite, than
to bestow a woman on him. But these may pass, it may be, for some Eunuchized
Stoics: hear what Fathers have thought and writ: one would think it a
contradiction in Adjecto (as they say) that Fathers should be against women;
yet truly some of those married Fathers have been bitter enough, and among
other, that Golden-mouthed Father Chrysostom forgot his Complements sure,
Chrysostom. upon Mat. 29.
when he styled Woman, Amicitiae Inimica, ineffugibilis poena, Necessarium
malum, Naturalis Tentatio, desiderabilis calamitas* Mali Natura Boni color
depicta; etc. Enemy of true Friendship, a Punishment still haunting us, a
necessary Evil, Natural Temptation, desirable calamity, the very nature of
Evil under the paint of good.

Saint Augustine was harsh enough when he said: Nihil magis deijcit ex Arce
Animum vitilem quam Faeminae blandimenta, and ille cordium contractus sine quo
Vxor haberi non potest: in lib. 8. soliloqui. nothing more dethrones the mind
of Man, than the flatteries of a woman; or that contract of Hearts without
which no wedlock.

I shall conclude all these contrary evidences with that of severe Cato
Vticensis. Si absque faemina esset Mundus, conversatio nostra non esset absque
Dijs. If Women were not amongst us, the Gods would; their being on Earth,
hinders Earths being Heaven. But let us now hear the impartial Judge, Reason,
concerning the Dignity of Women, (setting aside the distasteful word
Pre-eminence.) And first no doubt in more strict acception, they are equal in
the sight of Him, with whom there is no acception of Persons. Galat. 3. 28.
with whom there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, Male
nor female: for you are all one in Christ Jesus. As for those Objections of not
being the Image of God, as Man is, that therefore, they must be covered, and
their being subject, Agrippa answers, there is much of Allegory and meaning
beyond the Letter, in those cited places. Then for their materiated structure,
and its rare composure. Those that are not in Love must confess not only an
Equality but Pre-eminence in the Sex; Reason and experience vote them the
prerogative in Beauty; which I may term the virtue of the Body, as virtue is
the Beauty of the Mind. Their frame is of choyser constitution, purer
Elemented, and let me say its structure, fuller of Wonders, as destined for
diverse and more uses than the Male, and that some what more than ordinary shall
be in its Guest, the Mind, seems no irrational Inference; for whom more than
ordinary Trickings up is bestowed on her dwelling, and indeed of a virtuous
soul (as full of sweetness as her beatuous dwelling is to the Eye) in a Body
of choice and rare composure (as in some few has been found) we may say (as
Christ of little children) of such no doubt is the Kingdom of Heaven, rather
then of the most bustling Nimrods, Politic Statesmen, or those rougher
Eminences of the other Sex: in this me thinks Beauty seems as it were
enthroned, through whose red and white, and most Masterly Symmetry, or
proportion, the Glory of the Maker shines with more Dazzle than through any
part of the Creation: for Beauty is nothing else (says Agrippa) than Divini
vultus atque Luminis splendour rebus insitus, per Corpora formosa resplendens.
Nothing but Rays of that Divine Image and Light scattered in Creatures, and
sometimes shining through Bodies almost transparently fair, of which we may
say as that rare Beauties (I, or virtues) Hilliard, and masterly Painter, in
his Anniversary.

She, of whose Soul if we may say it, was Gold.
Her Body was the Electrum, Dr. Donnes*
and did hold
Many degrees of that: we understood
Her by her sight; her pure and eloquent Blood,
Spoke in her Cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,
That one might almost say, her Body thought.
Nor is the Music of their voice (generally transcending herein the other sex)
a small A^gument of some finer contexture of the Organ, and with some is as
taking as a Face, notwithstanding Saint Austins uncharitable severity in that
Assertion, in Risum aliquando dissolvitur, nunc Blanditias exhibet,^ and quod
venenosius est, super cunctae Psallere delectatur, aut cantare: cujus cantu
tolerabilius est audire Basilis cum sibilantem. When a Woman smiles, there is
Plot; but the Poison is her Voice, than to hear which the Hissings of a
Basilisk are more tolerable; but doubtless not the use, but some abuse put the
Gall in this Fathers Ink.

The manner of the Woman's Creation has as it were a more Signal Asterisk of
Eminence in the Phrase it is expressed by, Genesis 2. 22. (...) and God builded
Woman of the Rib he had from Man. It is only God made Man, but builded Woman:
Indeed the Controverted, known, and yet to be discovered Wonders and
Differences (by Anatomy's Survey) in that admirable Building, affords Reason
for the Holy Ghosts choice of his Phrases in that second Chapter of divine
natural History; And as the Court is more stately, we cannot deny but it
Queens (the Female Souls) Rule is sometimes orderly and wise, as in any
Masculine Throne; Passions at as ready Obedience, Virtues in as equa^ Favor,
and all the Commendables in Politic Government sweetly tempered in some
Women, to the shame of their Contemners. Modern times if well searched could
afford us some not inferior in Intellectual, as well as Moral Abilities; For
the Languages, or Philosophy, that Ingenious Gentlewoman at Vtricht, may in her
long Coats put some black coats (in our Synod) to the Blush. For Poetry (and
Philosophy) a Muse of our own, of the Muses own Gender, (and let me say Genius
too) The Lady New castles Poems, and Philosophical Fancies.
a Lady of great Quality by the Heralds Book, and of greater by her own, can
testify, Poetry is not the Monopoly of the Male. For Ability to govern, our
Island affords a Queen unparalle'd; with many other Examples of several
Eminences too large to instance in. And if it be objected, these are Times
Elephantine Births, not born above once in an Age; I cannot but give up my
Reason to Agrippas in the Answer: Educatione extinguitur, etc. The hopefuln^sse
of this Sex is stifled in their Education; for they are no sooner able to read,
but confined to it alone, as all the Learning they are obliged to, or Capable
of; and so with some little more Abilities to write, or read hereafter Letters
of Love, or Business they are diverted to the Fiddle Faddles of the Needle, or
the Wheel: Employments fitter to make Trades of to live by, than to share the
whole time of such, whose Birth and Plenty have afforded them Leasures for
Nobler Improvements of themselves, and Time: Thus Cloistered, till Marriage,
they are delivered over (says my Author) to the jealousies of a Husband, or
Encumbrances of Marriage, before their Minds have gained their Portion; or if
then they have Leisure, a cold Still, and making sweet Meats, are the weighty
Affairs of our ordinary Some-bodies (in their own Conceits it may be, and one
more's) not because less able for manly studies and Entertainings of their
Souls, but through Corruption of Custom, which has sentenced them to such
Effeminate (in the worst sense) Education, to which I fear we may impute, as
well that their moral (as seemingly) natural weakness, the Vices as well as
Ignorance of that Sex, and so they are beholding to their Parents for being
silly, or wicked: For no doubt the Soul needs not more a well organized Body,
to exercise it Functions with spritely Vigor, or Angelick Motions, than that
Soul, and those Organs need the Tuneings of Education; without which what
might be Harmony in Nature, will be discord in the Exercises, and Playings (as
I may term them) of Life. As for those trite Objections, what Mischiefs came
by Women, the Virgin Mary's Amends answers all, Though the first Woman was to
us as the Tree of Death (for Trees inversed some observe both man, and woman
are) she proved a Tree afterward of Life; through the Fruit she bare we were
again restored to life; the Fruit of the Virgins Womb healing whom the
forbidden Fruit had slain.

Thus have I shown women's Eminence* (even equal with men) is possible, and
has been, and so if still it is not, we know where the Fault is. But to leave
the Distastfulnesse of Comparison, let us now view what it is fit they should
be; and both (as I said) will make a true Touchstone who are They retain a
Title to all the Praises of their Sex, and who have forfeited them: I shall
deliver it by way of Character, thus.

They are true Attracters of love (more intimate) of some, and Esteem from all;
whose Infancy and Childhood (the Ages of Obedience) have prevented their
Parents Desires, nay, Hopes in Dutiful Demeanours to them, as those they
received their being and breeding from; and that more out of love to them and
Goodness, than fear (the controuler only of those that would be bad) for
such, when got loose from stricter Restraints, or View, are not so inclined to
vain Idleness, or active Indecencies, as many of the same Sex, and years,
are; but are tinctured from the first Fermentations, (and workings of these new
brewed Vessels) with Aspirings to Knowledge, and Piety. Thus it may be they
pass a time in Virginity, till it grow a Pity, and a wonder: a Pity, such
worth should longer be Cloistered in a Barrenness; and wonder, that it is so
its own Confiner by pious and virtuous Resolves, that it needs no Superviser;
as stoutly resisting, as warily declining Temptations; indifferently bent to
the Continuance of it, or change; as God, and his Vicegerents, her Parents
shall think fit: not envying the World the Propagation of what Goodness they
have received; nor its Communication and sharings with a well chosen Husband:
And since she has read the Apostles Recipe for Salvation (Faith, and
Childbearing) willingly takes it, though one half be almost as bitter as the
other is sweet. She regards not the fluent Invectives against Marriage, or its
Encumbrances, which she knows the grains of allowance of all Conditions; I,
and to be experimented most by ranging Licentiousness, which such Satyrists
call Liberty, and unclogged Freedom. The Despisers of Matrimony she looks on,
as some despised Attempters of it, or else some that yet never were admitted
into the Favor to be forsaken: for as for the condition of life, though she
considered it not as a Sacrament, she looks on it as necessary to the
Perfecting man's Happiness, that even Innocence could not be without, and
believes it still honorable; and that for that Reason (which still lifts it
above all that ever has been said for barren Virginity) of its necessity to
the Propagation and increase of Gods Church. Without disparagement therefore of
Virginity (for Commendations of which she needs no help; the becomingnesse of
it on her self, having been an Ample Encomium of it) she cannot only wittily,
but solidly, and wisely pronounce, as that gentle woman that inverted the
undervalue of* Marriages Maxim, next to no wife a good wife the best, nay
rather, says he, next to a good wife no wife the best. Thus her judgment
settled, she does but wait her Parents Proposalls, the Liberty of which she
allows her Parents, retaining only the Liberty of Dislike. As for the giddy
Licentiousness of Liking, and choice without the Approbation of her
Superintendents, she looks on it as most commonly its own Punishment, and
therefore will not buy Repentance so dear.

As for her Behavior, to those that are brought to draw at this Lottery of
worth, (on some hopes of obtaining so truly an inviting Prize) it is of so
prudent a reservednesse, as may give her Time for choice of that she cannot
part with; of the Book she must be chained to the Perusal of, she would
willingly see more than the Title Page. Among other things she would willingly
read (the Answer to the first Question in every Market Brides Catechism) what
he is worth; only it is not according to the Vulgar Rates; for to have Baggs
in stead of a man, she thinks a Cheat, and is of her mind in Platutus in
Stichus, Act 1. Sc. 2. Non me tu Argento dedisti opinor nuptum, sed viro, that
said to her Father, you married me, Sir, I conceive to the man, not his Moneys.
Being then satisfied in the real worth of her choice, at length she gives (as
I may say) an elective Access, to one she sees must at last obtain: Her
Entertainments even of him, are not so yielding, as to take of the Edge of his
Courtship, and Desire; nor so recoyling as to dampe his Hopes: No, the very
Modesty of her Delays (rather than Denyalls) do even blush for the Petitioner,
whom she looks on, as a Besieger, that at length must prevail; only she holds
out to make better Conditions, til at length she surrenders, and makes some
body a happy Gainer, by the loss of a well kept Virginity: becoming now as
virtuous-making a Pattern among Wives, as she was before among Virgins. If she
be blessed a Mother, her Cares as well as Joys begin, where the Sorrows of her
Travail end; and by Religious Education breeds that for God, she conceived by
man. In her Family she knows now as well how to govern, as before she did to
obey: She rules even her Ruler by Love without Command, and the rest by a sweet
mixture of Command and Love, and Example: The faults of Servants, (not her
Humors) Casheere them, and her Commendations here them. According to her
Sphere is her Activi^y, as to her Household Affairs, if her State require only
Survey, she does not forecast only in Bed; if Assistance, she does not set
Business back by unquiet branglings, and findefaulting Quarrels; but rather
makes up servants constrained omissions, by her willing Help: and can answer,
(in so doing) any proud Niceness with that Italian Proverb, Chifa ifatti suoi,
non s'embratte le mani. Ones own work fowls not ones fingers; or if you will,
House-wivery makes their Cloths sit nere the worse: in the Garments of which
she had rather be seen, than, Still to be neat, still to be dressed,
As she were going to a Feast.


But to view this Magnetic Lady in more general Draughts, be she Maid or
Wife: she is of a natural goodness from Temper much, (and education more)
imprinted on her; which makes her count those vices unnatural, that with
others are another Nature, and by this in a good step to her second making out
of the second Adam, by losing so much of the first. Her chief care is to
become Religious, as well as morally or naturally good: knowing Temptations may
break Natures best Fence, and lay her Paradise wast: but Religion is that only
bound of perseverance: She knows the truth of that Contracted sense.

Overbury's Poem of a A Wife.
Lust only by Religion is withstood.
Lusts object is alive, his strength within,
Mortality resists but in cold Blood,
Respect of credit fears shame, not sin.
But no place dark enough for such offense
She finds, that's watched by her own Conscience.
She does not therefore drive her Religion before to fifty, (as too many do of
both sexes that never overtake it) she counts it a pardonable forget fulness
never to remember when she began: to be Religious from her youth upwards, she
counts, will spoil neither her Behavior, Beauty, nor Match. In her Devotions,
she is serious, not Customary; knowing in the Items of Life all other Actions
are but Ciphers, and these only to be figures that have in them Signification
or Account, that can to those other impart any worth. Nor is she formal in
them: her Devotion is not only for view; nor like the Pulpit-Cloth locked up all
the week, or only used when the Church Doors are open; but counts it requisite
to have a Consecrated Closet as well as Chapel, where her best and purest
Prayers are innocent Hands whitened in her Redeemers Blood: indeed far more
prevalent, than those Verbal Pater-noster-Mongers utter over a Bead-roule,
like a Sea man's sounding line (so long, you may look for one of the Antipodes
at the end of it.) She hears frequently, and attentively, but keeps her self
only a hearer and doer: not breaking that Bishops orders for Silence, Saint
Paul's, that forbid Petticoat Preaching: of what she hears, her Life is the
Repetition. Saints she worships: but with that justifiable worship, Seneca
would men should serve God, in Epist. 94. Deum Coluit, Quisquis imitatus est,
by careful Imitation of what was good in them. And because the high Encomiums
of the Virgin Mary do deservedly make the World ring, (though some so little
acceptable to her, that it is true what our best of Poets said. Dr. Donnes
Poems.
Where thou shall see the blessed Mother-Ma^d
Joy, in not being that which Men have said.


The virtuous Lady on this rousing by her Fame, with a holy Emulation striveth
to become her Saviors Mother (and has his word for it that she may) she
therefore by faith Conceives, and breeds him, and when brought forth, her
Charity gives him suck: the one commends her to her God, the other to the
World. Let others Pride it in bareing their own Necks and Breasts, her humble
glorying is in covering the Naked Backs of the Poor; and counts her old
Clothes grace, her more on their Backs, than they did New, upon her own: for
she knows, at that Day when Nakedness will be the only Fashion, she shall
have more thanks for the Poors Wardrobe (of her procuring) than her own; and
for their warmth; than her own Gaudinesse. She gives Aliment and Belly relief
in Kind, not Medicament, or Physic: She gives that a nobler way; more from
her Purse than still, or Closet. She cures the needy Patient, by recovering
the Apothecaries (almost dead) hopes of payment, not by prescribing the poor
Sick man's Bil, but crossing it.

Her Banquets (to her self best pleasing) are more at Door, then in the
Parlour, and delights more to Treat the Almighties visitants, the Poor then any
requiting Equal!

Next being good, she counts the Addition wise; another part of a woman's
Portion, and therefore (though she first dress her self by the Mirror of
Mirrours) she looks for Modes and Dresses in that Exchange of Books, whence
she culls the best. She knows no Reason-Books should be engrossed by Men, or
that time spent in them, is not as good as to be a whole forenoone, Narcissus
like admiring a good, or Botcher like mending a bad Face in her Glass. Those
dead Monitours of her Eternity she loves: and indeed when she is minded of it
by any alive, thinks it not necessary presently she should conceit her self in
a Church, or looks about to spy the black Serge, or Cassock on Him that
speaks; but thinks it might as gracefully tip the Tongue of any He or she
that retains to Corruption, and these dying Elements. She counts it as
pleasant to converse with Historians, Poets, Philosophers, etc. though now
rotten, as with the finest perfumed Your-humble-Servant-Madam alive. Her
Knowledge, by Discretion she tempers to a Mean that Learnings Ingrossers
among the Males might allow her, and corrects by it Exuberances of Fancy, or
Desires, various Reading might imprint on such waxy Molds, or tender
Receivablenesse; which she manifests by her following Judgments; and
correspondency of behavior. Concerning her Beauty she will ow it to none but
Nature: she does not borrow it from Art: it sleeps with her in her Bed, not
Closset: it makes never an Item, (Jigg by Joale with Plasters or Syring) in
her Apothecaries Bill: that Beauty she has, she overvalues not, and counts it
part of it so to do, according to Saint Austin; Illa sit Pulchra, illa sit
amabilis, Quae nescit sepulchram esse. She it truly fair, that knows it not.
She therefore no further esteems it, but as A sign of a fairer Guest within,
which she striveth to make good. She can Preach the Frailty of it to her
self, as well as any castoff Lover ever could; and knows as well as He, a Pin
may race it into Deformity, or the sting of a Be alter it even from Knowledge
for the time. If she paints, she borrows from Modesty the blushing red;
pale from Fear, of doing any thing that might stain her honor, or defile her
Conscience. She dresseth her self by Gods Book, as her Glass, and there
rather by Timothy 1. 2. 9. than Isaiah 3. 18. etc. her Apparel is suited to
her Husbands quality, or pleasure.

She is of the Mind of Philo's Wife, who being asked why she alone did not
wear rich Attire, since she might, answered; Satis uxori magnus ornatus viri
sui virtus est: The Husbands virtue was the Wifes best ornament. She is not an
Assenter (though thousands be) to that Rabbinicall Rule, cited in Drusius from
Rabbi Haurica.

Let a Man cloth himself says he) beneath his Ability, his Children
a^cording to it, and his Wife above it. A canon she leaves among the Jews, as
she found it. Concerning affected Gayety she has as mean an opinion of it as
the Italian Proverb, that it argues sometimes such Levity in the wearer, that
the Cloths are often worth more than the Wearer. Vale Piu la Piuma che^l'
vccello, the Feathers are moro worth than the Birds Body. No, her A La Modes
are suitable shapings of her Mind to all changes of Occurrences or condition,
when wooed not scornful, when wed, not Imperious, or vanious; in abundance
moderate, in straightnings content or patient, according to Plautus? Quae tibi
Mulier videtur multo sapientissima? Quae tamen cum Res secundae sunt, se
poterit noscere, and illa quae equo Animo patietur, sibi esse pejus, quam fuit.
She is wise that knows her self in Prosperity; and that can bear changes
to the worse. Her Recreations are chiefly for Health, or relaxation of her
serious Thoughts; she makes them not her Business, or her Parents, or Husbands
needless charge: no servant through her means is turned away, for not being
of the Monkies or little Puppies Faction: for crossing their unluckinesse; or
distasting (some how) those worthy playfellows: if weather confine her pastime,
she can be as pleasant in some Author as those are hunting in a Park, as the
Lady Jane told one that wondered she could sit within while the other Gallants
were hunting in her Fathers Park (and she reading Phaedon Platonis in Greek)
She answered: I wiss all the sport in the Park is but the shadow of what
pleasure I find in this Book. In sum, the true Magnetic Lady strives to be so
like virtue, that you may scarce know one from the other: and now she that is
all, or most, of what has been said, they have been, or should be; will (I
fear me) shame, as well as excel those of the other sex, that fall short of
this despised one; for true is that of Valerius Maximus, excellentissima
animadvertenti, ne mediocria quidem praestare, Rubori oportet esse. Men may
hide their heads in women's Hoods, when they see in them Excellencies surpassing
their own boasted (and yet but So, So,) Qualifications. What therefore comes
near this Touchstone of solid and plate worth (as I may term it) may well
entitle any she Magneticke of wonder, Love, Respect or Reverence: and if this
virtue dwell with some pretty Accommodations (and not as one said of an
Ingenuous Man, but something Crooked) that his Ingenium did male habitare, his
wit had bad Lodgings; if I say this Beauty of the Mind, Virtue, dwell with
that virtue of the Body, Beauty; there is no such Loadstone, because it
endures this Touchstone.

Essays.
THE GRAND SCHISMATIC, OR SUIST ANATOMIZED.
IT is a quaere not easily satisfied, whether Man does faster Lose, or seek
Himself: Since he is lost in nothing more than in seeking himself, in that
sense of the Apostle Paul: Phil. 2. 21. All Men seek themselves, and not the
Things of Jesus Christ. A bold Dissection, O blessed Anatomist of the World!
that has so exposed to view the most intimate Projections of Men* that Momus
his wish of a Glassen Breast, is now needless. And to follow thy Method O
Apostle! we may begin with that Rank of Men, whose Tongues profess, (and
Profession challenges) selfe-denyall, even Heavens Ambassadors. How do some
make those they are sent to, buy dear the bringing of that peace they are sent
with, and by Subtle insinuation into the Affections of their misguided
Disciples, they often have ten parts, (not Tenths) flung at their Feet! How dear
that great pretended Agent for Heaven, (the Pope) sells the peace it self,
the Price of his Indulgences witness; while filthy Lucre, or vain Ambition is
negotiated, the Embassy, or Business of Heaven is pretended. Many will be no
Apostles, but him that carries the Bag; though Christ dyed not for Angels,
He shall be preached for them: if a poor Parish will have Christ, let them come
where he is held forth in a richer. Our Protestant Jesuits, that carry that
Name on all they say, or do (as well as the Papisticall) care not for
converting those Indians that have no Gold It. is Balsacas observation, (no
less true than witty.) Ne connoissons vous pas ceux la qui meslent Dieu parmy
toutes leurs passions? qui le font entrer dans tous leur Interests, etc. do we
not know that there be those that interweave the pretense of Gods interest in
their own, and therewith advance all their Designs indeed: (as he says in the
same place: ( viz. his le Prince: cap. 8. p 114.) The Jesuits carry not the
Gospel into any beggarly Regions in either the East or West Indies, etc. Spring
a Mine, and then if you will, set up a Pulpit. Show them Gold, and they will
barter Salvation: otherwise no Penny no Pater Noster. Their charity to Souls
travelleth those Countries, where the Sun makes Gold (as Balsaac says) and
dares not trust its fervency in Northern Regions, where there is nothing but
Snow and cold. They will the Salvation of the People of Peru and Mexico, and
when arrived there, their business is nothing less, than conversion of
Souls. How dear do they sell a confused Belief? there not being a Pist^l in
Europe, but cost an Indians Life, and a Catholics Sin. They are Balsaacs own
Imputations, not here (as in many of his writings) using strong complements
with these pretenders for Heavens business. It were to be wished, we cold not
say as much of our high worders, of their Covetousness; with propagation of
the Gospel, and Cause of Jesus Christ: it is too true that our Fishers angle
for no Fish but such as have Money in their Mouths; if they speed as Peter did,
they will do his work. They will only fish for such as can tribute to their
superfluities. That the Religion they pretend or Preach is but A cloak of
Private interest, you may believe by the several shapes they Cut it out into,
if they light on Patrons or Parishes, that are sick of present Affairs in
Church or State, (the Disease incident to Bodies politic as that Politic
Physician tells us) Qui laborant Rerum novarum cupidine, and odio
praesentium. Tacit. Hist. 2. squemish toward the present, and longing for
Innovation. Our Preaching Suists will be-Ante-christ their Church they were
borne in; be-Sodome-and-Gommorah the Cities and States they live in; to the
hazard of being silenct: in all which, nothing less than denying themselves.
Their Character take from Saint Hierome. Hoc ipso Placere cupiunt, quod placere
contemnunt. How many do we see, (and they foresee it before they venture)
deprived into a preferment, and unbenefic't into greater underhand benefits and
Contributions. Some declining Bishoprics, become Itinerant Vicars General,
making a whole Kingdom their Parish, and covetously lose a stinted certainty
for enlarged uncertainties. On the contrary, do their Patrons lie sick of that
politic Lethargy? mentioned by Tacitus, Annal 1. Qui novis ex Rebus aucti,
tuta and praesentia, quam vetera and periculosa mallent, who couch't on new
Preferments, wish safe, and present things, rather than to be wakened to old
and dangerous. You shall presently hear our changeable Chaplain tell you the
thousand years, hoped for by the Saints, are already begun; wishes of change,
are acts of Rebellion, against the Scepter of Christ; to die is now to go out of
Heaven, with what not extolling of the present Times. Thus too frequently
Preaching is made the Parasites Trade: and Preachers take their Texts from
their Patrons Humor, more than those impartial Oracles of Truth: among the
two Divinity Colleges, that of the Placentineans, men-pleasers, is far larger
than that of the Veronenses, Downrights; Preaching too generally being but the
Art of flattery, translated from the Court to the Church. Examine the matter,
or form, of many of their Sermons, and you will find them elevated to the
Meridian of those they study to please. I have known some commendable
Abilities, take more pains to conceal them, (before Learning-despisers, and
free-prophesy Rewarders) than they did to attain them; which on change of
times, might be brought to take the Apostles, who is sufficient for these
things? for their Text: then for the form (external I mean) of their
Sermons, what Gesture? what Tone? such as they would blame in a Schoolboy at
the Bar, or in any familiar discourse, is yet by them affected, in the most
serious place, because by some others affected, and interpreted, at Issuings
forth, or Sallies of zeal.

But secondly the more subtle, (and more hard to Sleave a two) Silken thread, of
selfseeking, is that Dominion over Consciences, which, because laudable, in
reference to the Conversion of men (and gaining them to that Kingdom we pray
may come) and near a Kin to that captivating their Persons and Purses, to our
own Designs) it is not easily discerned by others, no nor our own Scrutiny,
when we Commune with our own Hearts: and with this Ambition, many are tainted
in whose nobler thoughts Pelf or Riches are of cheap esteem. That Pulpits are
Thrones, (as one in his excellent Discourse, nolesse politic than Poetic,)
the Power of the Keys over the Sword, does manifest so, that the Seabberd of
Power (if not of Justice,) seems to have Locks on them, that only the
spiritual Keys can open. What Wars have been raised and laid, on the
command of the Pope, there where his jurisdiction is counted supreme? and where
he is defied, we see Pulpit Trumpeters have commanded much, as Generals, and
animated as much, as all their Drums and Trumpets beside. The Reverence that
Emperor showed, in laying down his Crown, and Scepter, and standing bare all
Sermon time, testified He esteemed the Pulpit a Throne of higher Authority
than his own, as indeed it is; punishing with Threats of more Horror, and
rewarding with Promises of far more elevating Hopes than any earthly one can.
Now judge then, how hard to be invested with this Authority, and not seek the
glory of it, more than use of it for his Glory, that installed them? This
Piece, or Schism of Suicisme, and Selfishnesse, has spawned most of the
Heresies and Schisms, that are abroad in the World. Whence sprung they? but
from this, their Authors would be counted Somebody; the small Regency of an
Apron'd Auditory, or handful of illiterate Disciples; how has it drove men to
singularity in Opinions and Doctrines? as the way to this Pedantick Regency,
and puffed them up after with a Pride obstinate against all Reclaimes of
Persuasion, or force: Nay, rather than be counted Apostates, by their
inconsiderable Crewes, they have become Renegado's of their own Lives,
Rivalling the Valor as well as Names of Martyrs, even in Selfe-destruction,
seeking themselves and striving to keep some slender Fame after Death; which is
not impossible, as appears by the Donatists, that had found a most Heretical
Revenge, as Baronius witnesses: who when they were banished, diverse killed
themselves, to breed Hatred to the Orthodox, and to get the name of Martyrs, in
the year 414. a Revenge not unlike that Ricius mentions of some of the
Chinese, who, to be revenged of their Enemies, hang themselves at their
doors. Sure there they need wish their Enemies no greater mischief, than such
power of Revenge, and that Power put into Act: now further than
Selfe-destrution, sure, none can drive this Selfe-seeking. And hence we may
easier believe all, or most precedent Actions of Life may have this Principle
of Motion. If constancy may be tainted with this selfefishnesse (to use our new
Wordings of old and general Actings) much more we shall believe the inconstancy
of Opinions, and Compliances, does proceed from those Arcana, Maxims of
Self-policy: Parce tibi, honesta colenda quamdiu ijs spes inest, in contrarium
transituri si plus scelerata promittant. Senec. Ep. 115. Favor thy self,
follow that specious Repute of honesty, so long as any thing is to be got by
it. But if thy Master break, change thy Livery; believe it, good wholesome
counsel, which well followed, has, and may still hook in Divines, and other
Professions into Rablais his Definition of a Physician, to be Animal
incombustibile propter Religionem, a Creature of that Sappy Sapience (for it
self) as too green to burn for Religion. Indeed examine the Suists Catechism,
and we shall find his Religion, getting, or saving: Quid dabitis? what is to
be got by any Profession, or Enterprise? is the first Question in the Suists
Catechism. Then for its fulfilling the whole Law, it is Selfe-Law, or if you
will, love God, so as not to lose by him, and thy Neighbor for thy self; and
for its Creed, we will furnish you out of Sophocles his Electra. (...). Versic.
61. nothing profitably spoke, can be ill said. But because in our Suists Creed
(...), Deed, must be added, be assured that if you can but show him, gain by
it, and he will extol those times Aristophares speaks of in his Plutus. --
(...). page. 6. Wherein it was very profitable to do nothing that was honest.
Take it indeed in short (and the Suists sense) wherein not to be a Knave, was
to be a Fool.

Dulcis odor lucir ex Re qualibet. Gain is Godliness. with such like Articles
our Suists Creed is filled up; which if you will have in the Epitome, it is the
same with his advise; when the Athenians were so scrupulous, as not to give
away the Honor of their Gods to Alexander. Demades said, Videte ne dum Coelum
custoditis, Terram amittatis. Valor. Max. 7. 2. 10. Take heed least while you
are so zealous for Heaven, your Earth be not Sequestered from you. Well, having
found the greatest Arnautists, Selfe-denyers in show, (and Ties, or Duty)
touched with this Magnes, or Loadstone of (...). Selfe-aimes, and ends: We may
with ease track the Doublings of others Interests through all Transactions,
Civil, Politic, and Religious, to the very confines of true Friendship
toward man, and love to GOD, (they being clearest from it.) Look on the
retired Grief for Friends departed, in appearance an act of Friendship; yet
how hard is it to say, I bewail my Friends absence, without respect to my
loss of some use of him, or delight in him, that this departure rent away
(with him) from me. It is no office of Friendship to him. Seneca tells us in
Consolat. ad Polyb. c. 23. Qui torqueri te non vult, aut non Sentit. Who either
knows not, or wills not thy Grief. Think thou that he, who all his life
would never grieve thee, now he is dead would desire it; there can be no
third, but our selves or Friends that makes even our Tears pleasing to us: if
even in self-vexation, something of self-content is sought: We cannot deny but
this thread of Self-aime runs through the whole Piece of what men do, or say.
Look abroad into the World into the Actions of Policy, there shall you see, not
only manifestly sought the good of a Kingdom, or State, but each Counselor
has some private reasons for his Vote to the Public Good, pleasing of others
that spoke before, forwarding his own, or Friends Designs, that it may be are
interwoven with the public. Go on then by this Rule; if those Actions that
seem most destined to public good, have their close Boxes undiscerned; what
shall we think of those civil Actions, called Courtesies between man, and man?
though they usurp the name of Beneficia; Courtesies, they are but Negotiations,
Traffic for Returns; we do end only lend, but act looking for something
again: non damus sed foeneramus Beneficia, Senec. de Benefic. 2. 31. are the
Philosophers very words, we usury out, not bestow our Favors. each Courtesy
being a Design not so much of doing, as receiving good, with unconscionable
Advantage: for, no such Usurer as Self-love, exacting Interest far above the
Principal. He that lends five Pounds, will take it ill if the Borrower will
not be bound with him for fifty. If we lend our Saddle, we presume the
Borrower cannot deny us his Horse. If through our good word a good Deed be
done our Friend, we proudly think ours the greater Courtesy, and think him more
bound to our speaking, than the others doing for him. If we do any real
Courtesy, the most grateful can never come out of Debt; if they will not in
Dealings part with their Right to us, in some measure, and Injure themselves,
how ready are we to upbraide former Favors, and fling that most hateful blot,
Ungrateful, on them? A man with more liberty might be a Debtor to the Jew of
Malta, than owe for Courtesies to this Schismatic Suist, that thus baits
with lesser Favors, to angle for greater; afraid of nothing more than to
bestow perishing Favors; contrary to that brave Spirit, malim non recipere
Beneficia quam non dare, I had rather receive no Favors, than to bestow none.

In acts of Religion, it is not harder to separate, than easy to demonstrate
this Self-seeking. Jehu's Reformation, what was it? but new modelling his
private Condition into a Kingly. Of such Reformers doubtless we need never
fear a scarcity, that would willingly reform their own Poverty by others
Wealth. Truly Jehu might after say so much in boast of his Reformation, and
justly, that the world was well amended (with him in the next Verse) but his
Suicisme was so gross, that any of Ahabs Relations whom he made run (out of
all they had) might read it. Acts of Devotion and Charity, what are they but
Designs on Heaven, where we hear of Centuple Rewards, or spells against
Temporal Judgments. No mervaile if Sincerity be accounted Perfection, when it
is almost as hard to attain such a true Self-denial, as to clear our selves
of these Squint Aspects in our Services of Heaven, is a Perfection too
Seraphicall for Earth. How many lower Ends set men on Religious Duties? it were
well that it were not true of both Sexes in the Church, as well as Theater,
Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur ut ipsae, many come but to bring their
Clothes, more than themselves, to such Appearances of Devotion; and many if
they had but one Suit, and that old, it is to be feared would decline the
Church, till they could procure a Recruite. To others, what is the Church but a
Rendevous of vain, or busy Companions? Or the Sunday Exchange, where either
News, or Bargain, divide their Discourse as soon as the Business of the Place
gives way.

We need not cross the Seas for proof of it; in some places of our own Land,
the Phrase is, if one Neighbor ask the other to go to Church, the Answer is,
No, Neighbor, I thank you, I have no business there to day.

Fastings, public, or private, how seldom for spiritual Blessings? in
comparison of being for the Aversion of some Judgments, or procuring a
Blessing on some worldly Design; nay, worse ends the Prophets knew, for
strive, contention, and oppression, etc. fast from meat, and devour a Brother:
And while we abstain from our daily Bread, prepare our swallow for some Widows
house at a Bit, with Orphans Tears, and Portion for Sauce. What is this? but
to feast our Covetousness, while our Gluttony is held to hard meat. Nay, Fasts
sometimes (such are the intricate Maeanders of Suicisme) are but tasters to our
Feasts, and Cooks to Gluttony, dres^ing not our Meat but Appetite? Plutarch,
Apoth.
(Like Alexanders two Cooks he bragged on; his Night-journy dressed his Dinner,
his and slender Dinner Cookt his Supper.) Thus do we seek our selves in Acts of
greatest Self-denial to the worlds view, while we fast to Gluttony, and humble
our selves, to the pulling down of others.

And for acts of Charity, how has Suicisme crept into them? He that gives to
the Poor, lends to the Lord, had not got the Almighty many Creditours; but
that the vulgar Translation has it. Foeneratur Domino, lends with usury to
the Lord: if we fling our Bread upon the waters, we choose not Currents that run
all one way, (and that from us) but tyding waters: we do good to such as may
return it. How usual to move to Compassion, by an Argument drawn from our
selves; it may be our own Case, we our selves may fall into the like condition,
etc. Our Charity (as we call it) on this very score is warmer to a Brief for
fire, than toward the Cold, and Hunger-starved in Prisons: because we presume
our Husbandry fence against a Prison, though our Houses are not so against
Fire. Well, the Worlds grand Schismaticke we have dissected, and taken to
pieces; but now to set him together again, and unite this Separatist, to the
Pursuance of public Concernments, were worth while: To bring which to pass, I
know no speedier course than for every man to sum up his Quotus, and survey
his Qualis, how inconsiderable a Unite he is, or how small a place he fills
up in the Mass of things, and what Place, Rank, or Office he fills, be it
small, or great. The first breeds Humility, the other directs our Aims
aright. As for the first, think thy self but above what ever is dishonest, and
thou can not think thy self low enough; the want of which causes this
wrying all things to our own proper Interest; as if for us alone this great
Motion of the world were set a going. Did we consider what an Atome (and how
easily, to be spared) the proudest he is that knocks the Stars with his head,
(in his own conceit) I cannot tell whether we should pity, or deride most, this
diverting of all Streams into our own Channel, not considering that by our
Crossing one another, nay Destruction of one another, the Designs of
Providence do proceed, and the Course of Nature is upheld; being Societas
nostra fornicationi lapidum simillima, quae Casura, nisi invicem obstarent.
Senec. Ep. 95. We are like a Brick, or stone-wall, where the ones resisting the
motion of the other to the Center (as they call it) upholdeth the whole
Fabric: Nay, Ibid.
ex constitutione Naturae miserius est nocere quam laedi, it is more miserable
to do than receive an Injury, says the same Author, by reason of that
Community of part^ in the Universe, whereof we are Members. Here is a
Self-denial talked of by Christians, but to their shame more practiced by the
Moralists, whose Humility made them bear patiently Checks of their private
Designs, rather than the (...) Natura (it is Saint James his word, c. 3.)
Course, Circulation, or wheel of Nature, should meet with the least Jolt, or
Check.

But then consider qualis, or what Relation thou have in the common Body of the
Universe, and thou can not be private spirited. Hear the voice of Nature
tell thee it: Omne hoc quod vides, quo divina and humana conclusa sunt, unum
est; Membra sumus Corporis magni: Senec. Ep. 95. consider the Universe as one
Body, we are all Members of this great Body. But to knock the Nail on the
head, hear Christianity speak in the language of that true public Spirit
Paul: Shall the head say unto the foot, I have no need of thee? A Comparison by
which it apeareth, sequestered Aims and Designs are natural Treason, and
Mutiny as well as Politic: as if (according to the Fable) the Arm should
resolve to work for the Belly no longer, but for it self: a Folly quickly
punishing it self with Atrophie and Consumption; yet true of thee, who ever
thou art, that wilt not lay out some of thy self on thy Country, or the Church
of God, as this Apostle; the greatest Prodigal of himself, of any of the
Apostles; his Bones would, (it is very like) and well might challenge the
greatest share in his Flesh; or to be first served: no, what fastings had not,
Whippings had of it, and watchings, and Travel; they were last served, and had
but the others Leavings: but such public spirits are scarce, as such Apostle.
I find in the School of Nature no better Emblem, of this commendable
Resignation of our selves to public service, than the Bee-hive, of which we
may use that of Ovid. -- Privati nil habet ista Domus.


They toil not for any Private Ends: and Pliny will second it: Apes
Rempublicam, ac mores habent, and nil novere nisi commune: lib. 2. cap. 15. the
Bees (says he) have a Common wealth, and have no designs but Public: Nay A
Be (if you will believe him in Stobaeus) cannot live alone, Sola perit. Now
Man (according to Aristotle) Est Animal civil, magis quam omnes Apes, vel
animal ullum congregabile: Polit: Lib. 1. c. 2. is a more sociable Creature
than any other Creature: but we have Law on our side, as well as Nature:
Dominus Membrorum suorum nemo videtur, and mulctat eum civitas, and ignominia
afficit, qui se ipse exanimavit, ut qui Civitatem injuria affecerit. F. de
ventr. in possess. mit. Leg. 1. p. 13. for according to the Civil Law, No man
is Master of his own Body, and therefore selfe-destroyers have not common
burial, and are after Death thereby disgraced, as such that have injured the
Commonwealth, as well as themselves. And that this Temper was believed to be
according to Nature and Reason and Law, take the Jury of Histories verdict.
Plutarch in Lycurgus affirms that the Lacaedemonians according to the above
mentioned Emblem, nec vellent nec scirent privatim vivere, verum ut Apum more,
conglobati ad Rempublicam Patriae essent toti; the Lacedaemonians knew not, nor
desired any private drifts, but like Bees with a public concurrence of their
Labors, and Aims consecr^ted both to their Countries general good. On this
score Paedaretus bore his Repulse, (of not being admitted into the number of
three hundred chose before him to some honorable employment) with more joy,
than troublednesse of Spirit: Protesting, He was glad there were so many in the
City worthier than himself. And take his other Instance in Polystratydas,
being sent to Treat with another Prince, and being asked whether he came
privately, or by public Authority, answered them gallantly: if I speed, I came
from the Commonwealth, but if I am repulsed, of my own head: but I conclude
this Ternary of Worthies with Cato, and his Character in Lucan's Pharsal. --
Patriae impendere vitam;
Nec sibi, sed toti genitum se credere mundo.
-- Veneris huic maximus usus
Progenies, Vrbi Pater est, Vrbique Maritus:
Justitiae cultor, rigidi servator honesti,
In commune bonus.
Who on his Country did his life bestow.
Himself (as to the Worlds use borne) allow;
The Pleasures of the Marriage Bed He aimed
At^s Country's Profit: the Father therefore named,
And Husband of the City, well he might,
That did his Justice, and severest Right,
Improve for the public good.


What ever Anima Mundi Naturalis, universal Spirit there be in the natural
World; doubtless it is gallantry of Spirit to believe (and conform to that
Belief) the Politic World animated with one Soul, and to count our selves no
more alive, than moved by a Spirit guiding our Aims to the good of the Public
we relate to. I find this confirmed by the speech of Manilius, well becoming
an Emperor: Membrum rescissum, cum seorsim esse coepit, hoc ipso mortuum est.
A Limb cut off, becomes by the very separating Amputation, dead: And by this
Rule we may justly say of private Spiritednesse (as Seneca does of illiterate
Idleness) that it is vivi hominis Sepultura, the ^urial of a man alive: and
true enough, as to his use, or Fame; nothing more perfuming Reputation, than
Dedication of that freely, which our Country of right may challenge, our
selves, and Services; which may be done in Peace, as well as War; not to limit
it only to that general applauded way, that sounds so high (and not
undeservedly) on the Trump of Fame; viz. The valiant undervaluing our Lives,
Limbs, or Estates, when public Concernments come in competition. For shall it
be counted gallant to dye (and so for ever put my self out of capacity of
further Service) for my Country? and shall it not be as gallant, to live, and
lay out my self, Time, and Abilities, on public Services, within my Sphere?
Sure on right examination, Valor must be counted as arrant Folly, as honesty
(if not more) among the Sophies of Policy; and I believe is by our Suist, who
undoubtedly is as much Coward, as Knave, they being seldom asunder: Nor will
it be hard to prove as much Fool, as Knave; the proof of either sure should
make his Temper hateful. Hear one in Stobaeus proving both together. Qui
seipsum prae Patria servare vult, tum injuste facit, tum stultus est, insuper
impossibilia desiderans. He that thinks to save himself, though his Country
perish, is unjust (there is his Knavery) and desires Impossibles (there is his
Folly) yet such Fools there were in Cicero's times, as appears in Epist ad
Atti^u^, Lib. 1. Ep. 15. C^teros nosti qui ita sunt stulti, ut amissa
Republica, Pscinas suas fore salvas sperare videantur. Others there are (says
he) whom thou could chalk on the back; so foolish, as they seem not to
doubt the Safety of their Fishponds, and that their Carps shall swim, even when
the Commonwealth sinks. But such thoughts could not enter a wise man's head, if
Varro's word may be taken: (I may term it the Traitors Caveat) Publica
prodendo tua nequicquam serves, It is a vain Design to think Proditio,
Protectio, that thy Treachery to thy own Country will always have the Harlot
Rahabs Protection: Or that thy over-wary Neutrality, will always prove a
Latitat, and concealment of Safety. Nay, let us hearken to divine Politics,
and we shall find Endeavors for public good, the commanded Statute of
Provision for a People (and made by him that answers all our high-conceited
Self-provisions, with that in Esdras 8. 47. Thou come far short, that thou
should be able to love my Creature more than I.) The Statute it self read,
in Jerem. 29. 7. Quaerite Prosperitatem Civitatis, etc. Seek the Prosperity of
that City, etc. for in the Peace thereof you shall have peace. In a stormed
City that Usurers Baggs would scarce be ensured, for ninety nine in the
Hundred. Nay, often the Betrayer himself has had his Reward as reversed, as his
Scutcheon; witness that known Story of Tarpeij filia, sua ipsa perempta
Mercede. Live. Lib. 1. The Daughter of Tarpejus, who for her betraying the Fort
was promised (as she Covenanted) what they wore on their right arms (meaning
their rich Bracelets) but the Conquering Rewarders of her Treason interpreted
the Text otherwise, and covered her (even to the stifling of her) with somewhat
else they wore on those Arms; viz. Their Targets. By what has been said
against this Schismatic, we may know who first invented that sequestring
Proverb, Every one for himself, and God for us all: Even that first and worst
Sequestratour, that sequestered man from his God, and so from his Happiness. We
may therefore with truth cross the Proverb, that where every one is for
himself, he is for none, that otherwise is for the welfare of all; and he that
is for the welfare of none, is for all such as (but for themselves) are for
none. And indeed they are his lawful Prize, since what Charity has no share
in, falls to Malice, as its Lot, and Portion.

I shall end this Dissection with these Assertions: Public persons with
private Aims are Monsters in Church, or State. Private Persons with public
Spirits, are of a goodness Angelical; whose Office it is (as Ministering
Spirits) to serve themselves least; and truly Ministering Spirits with no harsh
Criticisme) and public Spirits may interpret one the other; and so States as
well as Churches may be said to have their Angels In^arnate. If then to serve
the Public with what I have, or would have; must be -- Istud quod dicere nolo,
of a Spirit that shall be as namelesse, as I desire it inimitable. Contrary I
am sure to his Spirit, that was the great example of Selfe-denyall, our blessed
Redeemer, whose Name alone is Charm enough (meethinks) to call down the Spirit
of Charity; the old Word for public Spiritednesse, on which that Chapter, 1
Cor. 13. is a Commentary, and for which A spell, if seriously perused. But if
all will not do, let us leave the Schismatic Suist to his just Punishments,
who no doubt is not more Solitary in his Aims, and Wishes of Emol^ment, than
he finds a solitude Disconsolatory, in his Sorrows and Discomforts, forsaken
by God, and Men, as one that never gave glory to God above, nor bearing on
Earth good will toward Men. And it cannot but be just, that those that seek
themselves alone; should find themselves alone; when they most desire Redress
from Heaven, or Compassion from Men. In short, a Suist, and Selfe-Projector,
(so far as known) is one the World would not care how soon he were gone; and
when gone, one that Heaven will never receive; for thither, I am sure, he
comes not, that would (like him) go thither alone.

THE FAITHFUL SURGEON.
AMong the many Observations of life, I find none truer than that ( known to
Schoole-boyes, and practiced by Men) Obsequium Amicos, veritas odium parit, a
Saying not triter, than truer What in it self deserves the most intimate
Closes of Friendship, through the indiscretion of Administration, or Morosity
of the Patient, becomes the maker of the greatest Gashes in Friendship; That
is, faithful Advice (as it comprehends Counsel, or Reproof) than which
nothing in humane Society is more useful, nothing worse interpreted, and that
from these Causes principally; Pride in the Advised, mixed with Jealousy of the
Pride of the Adviser, (and very often not without cause) or of other
Distastives incident to that part of advise, called Reproof (which is here
principally meant by Moral Surgery.) I begin with the faults of the
Reprover. You shall scarce meet with a Reprover that takes not his Friend to
Task, with the Pedantry of an Usher to untrusse him, if his Reproof be
private, or with the Cathedrated Authority of a Praelector, or public Reader,
to dissect him: So more publicly preaching his own skill, in discovering the
Infirmities of the Anatomy. For the Algebra (as I may term it) or Nature of
Reprehension, gives the Plus to the Reprover, and the Minus to the Reproved:
Nay, the former Metaphor of Dissection, makes as much difference as between
the Living, and the Dead. Difference enough, to taint the humblest with
Arrogance, the mixture of which in most men's Reprehensions, the style general
discovers. viz. I would not have done such a thing; as weak as I am, I should
never have lapsed into such an indiscreet foul discreditable Miscarriage; with
many such like terms (to the Reprover as pleasing, as to the Reproved
galling) concluding him blameable, not so much for stepping aside from the
ticklish path of Virtue, or Religion, Cujus Metae quam mollis Flexus? But for
doing what he (as if he were the great example of goodness) would not have
done; and that (it may be) not from Principles of Virtue, but difference of
Constitution, Aims, and Designs, Course of life, or (which is the most real
of all Reasons) inequality of Temptations, and that -- Casta est quia nemo
rogavit. We know what Praise she may challenge for her Chastity, whose Cough,
or stinking Breath spoils her kissing, whose Rheum quenches, and wrinkles
burieth all desire in Suitors, or Approachers. The common practice of the world
dissalloweth the Partiality of Reproof, when a Prodigal reproves a Covetous
man, or a Nunnery, the Frolicks of Court. Nor can we excuse it from Priding in
its own Disagreement, rather than manifesting a Detestation of what they
reprove, because bad in it self. One should not take that man to be the Poor
man's Surgeon, whom we should see comparing his own sound Arm, with the
Vlcer'd one of the Diseased; or asking him, Why could not you keep your flesh
as sound as mine. From which kind of Comparison and Question, the pretended
Friendship of Reproof does but little differ, though sugard with nothing more
than, I tell you for your good, and, what is it to me? it troubles me more
than you think for; with many such non-significants, or mean-nothings, without
by their often Repetition they witness a Delight (not tenderness) in handling
the Sore.

2. A second Fault in the Reprover, is Ignorance of the Rules of Actions in
general, or the Design and Circumstances of mine in particular. By the first
there is diverse times Petitio Principij; or a taking it for granted that my
Judgment agrees in every point with his; and so, that I think unlawful, or
unfit, what his Ignorance has condemned, by the latter mistaking of Purposes
causes a gross Impertinency in the Reproof; the Style of the Ignorant
Reprover is, For my own part I wonder at such an Action, or such an Opinion; my
Judgment could never be reconciled to a good Opinion of such, and such, ways,
Persons, Actions, or Opinions, they seem against all sense and reason. All this
kind of Reprehension, proves not so much the conviction of another Error, as
discovery of its own. Sometimes what a man did on purpose for further ends,
they interpret slips of Infirmity, or Ignorance. Doubtless had Alcibiades cut
of his Dogs Tail, with an erroneous Aim at handsomeness, it had been a
Trangression against Discretion, as well as the common Judgment; but it was a
Design on purpose to be talked of for that, that so the talkative people might
less discourse his other Actions: That Formalist had been a rid^culous Puppy,
that should have begun a tedious Reprehension of the strangeness of the
Action. Yet this conceitednesse and Itch of being taken for a Counselor,
makes more Reprovers, than Peccants in the world. But a Phoenix (on stricter
scrutiny) is the faithful, humble, and discreet Reprover, and handler of men's
Infirmities. Though it seem a Paradox, that he that reproves another, would do
it best if he were guilty of the same fault: I am sure it is none, to say, he
would easier he heard if he did it, as guilty, at least with the humility of
one involved in the same common frailty. And it would come nearer the
compassion of Experiment, than that facile omnes cum valemus, recta consilia
aegrotis damus. Tere: Andr: 2. 1. Arrogance (as I may say) of Innocence can,
which from Inexperience cannot be tinctured with a less sensiblenesse, than
acknowledging guilt has. But the Characters and Faults of these unskilful
Chirurgions, are best set out in Jobs Friends, and the subtlety of
Reprehensions Reprehensibles (as I may phrase them) whether Arrogance, Malice,
proud insultings, etc.) appear the more, in that they did not appeaere, nor
the Reprehenders meet with a Reprehender, until the all-seeing Eye, and Grand
searcher of Hearts met with them; He that judges by Adverbs, not Adjectives,
not bona dicta, but been, good words, but well meant and spoken ones, passing
with him current; not general Truths, galling the Afflicted, by
misapplication: but tender and charitable Rebukes, ending in Reformation, as
well of their misery by comfort, as faults by Counsel. Nor does tender
dealings in private Reproves, cross the commands of Wisdom it self, to cry
al^ud against Sinners incorrigible, or impudent, and that in the public Chair
of Reproof; be it the Gospells, or the Laws, the Pulpit, or the Bench. When
by incorrigiblenesse Sins be concreted into Sinners, and they become even all
one; I confess, Amputation of such a Limb, not lancing, is requisite; but in
those private dealings of Friendship, our Rebukes should come from us as
afflicting, as a Penance for our own Faults, and wear rather mourning, than
scorn: (not but that the deceitfulness of man's heart can insult over a rebuked
Person, even in pretended Grief: Jobs Friends sad silence broke out into
insulting, and vexing Rebukes.) But to show the sincerity of Reproof, there is
no greater Testimony than readiness to take, as well as give Counsel; He
reproves with faithfulness, that is reproved, with thankfulness.

On the other side, I cannot deny but to the miscarriage of this piece of
Friendship, 2. The Reproveds Faults.
the Reproved is accessory. Among other that Jealously, frequent enough, that
my Friend does it out of a Preaching vain, to take my Faults for his Text;
Where, I am not as this Publican, is oft-times the Doctrine, and that
uncharitable Application, the V^e, This Fellow is not worthy to live. And
indeed in friendship not well experienced, and this Surgery of Friendship not
discreetly managed, this Jealousy is not without some ground: But a braver
Jealousy it were to misdoubt our selves, as justly awaking the censure of our
Friends, which cannot but come short of the prudent man's Severity against
himself; as discreet and charitable Rebukes are the greatest Pledges of
Friendship, ab extra, from without; so he is doubtless his own best Friend,
that is often at difference with himself, for his miscarriages, in suffering
himself to be hurried by the Torrent of Passions, or Tide of Affections
against Conscience, and Judgment, yiedling to no guidance from the Gales of
Grace, or by the Steerage of Reason. In defect of which inward Checks, what
more necessary, while we are at Sea in the Floatings of this world, than the
faithful Adviser? as being Compass, Rudder, and most faithful Surgeon.
For guidance of both Reprover and Reproved, these Deportments may conduce.
First, to preserve my Friend so to himself, by right guidance, and so to me,
by gaining his right Interpretation. No man that makes use of Reproof, but
must raise his Doctrine from the Temper of the Party, as well as nature of the
Crime: And then do it tanquam Opus alienum, as God calls his Rebukes (his
Punishments) as if he were on some harsh unpleasing Subject, without any
earnestness, discovering love to it, or tedious length, arguing Delight:
Knowing wherefore the Fly dwells on the Sore. Least we bring this
faithfullest Act of Friendship, into the discredit of affected Defamation, the
greatest Act of Enmity; and shelter Malice under a pretense of avoiding
Flattery; a thing so usual, it has brought faithful Advise into suspicion;
insomuch as in the Court of Reason (for that should be Monarch in the Soul)
the Fool indeed is entertained, but the Privy Counselor is excluded. And
our Impatience of Reproof makes us to the rebuking Friend, as that King
Junipertus King of the Bergomenses, who punished a good Bishop for his ^old
Reproof, by setting him (unknowing) on an unruly Horse, thereby thinking to
have broke his Neck: The Bishops Pnnishment was but an Emblem of the impatient
Kings fault; for his Impatience had first flung him from his Love, and then his
Revenge attempted, (but in vain) to horse him on Destruction. But to regain the
Credit of Reproof, and abate the impatience of the Reproved, that out
Reproves may be to reason, and charity justifiable, and as to success
hopeful: We must (on the Reprovers part) have (like the Surgeon) the Ladies
hand for compassionate tenderness, and Lions heart for bold Impartiality.
Solomon tells us, there is that speaks like the peircings of a sword, but
the tongue of the wise is health, Prove. 12. 18. the Cures (attempted) by a
proud and raencker^us Spirit, are wounds in this Soule-chirurgery. But
faithful are the wounds of a Friend, PROVE. 27. 6. to discreet and friendly
Reproof, must go S^asonablenesse, Prudence, and Affection. For the first, he
was well answered, that asking his Friend whether he was not ashamed of being
drunk, was thus replied to, are not you more ashamed to reprove one that is
drunk? So much does Seasonablenesse alter the case. Then for Prudence, and
Affection, divorce them, and Rebukes are but vaunting Discoveries of the
innocence of our hands, or Nimblenesse of our Tongues; which us the Lamias Eye
was worn only abroad; so this only preaches in the streets, and that to
others: never in our private Chappells at home, our Consciences; a good way to
make them Chappells of ease; for I am sure Conscience is quieter, by (that
which is counted maddish, or ridiculous) talking to itself, than twenty
Lectures; like an (...). a busy body, to those out of our Diocese, to sum
up the Advisers Advice; in the Sermon at thy Friends Penance (such is Reproof)
go by this Method, let Compassion, and Humility divide the Text, Meekness
explain, and Discretion apply with tenderness, if thou will not turn Auditors
to Mutineers: in so doing, whom (it may be) thou did find in the Chair of
the Scorner, thou may bring to the stool of Repentance (better than any
Discipline that brags of it) and thence to a faith of thy Fidelity, in this so
much suspected Act of Friendship.

MAN'S TWO ELEMENTS.
IT is not the least Imperfection of Man, that his Comforts are not Elementall
and pure, but mixed with vexation of Spirit, or puffed up with vanity: But his
Miseries are unmixt oft-times, without a Grain of Comfort. Solomon, after his
Anatomy of the greater World, gives us his Epitome, resolving Man, the lesser
World, into these two Elements, Vanity, and vexation of Spirit; there being
nothing of what man has, or does, but is tainted with the first, or suffers,
but is from the latter. They seem to be the two sides of Man, the two
Philosophers looked on; Democritus placing himself on the one side, and
Heraclitus on the other. There is not greater discord between the Elements
themselves, than Dispute about their Number* how many go to Man's Creation (or
any materiated Substance) as he comes out of Gods hands, is much debated. Some
will have Fire none of them, others but two, a third only Water: But how many
go to his Composition, as he came out of his own hands, is easily resolved; for
since his Creation, he has spoiled himself into these two Elements, Vanity,
and vexation of Spirit: what he does, or enjoys, is vanity, or nothing; what
he suffers is real Vexation, and that not of his Teeth, or Corns, but
Spirit. Solid Miseries, empty Joye^; such a Nothing between two Dishes (as our
excellent Divine Poet Herbert) is his Happiness, since he found those loosing
Inventions, that bereft him of the Righteousness GOD Created him in. But stay,
these are saucy Truths to obtrude on the Power-mongers, Wealthmongers, and
Pleasure-mongers of the World. But let them know they were asserted by no
Cynicall Stoic, whose Poverty were scarce to be trusted in its undervaluings
of Wealth, or those other things he never tasted of: But of a King, and such a
one, as wore as Glorious a Triple Crown, of Honor, Wealth, and Pleasure, as
any before him, or shall after him. Compare him with all the petite Pioneers,
that dig in the bowels of this low Sublunary Mine, for their Happiness:
Compare, I say, their Pains, and gettings, with his gettings without the
vexation of Spirit; and I hope, if he deal so rudely with all his own (which
was the greatest) Sublunary Happiness, as to afford it the course Complement
of vanity; he that thinks higher of his Nothings, give me leaveto take him
for no Solomon, or that ever he was aboard any of his Ships; no, there is
another Ship expects his coming, if he be not in it already.

1. Compare his Honor; and what King, or Emperor worthy to be his
Archidapifer, his Sewer? though it may be his Territorys were not of that
extent at that time, as some then in the world: yet Gods setting him up for an
Example of Glory, throughout all Generations, places him first in the Heralds
Book. What bustle do we make to be a golden Calfe for the People to worship?
(and Gold, and Simplicity, as they are often coupled, so either, or both have
the Vulgars good word to be set up) how ready to break both Gods Tables to be
it? as Moses did to see it: How do we break our sleeps, to arrive to the Honor
of taking a Nap on the Bench (I, or in the Church) without Control? and to be
chosen Burgess of some inconsiderable Dorpe, or Town (very like a Village) how
chargeably do we feast the Rabble, and lay more Plots to fetch over a
disagreeing Cobbler, than ever Macchiavel was slandered with? Forbear to jeere,
pray; are not these worthy Pains, and the Gains, and Honor as worthy? If
Heraclitus would change sides with Democritus, I mean his contemplating the sad
side of Man's vexation of Spirit, and come hither and look on Democritus his
side, and see his Vanities, he could not but change Notes. Do but view what
petite things swell men up: the Stage never prefented the Pride of a Constable
so really, as it is frequently to be found in men under that burdensome Honor:
I dare say Solomon, nay, Kings at this day, hold their Scepters with more
humility, than those small Officers their Staves: They are angry at days
appearing, because it Dethrones them from their Bench of Authority: And on the
same score hate St. Barnabies short night, and are therefore severe Examiners
of his Namesakes. And these but Emblem the Worlds Grandees, in whom Pride, and
affected State seems almost as ridiculous, if they but compare the utmost of
their wishes (almost) and hopes with Salomons Fruitions, as to Honor; compared
with which, all their Hono^rs are scarce big enough to write them his Yeomen;
in whose Heralds Book it may be the King of Spaines long Titles, would have
writ him Gentleman, or at most but Don. Then look on his Wealth, and here, thou
selfe-pleasing Horder, bless thy self; when thou hear, that which holds
all thy Corn, laid up for many years, would scarce hold his Money. Thou Usurer
wilt count thy Chest but a small Christmas Box, to his Exchequer. Nay, our
Farmers of the Custom House, but Pedling Receivers unto his; with whom Silver
was as cheap as Brass: for the Scripture says, it was as the stones in the
street, King. 1. 10. It is not unlikely, Silver, and Gold both came to as cheap
Market, as they did in America, when the Spaniards abounded so with Gold (on
the taking the King Atabaliba) that they gave 1500. Pezos of Gold for a Horse,
60. for a Rundlet of Wine, 40. for a pair of shoes.

Our richest men might, it may be, have been reckoned among Salomons Almesmen,
who never live to see (of their own, nor others) such Sums his Account Books
mention, or his Father David's. As for David's, consult, 1 Chronicles. 22. 14. and see
with wonder what a vast Sum, (and that in his Trouble) he had gathered; and
which is the third and greatest wonder (I doubt I must again say it is
Scripture, least I am heard and believed, as one reading a piece of Sir John
Mandevil) hear it O troubled Times! it was for a pious use, to build but one
Church. Now hear the Sum, (rendered by able Antiquaries into our modern
denomination) Six hundred eighty six millions, two hundred sixty two thousand,
and nine hundred Pounds Sterling; to the building of which Church, there was
gathered (says Cornelius A lapide) two thousand Millions of Gold; a Sum (says
Drexelius) scarce all Europe can make up: and (as he goes on) that 10980.
Wagons could not have carried, allowing each Wagon 250000. Crowns. But for
Salomons Wealth, it was of that vastness, it would put our Accountants to
find new names for Sums, and stun the Belief of one of our ( Beggarly in
comparison) Rich Misers, though both they and he on serious consideration
cannot put all this Wealth (as it is called) into a real Inventory of that
Riches which may be called their own, or enough to entitle them truly Rich;
since of it all, we may say as he said of the. Axe head that fell off to Elijah
the Prophet, King. 2. 6. 5. Alas, Master, it is but borrowed: as no less
ingeniously than truly Seneca confirms in Epist. 87. Divitem illum putas?
Quia aurea supellex etiam in via eum sequitur, quia in omnibus Provincijs arat;
quia magnus Calendarij liber evolvitur, quia tantum suburbani Agri possidet,
quantum invidiose in desertis Apuliae possideret? and cum omnia dixeris, Pauper
est; quare? quia debet; quantum? inquis; Omnia: nisi forte judices interesse,
utrum aliquis ab homine, an a Fortuna mutuum sumpserit. Do you count such a one
rich (says Seneca) because of hi^ rich Sumpter Horse, or because he have a
Plow going in every Province almost; or for his large Account Book, or such
large Possessions near the City, that would be envied him in the Deserts of
Apulia? When you have said all, he is poor; but you will say, why? why,
because he owes all; unless you make a difference between borrowing from
Men, and from Providence: but come we to his Pleasures, they were more, for his
Luxury was so great, ut vel aureos Montes concoxerit; demum revera coeperit
egere, and novis exactionibus mulgere Subditorum Marsupia. Drexel. Aurifodin.
Part 3. c. 1. None but Solomon could have drawn Salomons Exchequer dry, so as
he was fain by new Taxes to squeeze Contributions out of his Subjects, to
maintain his Luxury. Hear him, Eccles. 2. reckoning up the many Sluices of his
Treasury, and his own Verdict on it, that it was all but vanity; and yet what
wanted he, that Epicurus (according to some) required for to integrate his
Happiness with? the Elements were dispeopled to furnish his Table; in
comparison of the Delicates of which, the most voluptuous of the Roman
Emperors Banquets were but Scraps, and they to him but Basketeers. It was no
ordinary Fare that could Surfeit even wonder, and that of a Queen, 2 Chronicles. 9.
4. Then his Provision for his Bed is not inferior, 700. by the honester name
of Wives, and 300. professed Concubines, enough to make them blush at their
slender Provision, that glory in their s^ame: viz. their Conquest of some
Women's weaknesses, or a small Catalogue of Mistresses; when as the Turks
Seraglio to this of Solomon was not to be compared; that being but a Cage of
unclean Birds, his a Wood. Then for his Buildings, if measured by their time of
building, and number of Workmen, and looked on through the Prospective of
Proportion, how do they lessen the stately wonders of the Eye, into Cottages (I
may say Snailelike Vmbrellos) mere shades, and Dormitorys; yet of all these he
passes the sentence of Vanity: but that word (...) signifying them to be no
more then, when they stood (out-braving all other Structures) than they are
now, that is nothing; and indeed had not Solomon said it, Time had; whose Maw
has devoured the very Ruins of those stately Piles, so that jam -- periere
Ruinae. To sum up all, consult 8, 9, 10. verses of Eccles. 2. and you shall see
the best Patterns of earthly happiness, the great Example of what man could
possess, or enjoy, resolved with this Element Vanity. But the more to persuade
Admirers of Wealth, that Vanity is a name good enough (which while bestowed on
Wisdom, is the harder to believe, or on Piety) View it with great abundance
with Heathen, that can boast of neither. If we will believe Captain Hawkins his
Relations of the great Moguls Wealth, and Revenewes, Treasure, or Spendings. As
to the first, the Estates of Christian Princes will bear proportion of Grains
of Allowance to his fifty Millions a year, standing Revenewes of his Crown
Land.

But then view Man's Actions, and you will find all a man does, as well as
has, is no better Elemented; or indeed, how can it be so well? since the End
is more noble in the Herauldry of Moralls, than the Means. Now if all a man's
Labors, Designs, Plots, Sweates, and Colds, Perturbations of Mind, be to
compass a small inconsiderable Piece of that, which (if as complete as Salomons)
is but Vanity; What slender Title can Invention help us to for the Actions of
men? all man's Creations (his Actions) are vanity; (but what he does for his
Creator) and his Creatures, (the Effects of those Actions) but Abortives, or
moment-lived; passing from a Non esse not being, over the Stage of a short Est,
or Duration, to an everlasting Nonexistence; So true is that Eccles. 1. 11.
There is no remembrance of former things, neither shall be any Remembrance of
things which are to come, by those that shall come after. What vanity is it
still to begin to live? Stultus semper inicipit vivere. Senec. what vanity,
Quaerere quod nequit invenire, vel quod nocet inventum: says AEneas Sylvius,
de miserijs curialibus: to seek what cannot be found, or which being found,
will do more harm than good? Examine by these Touch-stones the Travells, and
Actions of Men; and doubtless their Vanity will appear. But because this may
appear better in the particular Dissection of men's Actions, or Judgments, I
pass to the other Element of Man, his passive Element, if you will, vexation
of Spirit, though in this active, like Fermamentation, as being begun in and
from it self. Dejection of Mind, disquiet, fretting Anger, and the like
Self-afflictions, being those Forms that give all external Miseries, their
Esse, and Operari, being, and Operation upon our Minds By all which has been
said, methinks we can stay no longer from crying out in that most Rhetorical
Aposiopesis (though Apocryphal, of most significant verity) Esdras 2. 7. 48. O
thou Adam! What have thou done? for though it was thou that s^nned, thou art
not fallen alone, but we all that come of thee. And would we could light on
some nobler principles that might sublime us from these Rellolacean Principles,
qualitatibus insignibus destitutis (as the Chemists phrase it) dead, low,
beggarly Elements: the readiest to be met with for this great Work, that my
slender reading meets with, is the life of Faith, and Actions referring to
Eternity: The first sets us above the World, and gives us a view (without
partaking) of these baser Elements, and the Men compounded of them, and places
us among those few that scorn, and pity what this muddy world admireth, or
feels not. Then for that other Gallantry of Spirit, projecting all we do for
Eternity; it inrolleth us in Plinies Catalogue of truly wise men, Qui mortales
istos caducosque Titulos aut deprecantur aut temperant. Qui sciunt ubi vera,
ubi Sempiterna Gloria, ubi Honores, in quos nihil Flammis, nil Senectuti, nil
Successoribus Licet. Plin. Paneg. 7. 47. that decline, or swell not with those
vain, fading Titles; but know where that true, that lasting Glory, and those
Honors, that neither Fire, Time, nor Posterities envy, can diminish. Or to
conclude, let this Resolve support us, that it is more wise, and noble to wish
with the Apostle (than fear) Dissolution, since to live is but to be Retainers
to these base and beggarly Elements, but Death is a preparing Deliquium, or
melting us down into a Menstruum, fit for the Chemistry of the Resurrection to
work on; into which one Drop of the Virtue of Christ's Resurrection being flung
(after a patient Fermentation in the Grave) will raise us embodied into the
Elixir of Glorious Immortality.

THE LASTING MONVMENT.
IT is the wonder (and no causeless one) of a Heathen Prince, that men lavisht
so much on their Houses, wherein they were to continue so little a while, but
took little, or no Care, or laid out but small Charge on their Tombs, where
their Residence should be longer; to say truth, not only their Bodies stay
longer in, but their Names on their Tombs, than their Manor Houses: People
not being so hasty to crowde in, or justle them out of these Quarters, as out
of their coveted Possessions: Tomb-Burglary in this kind, being so uncouth a
Case, as Law never made Provision against it. I find it storied of the Indian
Mogul, that lived no longer ago, than 1615. that he had then been fourteen
years building a Sepulcher, that no doubt will strike that of Mausolus out of
the seven Wonders, or make the eighth.

Nor is he singular in his Enterprise, many have done the like before him; and
all more or less strive at a Perpetuity of their Names; though let me say in a
more Preposterous way, than these Monument-Builders do: (who yet take a wrong
course, as on slight Examination will appear) how vain it is sought by
Purchases, or Inheritances, tied to ses Heirs (in more Knots than, etc. has,
or they think can ever be united) Experience will prove: for we daily see,
there is not the strongest Writings for Entayling an Inheritance, but a
Prodigal can presto quickly turn into Tailors Measures, that may be used for
the Measuring himself (or others as Prodigal) to have Suites made, that are
bought by those vainly intended Perpetuities. How many are above one and
thirty, (a Peep out) in their Estates, before they come to their one and twenty
in years? and that by those Commendable Courses, Dicing, Drabbing, or
Drinking, or such like Sluices. Nor is any thing more usual, than for the Fork
to be Rake's Heir: The Prodigal the Usurers. How many Masters have some
stately Houses had, in the age of a small Cottage, that has, as it were,
lived, and dyed with her old Master, both dropping down together. Such vain
Preservatories of us, are our Inheritances, even once removed: but look on it
more Removes off, and continuing in thy Name, yet how little does that concern
Thee (though the first Purchaser, or his Heir) Lazy Posterity, when they hear
it so called know it by the Name, but not as thine; but the name of thy Family,
never troubling themselves to know, whether it were a younger Brothers, or
Elders Building, leaving out the many Aps of its Pedigree) nor can they
distinguish which of the same man's Children lost, spent, or run out of it, or
which kept, or recovered an old, or raised a new Inheritance. Of such short
livd Fame are the Toils of worldly-mindednesse. In one Century of years, how
are the Memories of such Labors lost? whole Families meeting with their Ortus
and Occasus, Birth, and Funeral, in the space that some one man may live to
see it. How did the lease of Thomas Parrs Soul, in the T^nement of his Body,
outlast many a Circulation of Inheritances, throughout the Kingdom? besides
the troubled Progress, or (rather) Toss of Crowns, from head, to head; such
Labors in vain, are the thrifty Toils of Predecessors, against the
forgetfulness of Successors; the costly Buildings of Sepulchers are little
better, since -- datae sunt ipsis quoque Fata Sepulchris. Tombs themselves
have been buried in the heaps of Ruin. Cities have their ubi disputable,
their places in Controversy: the very Names of some are preserved by the
Eminence of their Ruin, while many other Towns (that only dye of Age and
Depopulation) silently drop into Dung Hills, without the least mention in
History. Where is Troy, Carthage, Syracuse, and Agrigentum? (says Pausanias)
that had once 700000. Inhabitants? and Babylon, that was once omnium quas Sol
unquam aspexit urbium maxima: the fairest City the Sun ever shined on? it must
be Critical Antiquarys, must be the Surveyours, that with much difficulty can
score out the Places where they were. The Pyramides indeed have stood some time
proof against the Inundation of Time, and Oblivion (the true Deluge that
drowneth the World by Parcells, as that of waters did all at once) but their
Founders memories had mouldred long before the stones of their Buildings, had
they not been built where Arts had their Nursery (as well as their Builders had
there their Sepulchers) and so were preserved in the Archives of History; there
being no such lasting Monument, but what is hewed out of one, or both those
Quarries Pliny speaks of, Lib. 6. Ep. 16. Beatos puto, quibus Deorum Munere
datum est aut Facere Scribenda, aut Scribere legenda. Beatissimos vero, quibus
utrumque. Translate Beatos by Immortal, and it fits our Purpose: I think them
happy, says Pliny, whom the Gods Enn^ble with Deeds deserving History, or
enable to writings meriting Lasting Perusal: but most happy they, that attain
to both; though this latter seem the most lasting. Of both these it is true
which Pliny speaks of one of them: ( viz. Princes that are born for the
Sepulcher of History) ut quisque factus est Princeps, extemplo Fama ejus,
incertum bona an mala, caeterum aeterna est. Paneg. P. 47. So are Exploites of
the merciless Sword, quiet Scepter, or the painful Pen: Their Authors have a
Perpetuity (be it good, or bad) out-lasting all materiated Structures. And
here I cannot but subscribe to an excellent Pen, averring to seek Fame by the
Pen, and profess it, is not so vain as it is commonly voted; but rather a
justifiable (nay Noble) Design, if subordinately to the Honor of our Creator;
as I know no speedier enabling of us to honor him (which must principally be
in Instruction, or Reprehension of others) then first to insinuate an Authority
into our Persuasions: (the very Character of our Saviors teaching) and how can
that be better done, than by gaining this Fame and Repute among men? It has
been always the Aims of the Noblesttemper'd Spirits.

As for Fame by Actions, we know that nothing among good Works do more
perpetually praise him, than the virtuous Deeds of our Forefathers; a Noble
Resolve it were therefore not to let Fame slip by us, if to be caught by either
Actions, or Writings. Nor is it a vainglory, no, (if, as I said, subordinate
to Gods glory.) This desirable Fame is nothing else, but a Testimonial that we
have lived to the End of our Creation, our Creators Praise. As to the raising
these desirable Monuments, I must give the Pen so far the Pre-eminence, that it
preserves not only its own Fame, but also the Memory, and so the Glory of all
the Actions of the world: The Temple of History (in which are inshrined all
worthy Actions of the world) being built of no other Materials than Ink, and
Paper; in sheets of which, the Worthies of the world are and will be preserved
longer* than their Sear-cloaths and sheets of Lead could ever have kept their
mouldring Trusts. The Dominions of Penmen are of far larger extent than those
of Swordmen, Cicero's Authority shall mint (and stamp for current) Language,
further than ever Caesar's Victories could challange Contribution; Nay, Caesar's
Sword could never make more Tributaries of Payments, and Subjection, than his
own Pen has at this day Revenewes of Wonder, and study, from the understanding
world. The lasting Monuments then doubtless are paper Monuments. Which of all
the great Hacsters of the world are better (or so well) known by any Tom^e, or
other Structure, than Sophocles, or Euripides by their instructive Tragedies.
The Tutor Aristotle has more enlarged the Empire of Arts, than the Pupil
Alexander could that of Greece: In this sense that is true Seneca says, Ep.
21. of Atticus. Nomen Attici perire Ciceronis epistolae non sinunt: nihil illi
profuisset Gener Agrippa, and Tiberius Progener, and Drusus Caesar Pronepos;
inter tam magna Nomina taceretur, nisi Cicero illum applicuisset. The name of
Atticus is preserved to a lasting perpetuity in Ciceros Epistles: what good
would his Kindred and Relation to Agrippa, Tiberius, the Emperor, and Drusus
Caesar have done? his name would not have been heard among such great Names,
had not Cicero made him famous. I must confess I look on Books, Colleges,
Hospitalls with more just wonder, and reverent Esteem of their Piety, than all
the spreading Conquests that ever swelled up many Kingdoms into one Monarchy,
as works of more public spiritednesse for good, than all the politic
Enlargements of Dominion, which are rather contrary; for how it can be done
without breach of Charity, or Justice, would puzzle one of those Casuists, that
would feign make it lawful; since their Enterprises differ as much in effect,
as Sodomes destructive Rain, and Aprills growing showers: and I doubt whether
many of them at that Goale-delivery of the Grave, and Sea, will not be
condemned for Magni latrones: compared with whose Mischiefs, the Villainies of
private Thieves (that they have suffered for) are but petty-larceny, on which
considerations to be a Net-maker (in Chrysostomes sense) is better than to be a
Thron^-maker* so as to be able to leave Empires to thy younger Sons. Would you
know what Nets? Retia salutis pandit, qui b^nos libros Componit: He that
compileth good Books, spreads Nets of Salvation: And what Honor Fishers of
Men have, our Savior tells them, Matthew. 19. 28. no less than Thrones: When
on the other side, I much question whether the Lamb of God were ever slain for
some of those vainglorious Butchers of men. I look on Paul's Churchyard as a
safer Preserver (than the inside of the Church could be, though of the most
durable Marble) of Austin, Chrysostom, etc. and there are to be shown many of
those* that, as to their dust, and Monuments, want a hic jacet. That Henry the
seventh is better shown in my Lord Bacons History (among many other*) than by
the pennyworth of History the fellow that shows the Tombs holds forth; (a
very fit place to buy that new word, will be to leave it in this Fellows
mouth.) Musa vetat mori, Writings of worthy Pens do so truly immortalize, that
Augustus is more beholding to Horace, and so was his Maecenas, than he to
either. True is Ovids, Ergo etiam cum me supremus ad^^sserit Ignis
Vivam, Parsque mei magna superstes erit.


Which take in our own Laureats English. Then when this Body falls in Funeral
Fire,
My Name shall live, and my best part aspire.


Seneca confirms Ovid by his quotation of Virgil, promising as much in his
21. Epist. and by this Assertion of his own, Profunda supra Nos Altitudo
Temporis veniet: pauca Ingenia caput exerent, and in idem quandoque silentium
abitura oblivioni resistent. A Deluge of oblivion will overwhelme us. Some few
wits (it may be) may lift their heads and names above it; viz. Such as are
harbourd in a Library? For to conclude, no Monuments so much too hard for the
all-devouring Teeth of Time, as these (...), built by one sound hand. And if
Sacred Story mention (and does not di^-approve them for it) holy men's care to
lie by their Forefathers in Receptacles, that have since lost their In
criptions, and escape the strictest Survey of Geography; it cannot but be a
noble Design to crowde our Memories into a Library, where the Dead preach (not
putrify) do good, and receive Honor; each useful Book opening as a Box of
Ointment to the good of the Opener, and Esteem of the Perfume.

THE LEVELLERS.
AMong those uncontrouleable Levellers of the World, Fate, or Fortune, (in the
Prof^ne Lexicon, and in the Christians undiscovered Providence) may pass for
the first; Opinion, and Time (or the Grave) for the other two. The two first
require the more serious inquiry into, for the universality of their Po^er (and
yet general unobservance of it) and usefulness of its Contemplation in the
occurences of life; the third is not less useful, but a more common Theme,
and so needs the less Descant. I find all three observed by the wisest of
Men, and by him inserted into the divine Oracles, for the settling our heads and
hopes in the midst of the Whirl-pooles of Change, and to arm us with
patience under crosnesse of Events: It is Solomon in Eecles. 9. 11. Then I
returned and s^^ under the Sun, that the Race is not un^^ the swift, nor the
Battle to the strong, neither yet Bread to the wise, nor yet Riches to men of
understanding, nor yet Favor to men of skill, but Time, and Chance happens
to them all. In which words the first, and last of the Levellers are expressed,
and that other blind Opinion employed in those words, nor Favor to men of
skill. Little notice is taken of the Tyranny of these in their Causes, though
by all confessed in their Effects; nothing has more undermined the Power of
Goodness, or Empire of Reason, than the two former, and that where they have
both been in fullest vigor. David was sick of his Innocence when he saw the
Triumphs of Villainy, and Depressions of Innocence, and Justice, Psalm. 73. 12.
13. Behold these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world, they increase in
Riches. Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
Innocence. He thought the cleansing of his heart and washing of his hands was
no less spilt than the water, when he saw hands polluted hold the Raines of
his own Horses in his own Chariot (as I may say) and that his Innocence was
kept out one while, and thrust out another, of his own Ri^^ts. His Son Solomon
was as much tr^^bled with his Wisdom, Eccles. 2. 15. Then said I in my heart*
as it happens unto the Fool, so it happens even to me, and why was I then
more wise? Then I said in my heart, this also is vanity. Understand it in that
part of wisdom (that is now counted most needless) Learning: and Martial
turns his sense into an Epigram; The Cobl^r translated to Wealth, Lib. 9. 74.
Dentibus antiquas solitus producere pelles,
Et mordere luto putre vetusque Solum;
Praenestina tenes decepti Regna Patroni,
In quibus indignor si tibi cella fuit.
Rumpis and ardenti madidus Chrystalla Falerno.
Et pruris Domini cum Ganymede tui
At me literulas stulti docuere Parents.
Quid cum Grammaticis Rhetoribusque mihi?
Frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos,
Si dare sutori calceus ista potest.


Which since it will be an Epigram, though but ill translated, I will not
spare the English Reader my pains, in rendering it near the sense. Is It not a
pretty change? that thou whose Chaps
Knew (better than the flesh by far) the dirty Flaps
Of The Hide (with which thou Coblest) now have got
That House and Lands; where thee a Stall allot
Before none would: and now do drink rich Wine
That breaks the Glass: Thy Patrons Ganymede is thine.
My Parents (in this not over-wise) must needs me make
A Scholar, poor, for th'Tongues, and Rhetoricks sake.
Thy Books Thalia tear, and scribbling tools,
If such strange^ Fortune have each Cobling Fool.


Authors both Sacred and Profane we see complain of the Leve^l of Learning,
with Mechanic Ignorance: but that this Leveller Fortune, (But before I
proceed, I will insert Lipsius his Caution. Fati vocem (vel Fortunae, hic and
alibi veterum more pono, sed non mente; nil nisi Providentiam divinam, idque
pio et christiano sensu intelligere me, semel testor. I use the word Fate, or
Fortune according to the manner, Polit. 1. c. 4.
not meaning of the Ancients; but once for all know, I mean divine Providence,
and that in a pious and Christian acception) and so I say, this Leveller
Fortune deals as harshly and unequaly (to appearance) with the Soldier, as
the Scholar; for the Battle is not to the strong; Gideons three hundred
proved it to the Midianites; and the bloody Chronicles of Battles fought
unequally, and won by the weakest will confirm it. Nay, the private History of
any old Soldiers Experience, sc^rce wants a Testimony at some time or other,
that Alea Belli, the Chance of War, psayeth as casually while the Dru^me beats,
as ever Die did on Drum Head: whole Armie^ then as truly having their lives
played, as ever any priv^te S^uldier had, when condemned to s^ing for his.

How often does some Ca^ualty, or Treachery turn the Scale? As for the former,
that of Caesar is true, In Bello, par^^s momentis magni Casus intercedunt. A
small chance causes no small turn: witness that disappointment of an Army,
under the very Gates of a City; when one of the Commanders bid them stand back,
(only that he might have the more room to force the Gates) by a strange and
sudden mistake, the word was taken back, back; and the Besieged issued forth
after the mistakingly frighted, and running Army, routing them, and delivering
it self from so near a Storm, or Surprise; call it what you will. Then for the
latter I shall use but a single Instance neither, (being enough for the
intended bulck of this Bo^k.) When Agesilaus had made hopeful Progress in his
Asian Conquests, and was sent for back by the Graecians his Masters, (bribed by
a sum of Moneys from the Persian) he complained that 30000. Archers had
driven him out of Asia: Now an Archer was the stamp of the Asian Coin. But to
say truth, where Treachery is absent, we know that disproportioned strength
has carried the Day, even casually, as to the wisest Counsels of War, or most
resolute Execution of such Counsels; what has begun a Battle, has turned in
a trice to a Horse Race: where as if Fortune had been one of the Jockeys, and
rid booty, the three to one has lost the Prize; deserving the name of that
Battle, fought by the English, in Henry 8th's Reign at the Siege of Terwyn in
France, Bakers Chronicle, H. 8.
and as heartily run by the French, and therefore called the Battle of Spurs.

But let us proceed in this Paradox, and the second Match between Wisdom, and
Chance seems as unequally lost: That the wise should want Bread, that ability
of Parts, or acquired Knowledge should keep fasting Days; and Folly, or
Duncery Thanks giving days, that all the ones year should be Lent, and the
others Christmas. Take the Wise here for Wisdom, Scholastic principally, as
before I touched on it, (in regard the following words may intimate Practical
Wisdom, or Politic, shufling and cutting ones self a Fortune in this
scambling World) and it seems as strange as unfit, that great Scholars
should be kept to such short Commons, as to want Bread (by which we must
understand Necessaries for life) while the ignorant Fool; or golden Ass, fare
deliciously every day; or are clad in Scarlet, while the Scholar is as well
known (as the old Ensign) by his Rags. Threadbare Scholar being a
Proverbiall verity, and a common experienced truth, as old as the Scholars
Clothes, in which the infidelity of his Mercer, or Taylour will continue him
an Antiquary, for any Admission he shall have into their Books; he may sooner
be matriculated in most Universities in Christendom, than see his Name in
their Books, without this poor Scholar strive to be Tutor to some rich
Pupil: otherwise his notionall Antiquities, and Apparel (for them) shall
strive for Seniority; he shall not be a greater Antiquary in his Readings, and
Criticismes, than his Garb; all which could never make the Scholar miserable,
could the worlds blindness see the rich Linings of these transparent
outsides. He is not miserable but by the Combination of these Levellers
Fortune, and (no less) blind Opinion of the Vulgar, by which his very being
poor shall keep him so: for there goes more than Desert to gaining Esteem, or
Advancement from the misjudging World; meannesse of Birth, or slender Havings,
cheapen the richest A^ilities, and Choke oft-times, the Preferment of the
clearest parts. The P^et hit it when he said, Haud facile emergunt quorum
virtutibus obstat
Res angusta Domi. --
Which take thus as a Paraphrase.
His Parts be what they will, t^s a Spoke in's Cart
To be a Carters Son. --


Pliny gives a Reason, Lib 6. Ep. 23.
neque enim cuique tam clarum statim Ingenium ut posset emergere, nisi illi
materia, occasie, Fautor etiam, Commendatorque, conting^t. There is no Wit so
famous as to fall presently under lucky and advancing Notice, unless some
matter, Opportunity, some Favo^rer and Commender do fortunately ^onspire in an
Auspicieus Influence on it. If this be true of Pliny, no wonder Salomons is of
a Canonical Authority, since so many Combiners must furnish the wise with
bread. Plutarch gives this for a Reason, why Arts, Plut. Lib. 2. de Alex.
virtute.
and Artists flourished in Alexanders time: Vt quibus Testem contigerit,
Arbitrumque nancisci, cum acri ad aestimanda Artium Specimina Judicio, tum vero
suppeditantibus Opibus ad maxima quaeque operae Pretia Autoribus ipsis
persolvenda; as meeting with a Witness, and an able Judge, of a judicious head,
and liberal hand; for (as he goes on) as Fruits, and ^orn are much advanced
by temper of the Air, and kindlinesse of Seasons; so Arts and Wits,
Beneficentia, Humanit, t^que Regia evocantur; Contraque Invidia, sordibus and
Morositate eorum, qui Rerum potiuntur, restinguuntur and languescunt; are by
Beneficence and Princely Favors caused to spring, but by the over-powerings of
Envy, and ni^ings of stingy Sordidnesse, or wayward Discountenancings of
Power-mongers, are blasted and dye. How many for want of some of the
formentioned Levers fall into an obscure Level with the most neglected, and
despised Ranks of men? A Belfry had hid, no doubt, as able Parts, as ever
appeared on Preferments Stage, and as good water goes by the Mill as drives
it; though this is not all the misery of Scholars, to miss Preferment for
want of being known by Lovers of Learning. Sadder and more near it strikes, to
be cast on levelling Places, or Persons, that look on an Ostler with more
respect than a Schoolmasters, or Curate (if I say not Pastor) to whom they
grudge a Falconers Wages. Socrates his pleasant Tale is too dismal a Truth to
many Scholars, and wise men generally; that Grasshoppers were once Scholars,
Musicians, and Poets, that lived without Meat, or Drink, and therefore were
turned into Grasshoppers by Jupiter. If they can get a little empty Applause
from some, they think them well satisfied; get full Bellies where chey can.

So true is that Juvenal says of Statius. -- tantaque Libidine vulgi
Auditur: sed c^m fregit subsellia versu,
Esurit, intactam Paridi nisi vendat Agaven.
Statius to th'longing People may rehearse,
Till his Appla^ders do the Benche^ crack:
If he do'nt sell his Works, he bread may lack.


Nay, they will come to a bad Market too, in Times that squint on Ingenious
Labors. The Suns are all set, that shined with gladding Influences, on worthy
Teemings of a fruitful Brain, as the same Author complained then. Tunc par
Ingenio Pretium: nunc utile Multis
Pallere, and vinum toto nescire Decembri.


Which sounds to this purpose: Then Wits met with Reward, but now alack
Their Palenesse-breeding Labors wo'n't yield Sack.


Plautus was one of these wise men, that was feign to grind Corn to get his
Bread; notwithstanding he was the Master of as much Wit as we find extant in
any one of the Ancients. He found true, quod non dant Proceres dabit Histrio:
What the Roman great ones would not go to a penny cost on; the Roman Players
would. Had he not got from them some Salary for his Plays, he had never
turned Merchant; and when broke, was fain to Trade with them again, and fall to
grinding Corn again, and writing Plays. Poor man, most truly grinding in a
Circulation of Fortunes, most of them low enough. Petronius Arbiter guessed
right, when he saw an old Threadbare man come in: Vt facile appaereret hac
nota Litteratum esse, quos odisse Divites Solent: A sure Mark (says he) that
he was a Scholar, the Tribe so much scorned by the Rich. He guessed by his
Clothes of no worth, that the Wearer was of some; as appeared on his further
questioning who he was? he answered a Poet: and why so clad? says Petronius:
the Scholar Answers, Propter hoc ipsum; Amor Ingenij Neminem unquam divitem
f^cit: On this very Score: For Love of Wit seldom makes men rich. Poetical
Records tell us when Jupiters Daughters were all married, the Muses were left
alone: Helicon was not troubled with Suitors. Buchanan has found the reason in
his Elegies, in one for all.

Calliope longum caelebs cur vixit in AEvum, Eleg. 1.

Nempe nihil, Doti quod numeraret, erat.
How comes Cal^ope no Suitors had?
She was (though honest, yet) too light, it is said.


The wonder of this unequal Level of deserving Meannesse (as to the Trappings
of Wealth, or Pedigrees) is lessened, when we consider what the Rule of the
vulgar Judgments is, to rate by outsides: So true is the Spanish Proverb, El
buen Appareyo haze buen Artifice, Good Clothes, and he is a good Artist; but
on the contr^ry -- Rara in tenui facundia Panno, poor and Scholar cannot be.
-- Ciceroni Nemo ducentos
Nunc dederit Nummos, nisi fulserit Annulus ingens.


If the Ring glitter not on the Orators, or Advocates finger, they will be no
Clients. This taint of Esteeming outsides is not mere Fiction, and of ^oetick
Authority, but Sacred and Canonical: St. James found, not to be (...)
Ring-finger'd, might want a Seal, James 2. 2, 3.
or (as we now might say) might stand at a Pew door.

Such odd Rules do the generality of men go by, in judging or esteeming of
worth. By this time, I believe, we do believe it no Paradox that Bread is not
to the Wise. But methinks I hear it objected, they are not worldly wise, they
are too Bookish; their Regardlesnesse of men and ways of thriving make them
stand in their own light: So that neglect and obscurity seem to be the Desert
of such Desert. But let us make Progress in this List of Levellers, and the
Levelled, and you shall see that Riches are not to those of Understanding, (you
may Paraphrase it very well with the Additionall) how to get them; and this
seems something strange indeed; How does fortunate Folly, and some
Simpletons, even to worldly Affairs, give the go-by to cunning, or laborious
Pioneers (in the Mines of Industry) for Wealth? becoming rich, no body (nor
themselves) know how: when frugall, wise, painful and careful men, like
Horses in a Mill, run round in a competency (and that is well) nay, sometimes
go back, come to nothing, and know not why, or how. How frequent to see
Servants buy out their Masters? ministri locupletiores ijs quibus ministrant,
Servus majores opes habens quam Patronus, as Plato complain^th, and Solomon,
Eccles. 10. 7. I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes walking as
Servants upon the Earth. But the Reason lessening the wonder of this (or indeed
(to speak strictly) of the former Levells of strength, or wit) is that the
Builders build in vain, unless the Lord build the House. So that all hitherto
discoursed may be resolved into the Resolve of Providence, to let us see we owe
all we have to somewhat extra, without us, and that extra to be Supra; somewhat
above us, as well as without us. But come we to the third and worst of
Levellers, in all its motions unjust, and that is Opinion, or favor of the
people, which is regardlesse even of those of skill; for so Solomon says,
Favor is not to them of skill: where by men of skill we may well interpret
able men in several Professions. It would make one believe, there scarce were
any Profession, but blind Ingratitude left in the world, to see some of
Abilities, in all Ages, by all sorts of men, have been no more esteemed than
worthless Insufficients; nay, not so much as they, advantaged with some
Setters off, and Takers, with the People. Non a Peritia sed ab ornatu vel vulgi
vocibus habemur excellentes. Lib. 2. de Consol.
Cardan says, men are admired not from their true skill, but Garb, Voice of
the people, etc. from this blind Opinion of the world, what uncouth Sights is
the world filled with? To see what strange Cattle, what Calves they worship
for rare, eminent, and gifted men: examine several Professions, and confess
in Divinity, Physic, Poetry, nay, where their Senses are Judges. He that
painteth a Sign, but ordinarily, passes with them for as rare a Master as a
Hilliard, or a Vandike. How does Opinion equal (that is Courtesy) nay,
sometimes prefer strange Fellows for Divines, above the ablest Improver of his
time and parts for that weighty Enterprise! Barba non facit Philosophum, a
Beard made not a Philosopher, was the old Rule; but the new Rule is, Non Barba
facit Theologum; among ^aire-brain'd Judgments, a hairelesse Chin graduateth
him a hopeful, and gifted young man in their esteem, above those Advantages of
Learning, and Seniority (not only Academicall) but even in the Lords Vineyard.
What Trade but (in some men's judgments) may receive Orders, and (only in that)
a Call sufficient to this no less burdensome, than honorable Embassy?

I make no doubt but confident forwardness, and undertakings, would Ticket men
passable (with such Judgments) that could scarce tell which end of their Bibles
to hold uppermost; as to Divinity. Then judge you whether Solomon spoke of his
own times, or ours, when he said, Favor is not to men of skill; A consequence
whereof is that Pulpit Burglary, that is now more than ever frequent, and as
unquestioned (or unpunished) as unlawful; whereby such uncalled, and unsent
Intruders, break into the Pulpits with far less timourousnesse, than their
Brethren into houses. But come we to that Profession of Physic, and
regardlesnesse of Desert seems to be a misfortune entailed on the Family of
the Medices, while Butcherly Quacks are pestered with more than they can
dispatch: Such as Clenard in his Epistles did not Nickname, when he called them
Causifici, and Sanicidae, words too elegant for translation, or if you will,
Feaver-makers, and Health-spoilers: and to aggravate the blockishnesse of this
Leveller, the vulgar Opinion, view the Character of them, that carry away their
favor, and custom, from the most skillfull Son of Hippocates, (or
AEsculapius) it is in Dousa's Epods. Quibus loquacis affatim arrogantiae est,
Peritiae parum aut nihil.
Nec ulla mica literarij salis
Crumenimulga Natio, etc.
Whose skill is nothing but to prate apace,
And pick your Pocket, though before your face.
What a ring of people shall we see of all sorts? gaping about a Belt of Teeth;
or a Fellow, above the Vulgar, more by three Planks, and two empty Hogsheads,
than by true skill, or any fullness in his own: You may see even Hospitalls of
diseased People broke loose; coming themselves for Antidotes, Salves, etc.
that before thought Physic needless, or at least the having it from a Doctors
Prescription, to little, or no Purpose: if their time were come, it were to no
purpose to take any but Kitchen Physic (though by the same Argument they might
leave off to eat.) A new printed Bill of a famous Physician, newly come, that
is a rare Oculist, Operator, Stone, or Broke or Rupture-cutter, etc. shall gain
more Credence, then the most Learned Lecture, or any other Discovery of a
Physicians Abilities in Theory; or Practick: And that this is no new thing, my
Lord Bacon shall testify in his. Lib. 4* page. 116.
De Augmentis Scientiarum: Ea est Hominum Infirmitas, and credul^t^is, ut
saepenumero Agyrtam aut Sagam docto Medico praeponant. Such is the weakness
and easy Credulity of Men, that a Mountebank, or cunning woman is preferred
before an able Physician; which he shows the Poets hinted, when they made the
Hag Circes Sister to Aesculapius the first Physician. And (because it follows
in the same place, nor will it be a Bodge in this) I cannot omit the
consequence of this disheartning Level. Ex hoc dic sodes quid sequitur? nempe
ut Medici ita secum, quemadmodum Solomon in Re^graviori: Si unus et stulti and
meus Eventus erit, quid prodest quod majorem Sapientiae dedi operam? equidem
minus Medicis succenseo, si saepenumero vacent alicui alteri studio quod
adamant, magis quam Arti suae propriae. Invenies enim inter eos Poetas,
Criticos, Rhetores, Politicos, Theologos, atque in ijs Artibus magis quam in
Professione sua eruditos. What seriously comes of it, (says he) even that
Physicians may say to themselves as Solomon in another Case: As it happens to
the fool, so it happens unto me, and why was I then more wise? I can
therefore the less blame Physicians, if they apply themselves, and bestow
their time in some study pleasing to them: For you shall have some of them
Poets, Critics, Orators, Politicians, Divines, and some times more Eminent
therein, than in their proper Profession. Thus far my Lord Bacon; view but the
Letters of Commendation to the people, that even Artists need, and you will
confess the Theory of Physic is not more Conjecture, than its Practice is
Lottery, especially at first entrance into it. From what Accidentals must they
be had? Friends Hyperboles, and so the Contagion of Praise: or some accidental
Cure, or at least Fame of it; which has diverse times made many Physicians
Practitioners, owing more herein to their Fortune, than Industry. So the Poet
-- plus etenim Fati valet hora benigni
Quam si nos Veneris commendet Epistola Marti.
-- one luckie Minute swaies
More, then if Venus writ to Mars our Praise.
An Accidental Cure, as accidentally observed, secureth following Mischances
from Infamy: for as is the first Hit, the following Misses are censured and
observed; Tacit. vita Agricol.
according to the Oracle of Policy: Non ignarus instandum Famae, ac prout prima
cessere, fore universa; Fame must be laid hands on at first; for as the first
things take, things that follow will succeed; and the best Commentatour on a
Politic Text, Machiavell, may give a Reason of it; Ducitur namque captivum
perpetuo vulgus specie Recti, and Rerum Eventu, and plane nihil quam vulgus
toto in Orb versatur. Success is the Law the Vulgars Judgment is ruled by;
and besides the Vulgar, there is scarce any other Judge of men, and their
Actions. It is not indeed the most rational Disquisition of all belonging to
the Disease, or Counsel for its Cure, but fortunate Events (though separated
from the former) cries men up for Physicians, with these unskilful Dispencers
of Favor to those of Skill: Nay, with easy Credulity, Boasts of Cure prevail
more in the Commendation of a man, than real (if modest) Abilities. I cannot
believe it unpossible (nay, this Complaint of Solomon makes it probable) but
even in his days, Women ignorant enough (or Men of no more Masculine Wit)
might pass for Salomons with some, and that in Physic too, notwithstanding
his Skill from the Cedar to the Moss upon the Wall: with such like Judges it
has been, is, and will be true, that Simples pass for Physicians, and modest
Physicians for Simples. But our next Descant shall be an enquiry after some
Rule for our Deportment, before we experience, or when under the Tyranny of
these two Levellers. I know no better than such Resolves. I will not think men
that want Bread, do therefore want Wisdom (even that of Self-provision) for
the most understanding in the thriving Crafts cannot allwaies fling Salt on the
Tail of Riches, so as to catch them, or clip their Wings to a tame, or certain
abidance with them, when (to their thinking) never so securely Caged. Nor will
I think on the other side, Plenty an Argument of Wit to spare; or (diverse
times) of enough, as these two Levellers chance, and Opinion have ordered it;
in these days Wit without Money is turned from a Comedy to a continued
Tragedy: By the sad experience of many Owners of Worth, Probatum est. And for
Professors of any Skill, or Science, if they be not out of Favor with the
Candid, or Skilful; I will not disesteem their (among the people) dis-favoured
(and so unemployed, or poorly Rewarded) Art. From the levelling of Providence I
will frame no Argument of like, or dislike, since it is one main Reason of its
levelling the Fool, and the Wise, the strong and the weak (as to success of
Events) for this very end, that we might not take any of these outward things
for Tokens of Gods Love, or Hatred. Nor will I enquire for men's Abilities, of
the Opinion of the Vulgar, that is as blind as its Mate Fortune; or Plutus
(whom the Poets make the God of Riches) both which, it were to be wished, were
had to Saint Albans, to be cured of their blindness, but with more Truth in
the Success, than in that Counterfeit in our English Chronicle (that pretended
he was cured at St. Albans Shrine, and never was blind.) But for such Oculists,
that can not open the Eyes of the Vulgar, or Rich (which in Judgment are most
commonly without a Disjunctive, and are Peers) to a judicious Aspect, or
Glance on Desert, this Text of Solomon dasheth our Hopes. Nor can we expect,
but that Esteem, Fame, Trust, Practice, or Reward, should be dispensed by that
Vulgar, any other ways than most commonly Wrong; never Judiciously, because
always blindly. Now for Armor of proof against these mighty Invaders of our
Constancy, (as we may term them, for they tottered the Father David's, and Son
Salomons) will be Conscience, and Patience; Conscience within our selves of
Ability, and Honesty; or patient Sequacity of the consequences of their
Assaults. To say truth, nothing fits us better for them, then a Resolve to
yield to all Destiny would have come to pass, and to slight the Votes Opinion
would pass on our Persons, Actions, or Fortunes. He that has this required
Consciousnesse, will have the latter, Patience: he that knows (without
Arrogance) some worth (it may be more than Envy will allow) or without Pride,
some honesty above diverse proud of their falsely Esteemed (because prospered)
Virtues, or Parts; Such a one will stand unmoved under what falls from
Providence, or against what ever can be thought or said by men: What Heaven
will have suffered, he stands as ready to receive, as to reject what men can
say, or do; for from this Doctrine, all things come alike to all, he rectifies
his Judgment with that in Valerius maximus.

Itaque quorsum attinot aut Divitias in Val. max. 44.
prima felicitatis Part, aut Paupertatem in ultimo Miseriarum statu ponere?
cum et illarum frons hilaris multis intus Amaritudinibus sit referta: and hujus
horridior Aspectus solidis and certis bonis abundet? Why should we mis-place
Wealth as in the top of Worldly Happiness, or Poverty in the bottom of
Miseries Dungeon? when the cheerful outside of that covers unknown
Imbitterings, and the tattered outside of Poverty has often the rich Linings
of solid and certain Content. With this Position let us rectify our Judgments,
and with the inverting of the Apostles Rule (in another case) steel our
Resolves, as He purposed to become all things to all men to save some: So let
us meet these fickle, inconstant Levellers, Chance, and vulgar Opinion, with
this Resolve, to become all men to all things, to save our selves, and
constancy from being puffed up with vanity, or deprest with vexation of Spirit.

THE FIFTH ELEMENT, OR, OF DETRACTION.
THE Confusion of Languages is not a greater Misery than the Corruption. The
name of the place where the first happened, somewhat hints one kind of the
latter, if not one of the worst Corruptions of Language, Detraction; for (...)
Shenaar, signifies, Dens Aemuli, the Tongue of the Envious, or Emulatour, the
same with Dens Theoninus. I am sure this Fault, and that Punishment much
resemble one the other: by the one men understand not Things, by the other we
rightly understand not Men: As in the former, when one called for a Brick, they
brought a Trowell, or when for Mortar they brought a Hammer; So in this latter,
how strange (but wilful) are the Impertinencies of Detraction? Commend a man
for his good Preaching, you shall hear some Cavil or other presently against
his Person, or Life; speak of a man's Abilities, and they will tell you of his
Fortunes, or Pedigree: And which is the most malicious, but silly Blast of
Praise, they will mention his Misfortunes, with such like Impertinencies, as
in its following Dissection will appear. It were to be wished all the Venom
of Detraction were spent against it self; but here is the misery, Detraction
cannot meet a Detractor, but has as many Advocates almost as there be Tongues,
because as many almost guilty as there be Men. The Italian Proverb therefore
(like a most choice Proverb) has as much Wisdom, as Wit in it, and Truth as
either; that says, Il mal dire d' Altrui^e Quinto Elemento, To speak ill of
another is the fifth Element. For you shall scarce find any compounded of the
other four, that has not this fifth more, or less in his Composition. The
Hebrews differ not much in Judgment sure from the Italian, make the same word
(...) that signifies the Tongue, to signify in Pihel to Detract, as if it
were as essential to Discourse, as a Mood to Speech. If you will have it in a
Critical Clinch, the word in English Writing, would be Lash-one, a fit term
for the Detractor, there coming no such Stripes as from his Tongue; a better
word then to explain their Mal-dire our English has not, than that, Proverbs
24. 24. Perverse lips, it being the comprehensive Description of this fifth
Element, which is nothing but perverting the Construction of what men are, do,
say, write, or have.

How universal (and truly in that Elementall) this is; I appeal to the
Conscience of the Actors, and experience of the Sufferers in this Tragedy of
Charity: The kinds of it are disguised under some deceiving appearances,
principally these; cold Praise, or slow Reception of it from another, or
Interruption of it, with a Dismounting But, taken from Disparagings of men's
Moralls, Naturalls, Fortunes, Pedigree, etc. or, which is weakest of all, from
the opinion of others, who it may be can discourse nothing but slander, or
censure; and the most subtle Disguise of all, is a pretended tenderness to
their Welfare, nay, Credit. For the first of which Patricius assures us, Laus
frigida est quaedam Species vituperationis, faint Praise is but a mannerly
disparagement, and a neglective Admission of another Commendations, is but a
dissembled Contempt. But come we to the second, and that is the positive
Detractor, that presently dismounts the most merited Reputation with some But,
often malicious, most commonly impertinent; hear it described by Horace.] --
absentem qui rodit Amicum;
Qui non defendit alio culpante: Solutos
Qui captat Risus Hominum, Horat. Sermon. 1. Satyr. 4.
Famamque dicacis:
Fingere qui non visa potest, Commissa tacere
Qui nequit; hic niger est, hunc tu Roman caveto.
-- That often nibles at the Fame
Of's absent Friend; and seems to assent
By silence to's Defames, for some's Mirth vents
His Buffone Scoffs; nay, things nere done he will swear;
All he unsecrets: such black Sheep beware.


What more familiar than to hear men acknowledge part, that with one
Detracting But they may overthrow all that has been uttered in the
commendations of another, on this manner; Truly the man is a pretty man, of
pretty Parts, and Abilities undeniable; But he stands in his own Light, by not
applying himself to, or complying more with the Times, and Persons that should
advance him: His Rigidnesse is not malleable enough; alas! what is the
unpolicied Scholar, but a Pedanticke and thread-beare Sophy? Chi non ha, non
Sa, says the Italian; his very Knowledge is questionable, whose Havings in the
world are scarce visible; the poor Scholar is no Scholar always. Or if a
man's Abilities be allowed, some flaw or other must be found in his Relations,
and Pedigree: as, it is much* considering his breeding, he should come to such
Abilities: which, though seeming Commendations (and, to the wise, great ones)
yet to such as they may be spoke to, enough to vilify, and cheapen the Noblest
Merit, because he can show it may be no C^oat, but a threadbare Sable one, or
has no more Arms than Elbowes, he is undone in his Repute among Admirers of a
Field Gules, with a Fesse, or Bend Or. And that this Topic of Detraction is
neither Fiction, or new, take that ancient Limners Draught (Theophrastus, that
so lively described Vices, as by his Fragments we may guess) who brings in the
Detractor in his Character of (...), Detraction; like a Herald giving account
of a man only according to his Pedigree, and that with all the disparaging
Blazons possible. Speak a man of unblemished Reputation, or exemplary life, you
shall hear (though most impertinent^) mention of his Illiteratenesse, or it
may be of his Crosses in the world, as that he is behind hand poor man, it is
pity. So be he never so good, if needy, the Worldling sets a mean Rate on him:
for to say truth, with him, poor honesty, is but a kind of Simplicity, thinking
no man need be p^or, or bare, except he will himself; it is through want of
Wit, or out of abundance of Scrupulosity, both which he thinks deserves the
Fools Cap, and unpittying Scorn. This usage men's Habits of mind find from
the Tongues of men; but what Torture do their Writings (or publications of them
in any eminent Actions) undergo from the Rack of Defame, or Censure? In
Writings how does this fifth Element dis-element all the other four? cavelling
at somewhat in the Efficient, or Author; or quarelling at the choice of the
Matter, or 'Deformity of the Form; and for the End, asperse them with
Contention, or vainglory, etc. for Actions, if of those above us, Plutarchs
Rule is true. (...). Or in english, to speak well of Governors, Tacit. Hist. 1.
and Rulers may be Evangelicall, but it is not natural: and Tacitus tells us,
Inviso semel Principe, seu been seu male facta premunt. A Prince once distasted
is always mis-construed.

In the Peoples Construing Book, the Acts of those above them have always
some false Latin in them, sometimes their Jealousy finds an etc. in their
Ordinances or constitutions; and make them mean more, or worse than ever was
intended. Another while it is doomed silliness, to believe Integrity in their
Meanings; but that still they aim at the raisings of Power, or Prerogative,
and always at the depressing of those that are low enough already. For our
Equals, what they say or do, (least they should outstrip us in Repute,) what
is good, we make Casual, or false Biased; what bad, is Plot, Design, or ill
Nature: for those below us, we interpret their doings principled with
licentious neglect of us, or undermining Envy. Thus does the Detractor accuse
those above of Tyranny, those under them of saucy Libertinisme, or
forgetfullnesse of themselves, and their Superiors. It infects, we see, the
orders and ranks of Men: but look on Professions, and for two of a Profession,
(that are not intimated by Nearenesse of Friendship) to give one another a good
word is Candidnesse miraculous. Begin with Trades, and among them with (that
requires no more Tools to set up with, than Quacking in Physic does, Want,
and Impudence) very Beggary it self. Among them you shall hear one telling
you, He is a lusty fellow, Master, better able to work than I am; or, he has
been relieved to my knowledge twice, or thrice this day* and I have had not one
Cross, (but in cold Answers, etc.) The Potter will be ready to borrow the
Smiths Hammer to break a Brother of the Trades Pots, and the Smith his Clay to
fling in the face of another Vulcan: it is Hesiods own Assertion. (...)
(...).
The Potter, Blacksmith, singing man,
Nor Beggar brook each other can.


Soldiers are tainted with this Fault, witness Johannes Heraldus, Lib. 2. c.
12. de Bello Sacro. Where speaking of Philip of France; and Richard Cordelion
(fellow Soldiers in the holy War) he says, Francum urebat Regis Victoria. The
Monsieur could not brook the Honor the english King got in the Service: and
what came of it? why, tam aegre far Ricardi gloriam, ut carpere Dicta,
calumniari Facta, etc. He Cavell'd at what ever he said, and calumniated what
ever he did: Nay, his verbal Detraction grew to real, at least in Endeavors;
for in Revenge he would have Detracted, and lessened his Territories, and to
that end professed open War. But for the Total of this, Il mal dire, Art of
ill speaking, he was a Pattern of it complete; and indeed it is an Art needs
no Academy to be set up to teach, when we can hear each Bulk, Shop, Camp
nay, Academians themselves) too well studied in it. As for Academians, do we
not see some whole Colleges to allow nothing good, that comes from another,
that its Faction, or Prejudice has condemned for a Nazareth: Nay, in the same
House no Discourse more familiar than the Disparagements of one another side,
or Faction. I wish these were not Pro^atums, and that Charities Rhetoric were
as well studied there as Aristotle's. But to go abroad into the world, if I
would undo a Divine in Order, I would first make him Scandalous by the Report
of some Brother Divine, whose Affections are Leven'd (by some small differen^e
in Judgment) into a dislike, malicious enough to slander, or detract, then I
should be sure to hear of him under Sequestration, and his Family in Commons
with the Ravens, whom Providence now helps to their daily Food, more
immediately than by thriving ways of Husbandry, or certainty of Incomes.

Come we to Physicians, and all Detractions Currents seem lost as in a Sea; no
Profession being more inclinable to this (...) live Dissection of one another,
(but it is that Sword Sal^mon speaks of, PROVE. 12. 17. There is that spe^k^th
like the peircings of a Sword.) Than that of P^^sitians, or Chirurgions. Here
that Desideratum my Lord Bacon speaks of, viz. Anatomia Comparata, or
Dissection of infirm Bodies, is supplied; for nothing more frequent than
Comparative Openings of one another: their Deserts, with the nimble
Perfunctorinesse of some Commentators (that skip over hard Places) but their
Faults, Infirmities, or Miscarriages, with Descants no less tedious than
maliciou^; If you will believe that Perito in sua Art, that great Master of
this Art, the Detractor of all Arts, Agrippa, he makes this Observation a
Probatum. At sunt revera Medici, homines omnium discordantissimi. Sic enim
omnes a se invicem dissentiunt, ^t nullus reperiatur medicus Qui citra
Exceptionem, Additionem, Permutationem, praescriptum ab alio Pharma^um
comprobet. Quinimo qui laceret, mordeat, ne videlicet ipse non melior Medicus
videatur, etc. Physicians (says he) are at Discord the best, but at Unisons
the worst; for they do all so disagree, that the Physitia^ is yet unborn, that
called after another approves all his Predecessor has done, without any
Exception, Substraction, or Addition: Nay, that does not rather disparage, and
vilify it, that on the Ruin of his Predecessors Credit he might raise his
own: he passes for a good ^atur'd Novice (to say true) that finds no fault,
that has never a Cavil against the former Physician; and no such sure way to
meet with Detraction, as to forbear it.

Examine the variety of Sexes, and this Element goes into the composition of
both; and the weakest have the strongest Taint with Detraction. Who knows not
it is the Ratio formalis, the very All, and sum of Goss^ping Discourse?
comparing, or descanting on this Neighbors Fortunes, that Families Blemishes,
this Ladies black Countenance, that others black Patches, their Beauty,
Behavior, Matches, Garb: as to Fashions (in their Inferiors Vote) they are
too proud, prodigal, fantastical: in the Vote of their Equals, they are late
in it, or if before them, it does not become them. Thus sared Salonina with her
harmless Gallantry, being much envied by the more obs^ure, as Tacitus tells
us. Vxorem quoque ejus Saloninam, Hist. 1.
quanquam, in Nullius Injuriam, insigni Equo veheretur, tanquam l^si
gravabantur. As to Beauty, if the Inferiors, and less handsome have never a
But against the Nose, Eye, or Lip, then be sure they miss not that common
place, suspicious Ifs, and whispers whether their Honor be so clear, or fair
as it were to be wished. As for Behavior, as it disagreeth from the Tatlers
own, it is censured, if free, and cheerful, she is too light; if Matron like
serious, she is too proud, etc. Then for all Conditions, no Disease more
spreading among Neighbors, in City, or Country; how greedily do they enquire
after, seriously discourse on, any Disparageing Relations of each others? In
Sum: I have seldom heard in any Discourse of but four, or five Parts (as I
may term it) a Symphony of Commendations of an absent man, or joint Consent to
Applause of worth, without some one or other (to spoil the shrilnesse of its
Fame) striking a F Fa ut -- But of Diminution. By this I hope the Elementality
(that is the universali^y) of Detraction, Disparagement, (or what else you will
call this Mal dire) is out of Dispute.

I find but one foure-Elemented man without this fifth of Detraction, or
Disparaging mentions; and that was Chrysostom, of whom it is said, nunquam
ulli maledixit* that he never spoke ill of any man. Give me leave to say his
Eloquen^e did not more meritoriously contribute that name of the Golden-mouthed
Father, than this rare Temperatenes of speech did, only some Cure of the
Infected, and Antidote against this Poison of Aspes (for such are in danger of
it) were worth Inquiry. The Cure.
And one remedy may be to consider it is unworthy any that has Worth; for it
is most commonly the Badge of some Defect, and low Merit raises it self on
the Ruins of another Fame. Or it proceeds from some Defective power of
Revenge, like Zoilus in Aelian, that had a Name fit for all five Elemented men,
and wa^ called Canis Rhetoricus; being asked why he spared no Body with his
Tongue, because, says he, I can do them no harm with my hands, or any other
way.

Then for the Danger, it is not one whit better, than saying Racha to our
Brother, or calling him Fool, and so much the worse, because Surdo maledicimus
to our deaf Brother, that is our absent, as Gregory in his Moralls: and if so,
this Element is enough to deliver us over to that Element that shall out-last
the melting of the other four, even to unquenchable Fire. Again, Detraction is
as injurious as Theft; for Praise whether deserved, or given (by some noble
Cand^dnesse) becomes their Due on whom it is bestowed (if not Geometrically
squared to their Desert) and it is as injurious to take the Beggars Penny, as
the Day-labourers from him. Domitian tells us the willing Ear detracts as
much, nay, worse than the Tongue: This being the Tempter, the other but the
Tempted. Detractor, and libens Auditor, uterque Diabolum portat, says Bernard.
I know not a better Hieroglyphick than Placiades has of Detraction in Pierius,
that would have Detraction signified by a Saw, Sive ob dentium seriem, quae
mordacitatem innuere videatur, sive ob invisum Stridorem, maximeque auribus
infensum, quem reddit: either from the Teeth, signifying the Bites of
Detraction, or the ungrateful noise that sets the Teeth, on edge; and I am
confident, to the Ingenious Ear, Detraction of all noises is most harsh,
pleasing chiefly the baser sort of people: Indeed no such Detractor as the
beggarly busie-body, whose Employment, next to getting their own brown Bread
(and eating it with murmuring) is to rail at the white Bread of others; Such
whose doings are small, and having less, you shall foonest find guilty of
enquiring into, and talkings of, the unconcerning Affairs of their Neighbors,
and of them the worst, or inconsiderable (even to a ridiculousnesse to
observe:) you shall not hear of their keeping of the Commandments, but if
their Daughter, or Maid but crack one that cannot be concealed, how jocundly
shall you hear them giggle it over? among such you may know (if you are given
to such worthy inquiries) who eats Masclin, who pure Wheat, nay, they can
tell you who^ Pu^ding has Sewet in it, and whose not; who drinks Ret-gut, and
who Steele-nose: with such like pitiful Discoveries of their Neighbors
Nakedness, is our Rustic Detractors Tongues tipped. But if this Humor creep
above the homespun Cloth upon better Coats, it is still among the baser sort
of them, as to their Spirits and Disposit^ons; such as are guilty of some
observable Defect in themselves: Qui alterius vituperatione se laudari putant,
and suo Merito quia placere non possunt, placere volunt comparatione malorum.
They know no other way of commending themselves than by disparaging others,
etc. Indeed they know not how to raise their slender Merits, but by levelling
others that excel them in any thing, with their unworthying Tongues. Another
Remedy against this venomous Tongue, is to spit at it where ere it hisses, and
by Rejection discountenance it; nothing sooner strikes Detraction dumb, than
a contemning and disliking Deafness. The North wind drives away Rain, so
does an angry Countenance a backbiting Tongue, Prove. 25. 23. To conclude, for
the entertainment of Slander, Backbiting, Detraction, and all lessening
Disparagings of others, this may serve for a Directory: entertain them with
tingling Ears, slow Belief, Blushes for the Defamer, as well as Defamed; a
dejected Countenance, excusing Tongue, or distasting Silence.

THE GOLDEN RULE.
TO account others better than our selves, is not more useful in the Compare
of our Gifts, and Graces, than the contrary may be, to esteem others worse than
our selves, in the compare of our Sufferings, and our selves as bad, in regard
of their Doings. If I look thus on the Sufferings of others as heavier then
mine own, (as he must be a man of Sorrow indeed that cannot) it cannot but
beget a Thankfulness to the Mercy distinguishing, Compassion to my Brother
Suffering, and a low Conceit of my self, equally deserving, not only the
same, but greater Imbitterings of my life. I may indeed look on both what men
do, or suffer, as my own in Posse; nay, on the one as probable (as to
inclinations of Corrupt Nature) and on the other as incident by reason of my
liablenesse to the same common misery; there being nothing what any one does,
or endures, but any other may. But to keep first to the first word (and that
which Pride will scarce believe) what any one does, be it never so horrid, and
hurtful to others, or himself, a Goodness that is not our own keeps us
from, and therefore let him that stands, take heed least he fall.

Nemo ante Obitum felix ( as Solon affirms) none is happy while he lives, is
more uncontroullably proved by Achitophell, and Judas, than Adonibezek.
Bajazet, Croesus, or any Te^nis Ball of Fortune. So true is Valerius Maximus
his inference upon the above mentioned words of Solon, Felicitatis igitur
humanae Appellationem Rogus consummat, Lib. 7. c. 2.
qui se incursui Malorum obijcit. The Title happy bears Date from a man's last
hour; and take Menanders Assertion for the Reason, dicere haud vivus potest
quisquam, hoc non obtinget mihi. The proudest He cannot say, Plutarch de Anim.
Tranvillitat^.
this, or that shall never befall me.

It is an Arrogance confuted by experience (and her Records, History) to
presume, or hope Exemption from any thing has befallen another. Who can say,
this, or that I shall never do, nor suffer? that we go not the Round of others
Sins, or Punishments is neither our Goodness, Desert, Policy, or Power
preventing; but from those Twins of gracious Providence, Preventing, and
Preserving Mercy. Doubtless he had been counted a prating Fool, should have
told Haman he should have held Mordecaies Stirrup, much less have changed
Preferment; that Mordecai should have been lifted up into Hamans Favor at
Court, and Haman should be exalted to that fifty Cubit Eminence above ground,
in Mordecaies Room. He that should have told powerful Haman should be hanged
against his will, or Politic Achitophell with his will, and full consent, had,
I believe, not lived to see either; how many have scorned the Faults of others,
with the Pharisee? I am not as this Publican, or their fears with
Nabuchadnezzars; Is not this great Babel which I have b^ilt? as a defense
against all Disasters, whose Righteousness afterward has done Penance, and
whose Power, Riches, or Honor have been turned to Graze. Plautus did not
without cause say, Pilas nos faciunt Dij, in the Tennis of Fortune (as is the
phrase of that Religion that is as blind.) Men are the Balls; how are men in a
perpetual Motion to, and from Hazards! while other Creatures, and some few
exempted Ones among men (most commonly the low fortuned, and humble Spirited)
stand like Spectators in the Gallery, in a regardlesse unconcerned, and
therefore quiet Posture; every day is big with wonders we should contesse, did
we see the Snares spread by our Enemies Temporal, or Spiritual, and the
readiness of Creatures to avenge their Masters Quarrels against his Rebels,
with such like, only called Casualties, because unseen: when each day
delivers us over safe to the Custody of Night (almost as full of hazards)
what can we call our Preservation? but wakefull Omnipotence, mindi^g
worthless, and helpless Creatures, or not worthless so much as meriting (but
of Detraction) or helpless so much as hurtful, and that even to our selves,
needing indeed no other furtherings of our Sufferings, but our own doings.
Liber^ nos a nobis, and libera nos a malo, Deliver us from our selves, and
deliver us from evil, being but Paraphrase, scarce various reading: the Sins,
or Judgments of others may make this Triple of Petitions out of that
unparalled Pattern: Sanctificetur Nomen tuum, Hallowed be this Name for our
Deliverance, Libera fratrem a malo, deliver our fallen Brother out, and ne
inducas nos in Temptationem, suffer not us to fall in (the same, or like)
Temptation, so shall we be neither to God unthankefull, our Brother obdurate,
or in our selves Arrogant, either of which being Evils, almost equal with any
humane Frailety is liable to. But how contrary is the Practice of the World? Oh
Wretch! oh Villain! are our Exclamations on the Relation of men's Faults; or
some Cold God help, is all our Charity sprinklings on their Misery, or a proud
Non sum talis, it is otherwise with us (God bethanked) in Course it may be
added; but thanks to my own Policy, Husbandry, Care of my Credit, and Honor
thriving, etc. are the Echoes of the more inward Retirements of Self-conceit)
far better Deportment were it, if from the Crimes of men were raised our Pity,
and set our Watch: from their Disasters arm our selves against the like (as
Euripides) when it does befall us, with that Rhetorical Correction. Heu Mihi!
qui heu Mihi? more hominum sane accidit. Alas! and why alas? I suffur but what
Humane frailety is charged with; and so while my Constancy benefits it self by
the Ills befall other, and my Charity the distressed by the good things befall
me, the Purposes of Providence are effected, and the Precepts of Examples
commendably obeyed. Or if you will work this Golden Rule of Three thus: if
Humane frailety gives Sins innumerable, and Miseries indefinite, what may I
fear, least I fall in, or expect some time or other to fall on, Me, subject
to the like Infirmities; instead of multiply, compute, the sufferings or Faults
of others by thy own, and (instead of Divide) compare them by thy worthiness
deserving the one, or weakness betraying thee to the other; and the Quotient
must needs have these three places, Thankfulness, Humility, and Compassion.

Profane Inspirations Plea, OR POETRY'S PRE HEMINENCE.
MUSIC may be called the Rapture of the Ear, and Painting the Poetry of the
Eye, but Poetry to the Fancy is both; for it is Fancies Music in her
Conceptions, and its Painting in her Expressions. No Music without doubt
strikes more ple^santly to the Ear, than an Harmonious Epithire does the
Fancy; apt Concord between what it thinks, and would say, strikes first it
self, and then others with Delight: whose Conceptions when come to Birth, they
do not cry, but sing. So pleasing both to Mother, and Gossips are the
well-shaped Issues of the Brain, and when brought forth, what Picture, varieth
the life? (for it is not the same, therefore pardon the Expression) into so
near a likeness, as a full and fitted expression does present Invisibles, to
our seeing (but invisible) Eye, the active Fancy; and give me leave to call it
so even in the Auditor, since it is part of Poetry to have a judicious
Reception of a well-lim'd Notion: we may say of it as Strade in another case,
that in Poetry, Res vivunt, and plane spirant; Things live, and seem to breath;
nay, I may say they receive from Poesy many times a more graceful life, than
from Nature. For the Music of it, the Ancients did not amiss in calling that
part of it that on the Stage instructed the People, Plectrum Animorum, an
Instrument of the same Musical Efficacy over the Passions of the Mind, as
David's Harp was over Saul's evil spirit. It is true enough of most of all sorts
of Poesy: for what is it sometimes? but Philosophy musically set in feet, and
Number, or some stricter kind of expression: Orators, Moralists, Historians,
that write in that -- nec Sermones ^ego mallem
Repentes per Humum; --
in creeping of Prose (not flights of Verse) are Compilers of the same sense,
but differing almost as a Song read, and sung: and as a Writer of our own says
well, Poetry is a sweet tuned Eloquence, and of singular use, specially reduce
it to Plato^s three Heads: Divinos Hymnos Canere, leges patrias, magnorumque
gesta virorum graviter recensere: Consecrating it for the pious use of the
Quire, or politic service of the Commonwealth, in embodying their more rugged
Laws in more beautiful Joys, or raising Monuments of Fame to her deserving
Heroes; when thus employed, they are as it were divine Issues of the
understanding. Poetry wings Notions to a flight above the low and muddy
conceptions of Ignorance, or Dullness: and although it may seem to rob Truth of
her best Ornament, Nakedness (as it is commonly objected to Poetry yet it
furnishes her with an advantageous Dress of* taking Ple^sance, even to those
that care not so much for Truth it self. Thus Herbert says excellently. A
Verse may find him who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.
Nor is it absurd to aver, that many Truths by their Fictions have been best
ushered^ into popular grace, and Acceptance. It is well known, in Gentilisme
their Divines were Poets; it is as well known among the first chosen People,
and Worshippers of God, (the Jews) the most useful writings for life, or
manners (nay, for faith it self) are Poetic, as the Psalms, Job, Proverbs,
Canticles, etc. for which consult. Alsteds Triumphus Biblicus, C. 27. where you
may find Scaliger refuted for denying Poetic Rhithme, or Meeter (because not
like the Greek, or Latin) and so not Po^sie in a strict sense to be in
Scripture: for Saint Hierome is of another mind; and the impossibility of a
Rhithme in that Language, like our (...), like Cadency of words, which we
strictly call Rhyme, is by Alsteds Instance refuted in Psalm. 118. 25. though as
Alsted well* if the manner were not the same, to deny therefore there were no
Mee^e^, is no sound Logic; his Instance are these two lines in the same Verse.

(...)
(...)
Anah Jehova Hoshiangnah Na
Ana Jehova: Hitzlichah Na
Help me now O Lord, O Lord send us now Prosperity; And Josephus gives us a
Testimonial to it, and not to be rejected, says my Author. The Reasons why
some Scripture, and chiefly the Psalms are in Verse and Numbers, if not in the
gingling Rhyme; see there more at large in Alsted. But for the Honor of Poesy,
let Doctor Donnes Observation plead (in his Essay of Divinity among his
Fragments) concerning that Song of Moses which was made (says he) by God
himself; for though every other Poetic part of Scripture be also Gods word,
and so made by him, yet all the rest were Ministerial and Instrumentally
delivered by the Prophets, only enflamed by him. But this which himself calls
a Song, was immediately made by himself, and Moses was commanded to deliver it
to the Children from God, choosing this way and conveyance of a Song, as
fittest to justify his future Severities against his Children, because they
would be ever repeating this Song (as the Delicacy, and Elegancy thereof, both
for Divinity* and Poetry would invite any to it) and so he should draw from
their own mouths a Confession of his Benefits, and their Ingratitude. Thus far
that rare Observatour; doubtless there cannot be a greater Testimony that
there is something more than humane in Poetry; somewhat more than ordinary in
this rare Modulation (for so it is in the Fancy, as well as when Music aireth
a Poem on the Tongue) of conceits by Poetic Laws, the light of Nature
confesses, in that it confesses it fit for the Service of their Gods: the
flat Hudles of Prose were too rude, and of lower flight, than fitted the
Heights of Devotion: for Zeal knows no flatter Figures than Hyperboles,
gracefully set to number, and measure. For its use in their Philosophy, I refer
you to Plutarchs Morals, de audiend. Poetis: for its Excellency, and use
through all the three Regions of Men (as excellently Mr. Hobs) the City, Court,
and Country; I refer you to Sir William Davenants Account thereof; a Poem as
amply commending Poetry as can be wished, by its one Perfection; only somewhat
untoucht by them (and as little observed by many, as it is believed by some
few) may be added for the use (and therefore Apology for) the Dramatick part of
Poetry, inferior to none for usefulness; to which Heathens (and some
Sermon-shunning Christians) owe much of their Discretion, Civility, and
Reclaimes) as to Moral Honesty. I here enter not the Lists with any
Histriomastix, to maintain the Stages Quarrel, as to the Presentiments on, (it
they now being confuted as sometimes Bellarmine is) but Writings, and Pennings
for it; and first for Wit, from Plautus, or his Followers (in Imitation I mean,
as well as Time) it has borrowed its Quicknings, and Heights: Nay, Wisdom is
Debtor no less to the Sock, and Buskin: Nor is it such a Paradox as it may
seem to sound to some halfwitted Ears; for I dare aver what has been writ for
the Stage (ancient, or modern) is not inferior to any writings on the same
Theme (excepting the Advantages of Christianity, and our better Schoolmasters
for Heaven) of never so severe an Authority: Nay, on the same Subjects, some
far above most other Pennings: and Prejudice condemned (instead of them) they
may appear so to those judgments, that through some misbecoming (and no less
mistaken) Gravity, think them below their use; and Plautus shall be my Instance
for all the rest: it is Stradas Belief (not my Schism) besides diverse others;
from him take most of the Instances, and the Distastfulnesse of the Quarrel
rest with my Author. In Scripts of this Nature our Author requires 1. Verborum
vim and varietatem, 2. In Sententijs Pondus, 3. In Personis Decorum, 4.
Praecepta demum instruendae vitae in memoriam revocare.

1. For the first, in their Translation they lose their Elegancy; I shall
therefore crave the English Readers pardon (in this discourse unconcerned) and
keep the Language. I begin with that Expression by way of Invitation to an
Afternoones Society.

Dies jam ad umbilicum dimidiatus est, Sepulchrum quaeramus ubi hunc comburamus
diem. And for our broad Hats ( it seems in this time) how fitly does he liken
the Wearers to Toad-stools. Hic Fungino genere est, Capite se totum tegit. For
the Infidelity of the Scholars Mercer, how fit that: Oculatae manus nostrae
sunt, credunt quod vident. The great Eater of Kent ( or any later) may fully be
deciphered by those Threats of Ergasius; which seem like some Gluttons Grace (
or Self-Resolves.) Quanta pernis pestis veniet! Quanta labes larido! quanta
Sumini Absumedo! Quanta Catto Calamitas! quanta lanijs Lassitudo! In which that
no wit may be wanting, the gingling Ear, or Fancy, with whom Quibbles are the
best Wit, may have Patterns exceeding ordinary Imitation, or Friblings of Wit.
But (to return of some of Stradas instances) that his commanding Fancy could
vary on the same thing ( the Mastery of Wit) view in the above mentioned place:
The several names for a Slave, u^ed, threatened, or deserving to be beaten.

2. Then for his Sentences, his Ink spent in them seems a rare Oxymel:
S^rada shall make it good, Haud scias utrum mellis plus obtineant an Aculei,
you cannot tell whether they have more ^weetn^sse, or sharpness; the short
Duration of w^rldly Happiness, how aptly called the Solstitiall Plant, quas^
sostitialis Herba fui, repent exortus sum, repentino occidi: and for married
Mariners ( or others ili-wived) he makes whether he could not tell which were
the greatest trouble ( and sometimes Hazard) for them to stay at home, or go to
Sea: for (says he) Negotij sibi qui volet vim comparare, Navem, and Mulierem,
haec duo sibi comparato. But inferior to none is that of the Tosses of Humane
Conditions, or Affairs, that it is like a Set at Tennis, and man the Ball. Nos
quasi Pilas homines Dij habent; as Ovid seconds him.

Ludit in humanis divina Potentia Rebus.
3. For the Decorum of Personating, it cannot be shown but by reading and
comparing their Pars and Behaviors; but

4. Lastly, for Precepts of life, how does he abound? Benefacta benefactis
alijs pertegito, ne perpluant, is an Advice as useful as witty; that we should
cover good deeds; (take it as Strada, not only for Courtesies) with more
following them, or on the top of them, least the former should rain through.
For the Omniscience of our Judge, and of the Powers above, how rarely presented
and applied to the Spectators? by one personating Arcturus (that bright Star
between the Legs of Boots) which he feigneth to come down in the day, and
observe the Actions of Men, and so to make Report (as it were) to Jupiter. What
more Divinely could he conclude with, than that comfort of honest men, and
Counsel to Perseverance. Idcirco moneo vos ego haec qui estis boni:
Quique aetatem agitis cu^ Pietate, and cum Fide.
Retinete haec porro post factum ut laetemini.


Show more serious Counsel in any humane Writings, and take it (and follow it
too) for your pains. For Providence against all sorts of Futures that fall
under our Care; what Rule better than that, Vt quotidie Pridie caveat, ne
faciat quod pigeat Postridie, that it be our Care every day, to do nothing the
day before, we may repent the day following. But for more Instances, or
Apologies for this part of Poetry, I refer to the above mentioned Author.
Should we cast our Eyes on divine Poems, and those in our own Tongue, we might
find such whose Rapture and Devotion might well absolve Poetry of its objected
Futility, and Levity, as if below the Serious man. In general this may be said
for Poetry in all its parts: It cannot fall under contempt justly; for it never
was below, but far above the Impotence of its Despisers. It is a most musical
Modulator of all Intelligibles by her inventive Variations, undulling their
Grossness, and subliming it into more refined Acceptablenesse to our own, or
others understandings. Truths Nakedness it adorneth, (concealeth not:) the
rougher Draughts of Virtue it sweetens, and pleasants with her Artfull hand,
even to peevish Be^olders. Divine Meditations it makes Raptures, and turns
sparklings of Devotion to a Blaze: It makes the Actively virtuous sing, and
even the Passive Cheerful, turning Groans into solemn Church Music, and
thankful Joy into sprightly Anthems. What Intellectual Sweets Poetry has,
they only know that feel her fires; they never know that contemn them: it is
some Argument to me of its transcendent worth, that is scorned* by none but by
the blind, or Lame, the Ignorant, or Impotent; imitated by most that have made
such a Progress in good Natur^dnesse, as to be in Love, or in Knowledge of
words, as to Rhyme* the most understanding may not only love, but admire it,
which is not incident (frequently) to other kind of Writings. Poetry indeed
has a Fluence of Expression that chiefly stammers, and shortens of Perfection
it self (as to Mental Midwivery and communication of our Notions) only in
this, that it can better express any other thing, than its own worth. What
Honor the Italians have it in, let their Prover^ testify. Chi ha Spirito di
poesia merita ogni compagnia, He that is inspired with Poesy is welcome to (as
well as fit for) the chiefest Company, and a Laureat is Companion for a Prince.
The Dignity of Poets, and Poesy at large would swell to a Volume: its Picture
wear therefore in this contracted Medall. Poetry was the wisdom of the
Ancients, and its contempt is the Folly of the Moderns: Poets were among the He
^then, Divines, among Christians they are (or may be) Psalmists. Poetry rightly
understood, and used, is sense worded to the best Advantage, the Opiat of
unruly Passions, and Incentive of the Dull. In short, it is somewhat inspired,
beloved by all it is understood. Language does not more differ man from Beasts,
than Poetry does Men from Men in the Penning of their Conceptions: The Infantry
of Prose may slowly gain upon our understandings; but the Chevalry of Verse
charges them more sprightly and Irresistibly. Allow we then this Profane
Inspiration (as it may) and not improperly be called) its just Plea for
Pre-eminence above other Pennings, divine, or humane, on the same Theme (and
where the freedom of Prose is not absolutely necessary to the nature of the
Discourse) as much as Riding differs from Hoofing. What though Pegasus come to
a bad Market, among Smithfield Souls, the Lofty Traveller knows his just
price. To conclude therefore, the Zeal that is against Poetry let us leave
singing Psalms; and the Scholar that slights it, is fitter to be rhimed on,
^than reason^d with.

OF MUSIC, OR, THE IARRING EAR PUT IN TUNE
IN the Sisterhood of Fancy, Music may justly challenge a Birthright; She and
Painting being but younger Sisters to Poetry: A Ternary of Sisters, whether
rich, or poor, that stoop not to inferior Souls; whose Dullness deafs their
Delight in this second, and Injudiciousnesse blinds their wonder, or liking of
the third. Music for her Antiquity may challenge Seniority of most Arts; (in
which Age is Beauty) as being dated in some irrational Creatures from the
Creation, in Men not long after, and take Plato's word; from man's Creation it
self, his Soul being but Harmony, and the greater world but Dissimilium
concordia: Assertions we may be the modester in overthrowing, in regard the
abstruse nature of the Soul admits of no better positive Definition (do I say?
nay, Description) in this showing her Original to be from that Father of
Spirits, as being better described (like him) by Negatives than Positives. But
what kind of Harmony it is, we shall better know, when Hallelujahs come into
Play. This rare invention of Music doubtless in some particular may challenge
the Creator for her Inventour; in the Organs of those Aerie Choristers, whose
Lays like Grace before and after Meat, are tuned Praises of him that fills
the expecting Gapings of the young Ravens, and indeed of every living Creature;
they being appointed (it may be) to present in more artfull Notes the Praises
of those Creatures (besides their own) whose more indisposed Temper, and Organs
have made them Mutes in the Temple of the Universe. For its Antiquity, when
Heathen Authority has kept all the Puther it can, with their Amphion and
Orpheus, Moses stateth the Question about the first Inventor of Isntrumental
Music: I will not deny but Vocal might be Adams Prayer, or Thanksgiving, who
doubtless would not be behind those Creatures he was Gossip to, and named out
of acquaintance with their Natures; and (if any) no doubt the best Interpreter
of Ornithology, or Language of Birds. In particular of the Cithara (let
Critics interpret it) Tubal Cain was Author (as Hierome says) an Instument
different from what is now so called, and had four and twenty Strings. Of the
Trumpet Moses himself was Inventor, says Josephus lib. 3. Of all which see
Polydorus Virgil. de Inventoribus Rerum; all, or part of which may silence the
dull, and more Grave, than wise Coxcombs, that call all Music fidling, is
Original being as noble, and more ancient than many admired Crafts: Nay,
Themistocles his Scorn (when entreated to play on an Instrument, he answered, I
cannot fiddle, but I can make a little City a great one) might be answered,
that That, and building (or enlarging) Cities were of Antiquity alike: But more
its usefulness than Pedigree commends it. I find these Uses principally
recorded to its Honor: In War it charmed their Fears, and raised their Valor,
and that not only Imaginatively; for to such purpose, doubtless it has some
real Power, though Philosophy can but offer at the Reason of it. As for Beasts
we know how some Aires have made the bounding Steed even tread the Air, and
scorn the Ground as much as Danger. By its known power on Beasts, I cannot but
believe that man's Soul is gone on some Errant and left the Body in Pawn, that
feels not one String of his Mind touched with a Concent with the ravishings
of Music, but complains it makes him dull, or more Melancholy. Music has
had its use in the Wars of Passions, and routed Discontents out of troubled
Minds: Nay, when an Evil Spirit had Garrisoned Saul's Mind, David's Harp could
vanquish even diabolical Melancholy, Sam. 1. 16. it not only expells a bad
Spirit, but invites a good; So Elisha, King. 2. 13. Cassiodorus reckons many
rare Feats of Music. Cithara Tristitiam jocundat, timidos furores attenuat,
etc. Ep. 4. It unsaddens the melancholy, quickens the dull, awaketh the
drowsy, etc. Herein you may hear the concent of a Consort of Authors:
Lemnius, Giraldus, Philostratus, with the close of Scaligers confession of
himself, in music is supra omnem fidem capior and oblector, choreas
libentissime aspicio, etc. I am, says he, incredibly taken with Music and
Dancing (and they are no Scaligers that take Scaliger for a Fool:) it seems
a Screwer up of lower Passions (more than Pins) if he in Philostratus may be
believed that he could Moerentibus moerorem adimere, laetantem seipso
hilariorem reddere, amantem calidiorem, etc. That he could make a sad man
merry, and a merry man much more merry, a Lover more enamoured, and a Religious
more devout. But here mee-thinks the threadbare scoff at Devotion Piping hot,
seems to deny any use of Music, in that where David chiefly used it, in the
Service of God. But for my part, that the wel-ordered Music of former Ages did
not better tune Devotion, and to higher Pitches (or Ela's) of Zeal, than Tunes
began by an out-of-Tune Clerk, is one of those many Postulata, Assertions taken
for granted, that I cannot play Assent to at first sight: David, the best of
divine Poets, and (were his Music known) not the worst of Musicians (nay,
according to some, so eminent, as an Inventor of many sorts of it) accounted
not dumb Service, (I, or out of Tune howling either) fit eenough for him to be
honored with, that continually does (and to all Eternity shall) hear those
Ravishing Hallelujahs; since old Law and things (as is objected) were past
away. A cheerful (even Musically) Service of God, was retained by solemn
Anastasius, and seriously devout Ambrose, who thought not Church-musick too
light, or needless to (much less destructive of) Devotion. Poetry, and Music
too in one Charge, is the Apostolles Cure of the Christians Melancholy. If any
be sorrowful, let him sing Psalms, says James 5. 13. And that even humane
Invention may not be excluded the service of God, Paul enlarges it to Hymns,
and Spiritual Songs, where humane Invention comes in for Ditty and Notes;
unless some (that declame that general whord humane Invention, against all
that comes not from their own Spirit) can make out (to talk in their own
Phrase) the Canonical Poetry, and Apostolical, or Canonical Pricks^ng,
(wherein the Tune of those Hymns, I, or David's Psalms) were set) that the
Chrstians then used: If they cannot, let us not shut the Fancy, or the Voice
from the Service of him that made both; which doubtless will be exercised in
their highest Altitudes, and most Elevated Perfections, then when all Tears
shall be wiped away, and that endless Song of Joy be begun: On which
considerations I am much prone to subscribe to the Italians Opinion, that the
Enemy of Music is one God loves not, confirmed by Pindars (...): to whom
Jupiter bears no good will, Music is Caterwawling. That Soul has indeed
most commonly some jarring ill-naturednesse, making harsh discord here among
men, and (not without probability) is a thing untunable for Heaven, and unfit
to bear a part in that Song of Moses and the Lamb; which since it intimates
both Poesy, and Music, we may say of them (among Arts) as Paul of Charity
(that when Faith, and Hope cease, Charity makes her Nest above the Stars.) So
when all Arts shall vanish, then only for the creditable Pre-eminence of them
before many here preferred Arts) shall Poesy, and Music begin their
endlessenesse; let who will commend their Mistresselike-chosen Arts, and
advance them higher if they can.

NATURES REPRESENTATITIVE, OR, LIFE DEAD COLOVRED
SIMONIDES worded it to the Life, when he said, Painting was dumb Poesy, and
Poesy a speaking Painting. Imitation is the Soul of both, and if you will
take in a third into the Society, it is a History that can (as Plutarch of
Thucydides) make Auditors Spectatours by its full Relation. Plutarch de Glor.
Atheniensium.
So this History of Persons, (as I may term it) like that other of Actions,
makes the absent present, without the black Art, and yet with the Art of
Colors. Plutarch makes them not to differ in the End, Representation, but
matter, and manner of Imitation; as if he were the best Historian that comes
nearest the good Painter, and he the best Painter whose Draughts do even equal
the best compiled Narrations. Plutarch Moral. Tom. 2. p. 636.
Narratio enim Rei, etc. Plutarchs Moralls, Tom: 2. p. 635. An Art it is,
exacts the Reverence due to Age, as well as other Arts. Some will have
Apollodorus the first Inventor of Colors and Shadowing, which latter according
to some was first; the Painting being but Draught of such out-lines the Shadow
casts: according to that Story that makes the World Debtor to Love for this
Delight of the Eyes Painting; for the Daughter of Deburiades, the Sicyonian,
when she took her leave of her Sweetheart (to comfort her self in his
Absence) she took his Picture with a Coal upon a Wall, as the Candle gave
shadow; which her Father admiring, perfected, and it was the first Picture that
ever was made, according to Pliny. That its Infancy was so, Polydor Virgil
proves out of Quintil. that the Substance of the Art was but rude shadowing.
Non esset Pictura ni^t quae lineas modo extremas umbrae quam corpora in scle
fecissent circumscriberet, it was nothing but a circumscribing those out-lines
the Body casts by its shadow in the Sun: And to lesson our wonder, (that know
to what Perfection it is arrived) he very well adds, Si omnia percenseas,
nu^^sit Ars qualis inventa est, nec intra Jniti^^m stetit: No Art remains in
the simplicity of its first Beginning. It is not unlikely the first painted
Cloth had as false painting, as still they have false English. Arts have their
Ages: Some like Man created, some like Man born; some perfect at first, that
moulder by Time into the Infirmities, and Decays of Age, till they are quite
lost, and buried in a confused Mention in History: (some it may be scarce have
that) others again like a Man born, do from Infancy arrive to Perfection of
Stature and Maturity: even so this among other Arts did, not much unlike the
Artists themselves, that first learn to grind Colors, and draw outward
strokes, which they in after times view with Smiles and friendly Contempt. This
Art (according to Plutarch) came to pretty Perfection many years ago; for he
reckons Euphranor of that exactness, as to have painted the Mantinean Fight
against Epaminondas so lively, that the eagerness of the Assailants Minds
might be as it were visible. Of these we may speak peaceably, and gain Belief
of their Abilities, it may be: but to the Fame of any near our own Times,
Emulation is deaf, unless some strange mastery in it set him abo^^
detraction. The rareness of the Art none will deny, though few can judge: the
division of Protogenes his line by Apelles is a known Testimony of it; and so
is that Contest between Zeuxis and Parrhasius: the former having drawn Grapes
that deceived the Birds by Invitation; and Parrhasius afterward a Curtain that
deceived Zeuxis his hand attempting to draw it, who therefore modestly and
justly cried out, Vicisti Parrhasi! thou have the better Parrhasius; for I
deceived only silly Birds, but thou an Artist. Strange Art! that questioneth
the evidence of sense, and that our best, our sight: How can a masterly hand
deceive with likeness, and please with variety; and yet in another sense with
likeness satisfy the curious Eye, or treacherous memory, that has lost the
Effigies of an absent Friend; what esteem this Art has had, the high estimate
set on the Artists (and justly) and the great Price on their works can
witness: and the proof of this, we needed not to have gone far to have seen in
well furnished Galleries of our own, though it is indeed one piece of most
Princes Gallant^^ in Christendom to show selected, and ^umerous Draughts of
the ablest Artists ancient, or modern. But on the contrary, this Ternary of
Fancies Sisterhood, agree in nothing more than this, the Distastfulnesse of
their ill Performances; no such fool as the affectedly riming fool, no such
harsh Noise, as hobling Music, or such an offensive Sight as Pencill-dawbing:
it seems an unpleasingnesse like fail of Trust, or Expectation, since the
Art we know can, (and it may be the brags of Bunglers in it, make us believe by
them it shall) perform Expectances. To say truth, ill Painting abuses the
Spectatour, and ill Judging the good Painters; and this latter is not the
unusual Fate of deserving Men, and able Masters in this Art. Some must be
drawn fair (forsooth) though they would have the Painter do more than Nature
for them. Polycletus, I believe, would have fitted them, that, Quintilian
says, had this fault; he was so for handsomnes, he could not draw their Gods
grave enough: nil ausus ultra laeves genas, (says the same Author) he could
attempt nothing but smooth chind faces (or as some phrase it fair snowts) and
so non explevisse Deorem gravitatem, made Skipjacks of their Gods. On the other
side Demetrius would as much detest such Judges; (...) he was accounted nimius
veritate, and similitudinis quam Pulchritudinis amantior, the good Painters
Character, he was more for the likeness, than fairness of a Picture: other
look not on likeness in purposed places, so much as in less material or
intended: If the Doublet, or Girdle be not like, their Noddles condemn it,
Others look more on the thing signified, than Art of the Piece; like him in
Rome, that being shown an excellent Piece of a Shepherd and his Pouch, and
being asked how he liked it, answered, He would not have the live Original if
they would give him him; Non agnoscens Artificium, sed tantum formam, says my
Author, not observing the Art so much as fancying the Prototypes deformity:
gross Judgment enough, for though natural Deformity have a loathing Aspect
afforded it, yet the artificial Representation of it has often more Pleasance
than many handsomer Pieces. As for the Censures from one another, the Pieces of
Artists meet with; I wish them to guard them with Apollodorus his Motto (the
first Painter (according to some) and that used to write it about his
Draughts:) (...), any one may sooner find a fault, than mend it, in any
Specimens, or performances of Art. To say true, this and diverse other are alike
in their Censurablenesse by the unskilful (be it Divinity, Physic, Poetry,
etc.) we may complain in a Metaphor (as Painting can without) the blind World
cannot judge of Colors:

SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS, OR, False Reformations SHIPWRECK.
THE Counterfeit of Religion, or moral Honesty in single Acts, are but
Hypocrisys Pedlary, parcelled out in small Wares; but the whole Pack is
dissembled Reformation. Totius Injustitiae nulla capitalior est, quam eorum qui
tum, cum maxim fallunt, id agunt, ut viri boni esse videantur. Cicero de
offic. Lib. 1. Being indeed rather 1. a Change, than forsaking of Vices, and 2.
Pretense (than Admission) of Virtues; whence follows a false absolving of
themselves, and condemning of others. As to the 1. truth is, Sinnography (as I
may term it) the description or consideration of the kinds and differences of
Sin, may be likend to some great Town, or City Corporations and great Towns, I
am sure, are too like it in which are several Parishes, and each Parish its
several Street. Now we know a man may remove even in the same Parish, out of
one Street into another, and still keep the Parish, or out of one Parish to
another, and still keep the Town: so fares it in the Imposture of Sins; Men
think themselves as free, as the Child unborne (forsooth) from such and such a
Vice, though they dwell but in a several Street of it; or free from all,
because free from sins that make a greater Noise (rather through Corruption of
Custom, than right Reason) as in some instances appear. We will instance the
Extremes of Liberality, Temperance, and Justice, as having in them Vices
branded with Scandal (although falsely) but partly (because partially.) On the
one hand of liberality stands Covetousness, on the other Prodigality: now this
double Error mists men's Judgments concerning them; either they take some
things to be Sins, which are not, and that is the fault of those guilty of the
other Extreme, or those not to be sins (or not so great) which indeed are, and
as truly deserving the word Scandalous, and those are the guilty in the same:
we will deal with the Truth (in the Dissection of this common Impostour, the
deceitful Reformado) as Carpenters bring the square to great unw^ildy
crookednesses, that cannot be moved to it: First, show what indeed the Vice is
(and no more, as well as no less; for there is Error in misapprehension of
either) I hear fear not the half-witted Objectours that I may meet with, that
may be ready to call limiting faults, their excuse; an Objection readily shot
by Sinners in the opposite, or very different kind of Vice: and having done the
first part, we will examine the common Practice and its sad consequences.

Avarice is defined by parce nimis largiendo, and avide nimis accipiendo. The
Niggardly bestowing, or sparing of our own, and too greedy desiring of what is
others. Saint Austin has them both in that Saying, non solum Avarus qui rapit
aliena, sed qui cupide servat sua. He is not only Covetous, that is, Ravenous
after what is another, but he that is too close a hold-fast of his own: but to
take it in the formality of it, it is inordinatus Amor hubendi. Aquinas prima
Part: Quest: 63. Art: 2. but more distinctly consult 2d. 2d. Quest: 118 Artic:
4. and 7. Aristotle's Ethic. 4. c. 1. You see a bare inordinate Affection and
love of Riches, comes under the notion of Covetousness.

2. Prodigality on the other hand is Peccatum semper, non principaliter propter
quantitatem, sed propter inordinationem dandi, quibus non debet dari, and
propter quae, and sicut non debet.

Prodigality, Tho: Aquinas. 2. Quest. 119. Art 1. Aristot. Eth. 4. c. 3. 1, 2,
3, etc.
says Aquinas, is not so much in quantity (he may be a Prodigal that does not
beggar himself as well as he that does) but Inordinatenesse of spending, or
giving either to such he should not, or for what he should not, or as he ought
not; by which Rule, I believe, many a one that in his own conceit is a main
Husband, and is forward enough to call some (in one kind of Prodigality)
Prodigal, will be found to live, as I said, but in another Street of it; for
according to the Rule of the Casuists, the formality of Prodigality is
Inordinatenesse of our layings out, or misbestowing on what we should not, and
so the Items of some men ( Parsimonious enough) will be found tainted with idle
Prodigality: one of Aristotle's Characters of it, is, that it is a kind of
carelessness, which end goes forward (as we say) (...). I cannot better
interpret it than by the Apostles phrase, Ethicor. 4. c. 3. princip.
he knows neither how to want, nor how to abound. An excellent and fuller
Character I cannot omit, being very ancient and significant, that I find
quoted by Causabon on Theophrastus his Characters, which take in its Original
and Translation, as above: (...). What an Enemy would do, they do themselves by
Luxury to their own Estates, wasting their own Fields, and even plundring their
own houses, selling what is their own, as if it were Spoils taken from an
Enemy; caring more what is left to spend, than for what is spent: rejoicing
more in She-friends, than Hee-comrades, and in the Wine, than the Company.

2. Next to be examined are the Extremes of Temperance, or rather the different
kinds of Intemperance (for as for the too much Abstemious, we do not meet with
them any where but in History, and that History for such like Examples much
questioned) look on the two chief, 1. Gluttony, and Drunkenesse: as for the
former, People, I believe, as are ignorant, as in the latter they think
themselves knowing, what it is, and how to call it: I will but mention the five
limitations of the Casuist, a step beyond which, is as truly Gluttony, as
Reeling can be called Drunkenness; 1. Either secundum ciborum substantiam,
quam pretiosiores cibi appetuntur quam proprio cuique statuti convenient, the
first inordinatenesse about eating is, the substance of our Diet, if too costly
for our Rank: Secondly, About the Quality, if too elaborate, and curious about
the Sawces and Preparations. Thirdly, if for the quantity we take in more than
agrees with Nature, whose burden appeaneth by too much dullness, drowsinesse,
or indisposednesse of head, or stomach, unless coming from some Disease
besides, or Infirmity of Digestion. Fourthly, the manner of eating if with
greediness. Fifthly, the time when we should not, or oftener then is requisite.

2. Is Drunkenness, which has its circumscription; though some will give none
but their own Fancies Test to judge one drunk by: Others again as wide, that
will stand to Statute interpretation (when they scarce can against a Wall) and
have none drunk but such as will scotch a Cart; a largnesse, I believe, allowed
to Scotch that Propensity to censure which many have, when they stand on shore,
and see a Shipwreck, and themselves being sober (but in their Judgment see
Double) subject to Sentence any they see but fuller of the Creature (as they
word it that act this Severity) than themselves; but take the Casuists (among
which I count Aquinas, and for all the stricter Apellation of Schoolman, (bate
our Differences, as able as any) Definition, and est excessus in potando causa
voluptatis, usque ad violentam Rationis Privationem, it is intemperate drinking
with delight, till Reason be violently overthrown. Now to our new Modeled
Divine, to whom the word Ethics may signify, for ought he knows, Sugar
Sops, this Definition will seem as fraught with needless words, as some bodies
discourses (I wish I could not say, not only with men) but there is reason
enough, says Pavonius, for with delight is opposed to what may be taken in
Physical Potion, and violent deprivation of our Senses, and Reason, as opposed
to natural by Sleep.

3. For the diviations from Justice commutative, or distributative, they vary
to as many ways as there be (in the first rank) kinds of cheating,
overreaching, and cousening; I had almost said Tradong: and not I only, but
Anacharsis long before me, that said Forum esse locum mutuis hominum Fraudibus
and Rapinis destinatum; that exchange, Faires, Markets, I, or Shops were but
finer convenient Places to be cheated in, Erasm: Apoth: 302. 19. and in the
second all sorts of Injur^es, from slighter Trespasses to violence, besides
Defamation, uncharitable censure (which though not on the Bench, is no better
then condemning the Innocent, according to the utmost of our power) and indeed
to whatsoever transgresses our Saviors Compendium of the Law of doing as we
would be done by. And thus we have seen the Channel we should steer our
Judgments in concerning these Vices; now see the Rocks, our false Reformado
splits on; the Prodigal thinks himself sure of Heaven, because he contemns
his Earth into Mortgages, or perpetual Farewels, the Parchment men call Sales:
he would not live such a life as such a one does (that is a Jew to himself,
because he will be sure to be a Christian to none) and abridgeth himself of
the very Crumbs of his slender Table, whose whole Loaf indeed it may. be are
nothing else, and whose whole meat Scraps. Well, hear one Prodigal against
another (before you hear the Misers Vote) one cries, you will see such a one,
I will warrant you, come to Beggary; do you not see how he flings away, or
drinks away his Fathers Rakings of much Labor, many years, and more Cares,
while it may be this Reprover only in a graver and silenter way buryeth it as
fast in Buildings needless, vain, or ill contrived, that stay but the
finishing, and being called by his kind Gossip-neighbours, his Folly, and
though it have no Godfathers, or Godmothers, or such like Popish things, his
Conscience shall furnish the Solemnity with a thousand Witnesses. Another cries
out on the ones Taverning (where he would not spend a six pence, he never knew
any come to good that did) or the others diruit, aedificat, mutat quadrata
rotundis, building, altering, and changing his Money for Rubbish. In the mean
time, one that shall be namelesse wears the Breeches; no mervaile therefore if
she command the little Pockets (and Keys to more than they can hold) and this
frugall must, nay, (in Vxoriousnesse) offers what ever his Princess will call
necessary, if the Exchange afford it, it matters not who call it superfluous,
vain, or idle Expense, till his Purse finds an Exchange Shop, as chargeable as
any house with a Bush to it. Thus you see various Prodigalls absolving
themselves. Hear the Miser, their common Enemy; Horace has him to a hair, --
Contra hic ne Prodigus esse
Dicatur, metuens, inopi dare nolit Amico,
Frigus quo duramque famem depellere possit.
Least he a Scatter-good should counted be,
He Will not relieve his Friend, although he see
Him perishing with Hunger, or with Cold.


To avoid the Infamy of an ill Husband, he will not be a good Friend,
Neighbor, nor Man; or say he be not in the extremity of sordid Covetousness;
nay, be only not guilty of Prodigality (yet which is the upshot of this
Dissection) how does he absolve himself, and condemn the Prodigal, thinking
nothing Virtue but thriving, nor Vice, but spending, and Poverty. Horace met
with such Selfe-applauding well-to-passers, triumphing over another
inferiority in Estate, as in some expressions, culled for my purpose,
follows. Quem damnosa Venus; Quem praeceps alea nudat.
Gloria quem supra vires and vestit and ungit;
Quem Paupertatis Pudor and fuga, Dives amicus
Saepe december vitijs instructior, odit and horret.
Aut si non odit, regit: --
-- T^ibi parvula Res est.
Which though not Critically translated, (yet to my purpose, and the Enlish
Readers Instruction sufficiently) take thus. Whom Cheating Whores, or Dice have
made Threadbare;
Whose Clothes, and Garb above his Incomes are:
He that with shame of Poverty, and shunning it, is vexed;
His Richer Friend Prides to reprove; his Text
He takes him for: though Vices ten times more
He Is guiilty of; that nothing: you are Poor.
A Bankrupt in Estate is so in Grace in his Account, and will scarce allow the
Parable of the returning Prodigal to be probable; when it is well known, it
has often proved a better School to teach men the Knewledge of God, themselves,
and the world, than an even unruffled swim of Affairs, and Fortunes. The
like Passages are between the variously intemperate, or them, and the any way
abstemious (but virtuously; for they that light on the virtuous Mean are humble
and charitable) If ones natural Constitution, or Inclination has made him
decline Wine (but not faring deliciously every day by his good will) You shall,
it may be, hear him disliking any use of Wine that is not in the measure, or
manner he uses it himself; though Scripture it self has appointed it as
well to Mirth as Digestion, and mentions its sometimes freer use, than at
other, without the least blameablenesse; in such like use as Dr. Brown on this
ground and reason, snatcheth it from the vulgar Errors, slandring it with the
imputation of Drunkenesse, in these words; but Averroes, a man of his own
faith, restrains his Ebriety to Hilarity; in effect making it no more than
Seneca commends, and was allowable in Cato; that is, a sober Incalescence,
and regulated Aestuation from Wine: or what may be conceived between Joseph and
his Brethren, when the Text expresses they drank largly, and whereby the
Commodities set down by Avicenna, may also ensue; viz. Alleviation of Spirits,
resolution of Superfluities, Provocation of Sweat, etc. Against such
justifiable uses of it, you may frequently hear some good-eating Chaplain
rail; or against any Divine but seen going into a Tavern (more through
Custom, than Reason, made to smatch of offenssive, and for which any of them
might plead, as Diogenes, once reproved for being seen in a Victualling house,
answered, I use to be trimmed, says he, in a Barbers Shop; It being
doubtless no more scandalous to go to the Place Wine is sold in, then to the
Market for Provision.) Well, this Trencherlabourer will not drink with that
Divine, but he shall eat, and drink too (at another bodies Table, and house)
with him, and tie one of his hands behind him. On the contrary, the Riotous
Wine-bibber preaches over his Cups as fluently against Hospitality, or a
wel-furnished Table, as Gluttony and Excess, making Provision dear, and
d^stroying Health, etc. Another railes against both, not as vicious, but
profuse: In other Deviations to extremes, how does the Professor (and no more)
glory that he is no Drunkard, Whoremaster, etc. though never so arrant a Thief
in unjust dealing for Highways, or Crowds have not all the Thieves; Shops
have ten for one) though he overreach Father, Brother, or Sister, etc. The
Schismatic glories that he keeps not Company with the Wicked, and is proud
of his pride of Separation. The looser Liver glories, it may be, that he is
not an Herctick, or Schismatic: it is not only Rioutousnesses properly, to
hate those that run not to the Excess, but generally each Extreme dislike the
other; so true is the Poet Horat. lib. 1. Ep. 18. Oderunt Hilarem Tristes,
Tristemque Jocosi,
Sedatum celeres: Agilem, gnavumque Remissi.
Potores bibuli media de Nocte Falerni
Oderunt porrecta negantem Pocula.
Grum-sirs hate Jovialists; they the sad,
The active Soul a Saturnist; as bad
He brooks your nimble Mercury; agree
With midnight-Roarers cannot the sober he.
And all this while their Consciences know* what they are, while their Tongues
glory* what they are not: what more familiar than to cover the Sins against one
Table, with the pretended observation of the other, or of the same Table with
strictness in the observance of some Duties in that Table? Thus one will not
be seen go into an Alehouse, but will be seen going into a Brother Divines
Living, with no more Remorse than a Royster goes into a Bawdy House, nor with
no more Conscience, (for if they should change Consciences (this Abstemious and
that Incontient) I believe the shameless Whore-master would have the worst of
it.) Another seems so strict a maintainer of somewhat in the first Table,
some Opinion in Religion, that he cares not for breaking any of the second
against a Dissenter, by endeavors to undo him, besides his uncharitable
Censures; why he is a Repr^bate at best, who thinks not as they do, is not
acquainted with the Power of Godliness, discerns not spiritually; is yet in
his natural Condition, with such like phrases of Excommunication, when as God
knows, the Power of Godliness is Charity, thinking well of, and doing well
to those within the Pale of the Church: it is not slight difference will bear
pronouncings of Anathema on those that Concur not with our Judgments. But let
us view the miscarriages of public Reformation; they often prove as guilty,
and sometimes of worse Consequence, than that they reform from; as Horace
phraseth it, Est huic diversum vitio vitium quoque majus, Lib. 1. Ep. 18. Thus
to reform the Enormities of men in Authority, by taking away the very Order of
Government it self; from corrupt Judges, to none at all, were a wild
Reforma^ion; to reform Hierarchy by Anarchy, a Remedy worse then the Disease,
to reform that again by Papal (I, or Kerkish) Tyranny over Men's Conscienes
(and then be sure over their Purses will follow) were a Reformation would
extort Horaces Stulti dum vitant vitia, in contraria curru^t.

It being neither Wisdom, Policy, nor Piety, to reform Abuses by Ruin. Again,
who denies but to put down Swearing is good (and so it is to forbear it) but
to practice (or tolerate, much more encourage) calumniating Information^
against our Brother to the ruin of him, and his, is as bad as the other is
good. To pull down an Image, and tie a Horse in the room of, it is reforming a
Church with Furniture not required. Thus (as I said) Neighbors in the same sin
think they Reform, if but tinctured with an extreme in any thing: The Jewish
Pharisee boasts he paid Tithes of aell that he had (more than was required; as
Montanus observes) diverse Christian Pharisees think they reform from him, and
Publican too ( scandalous sins of all s^zes) if they can boast that they pay
no Tithes of any thing that they have; an Omission (according to some)
equivalent in guilt with most of the Publicans Commissions (I, of many of our
Newgate Publicans) or C^suists talk besides the book* for they make it Robbery
of God, and the Denyers little better than Bid-stands to the Almighty, and
bidding him deliver; or a tak^ng not ^so much Heaven (as what belongs to the
Ambassadors of Heaven) by violence. But let us now come to view the sad
^Consequences of mistaken Reformation, ^inlargement in the Instances whereof I
leave to every one of sober Judgments Animadversion in his daily looking abroad
into the World:) and Horaces 18. Ep. Lib. 1. The sad Consequences of this
Shipwreck are redu^ible to these two; the first, Crowning of Charity* and
secondly, a saving our selves, or such a Self-justification that is but a more
sure Damnation.

1. For the first, whence springs all our uncharitable Censures but from the
Pharisees, I am not as this Publican, which words contain both these Mischiefs,
Reprobating the Publican, and saving himself (but by his own Righteous^esse.)
Thus do we, while we count the Faults of that same This Publican (be they
real, or slander) to be greater than any we harbor: whereas (though it sound
like a Parado^ to such as look for Truth no where but in their own narrow
sense, and traffic for it neither with other men, or Books, than their own
private Spirit; and although it may make such prick up their Ears, yet ^since
it is from Truth, and her Secretaries (the Casuists) hear their deducibles.

These right Examiners of things make rash Judgments of others, sins of a
deeper Guilt, than men generally take them to be; insomuch as to be a Thief is
less Crime than to call one so wrongfully: by how much ones good name is more
precious than hi^ Goods, though the loss* may ^ be considerable; but much more
if ^ no greater than many a (less Guilty) Thief is trussed up for, and so
they aver to be drunk, or accessory to another Distemper (especially supposing
the Distemper under command from breaking out into any other sins besides its
own dementation, or stupidity) to be a less sin, than to call one Drunkard, on
the bare sight of him in a Distemper, or but one slen^er Information.

2. The other dangerous Consequence of Opinionative Reformation, is saving our
selves, which (so long as by Selfe-justification (and by our own
Righteo^snesse) is the highest degree of Self-murder, as surely reaching the
Soul, as Despair: which is more than we dare pronounce of all Disposers of
their own Lives, and Bodies: It is not ordinarily imagined what danger lurks in
this Pride of Conceited Reformation from Sins customarily called Scandalous,
and justly so called, but unjustly exclusively, as if they were so only, and
others not Sins, which we retain, though sins all out as scandalous. Among
Casuists this Nicknaming of Sins has done more hurt, than the World is aware
of; yet it is as old as Tacitus Histor. 1 p. 269. Quae alij scelera, hic
Remedia vocat; thus let Sins be but bearded, or gilded (as I may term them)
grave enough, or gainful, they pass for Commendable Qualities. Thus
Covetousness (in Laietie, or Clergy (in whom it is not Idolatry alone, but
Atheism) is good Husbandry; and uncharitable Censures, or Murder of Charity,
is but Severity against Vices, when none of the Ruffianlike Sins are to be
compared with either. Thus all rail against the Thief, when the several
Corruptions of Justice, from the Judge to the Sollicitour, are above Theft, or
Deb^uchery: compare and judge. The Debauched Riotous Youngster makes a house,
it may be* roar: A Corrupt Judge (I, or Justice of Peace, even in his smaller
Volum'd Authority) can make a house weep as fast; the one breaks a Drawers
Pate, the other a Widows Heart: the one, it may be, will bring himself to
want, but the other brings Fatherless and M^therlesse by whole Sale to Misery;
but that is done on the Bench, or in Formalities, and in Scarlet, therefore no
words of that; yet it is thought the arrantest Goal-bird might take the
Pharisees words in his mouth, change but the word Publican, and truly say, I
thank thee Lord, I am not as that corrupt Judge, since it is not a Problem
will need a Sphinx, to resolve whether all the Thieves condemned by any
Circuiter corrupted, have done more Villainies than their Judge. But to pursue
particulars were endless: the (...) is in the c^vil^ ^onest (...) T^cit. Hist.
1. in Lips. Ed. 160. p. 273.
magis ex^r^ (...) to be a^ (...) from (...) Hypocrite: that of Otho: ib. 272:
Om^^i^^et O^^ensas, an distulisset, brevitate Imperij in incerto fuit: Vices
rather adjourned than dissolved; as in express words in the same man's
Character Tacitus wordeth it; ib. page 281.
dilatae voluptates, dissimulatae vir^utes, and vitia reditura; Vices sent
before, till he was Enthroned, and Virtues to be his Followers; only during his
Progress to Empire: Of which nature are Virtues through Impotence of sinning,
as Abstemious Poverty, which no doubt is as Commendable, as p^tient Prosperity.
By all that has bee^ said, our Mock-Reformado seems to ^^ in no whit safer
condition than a professed Re^egado; for dangerous and sad no doubt must be the
miscarriage of that Voyager in Reformation, that scapes (as it were) the Rocks
of our Shore* and after is cast away on Goodwin Sands,

A MEDITATION ON THE UNGUARDED TREE OF LIFE.
IT is an ungrateful, nay, Superstitious Scrupulousness, to deny the day
wherein (and cro^^e whereon) the Tragedy of God was acted, their Sequestered
Meditations: It was doubtless as needless to ^et down the Circumstances of
our Redeemers Passions as it can be vain to allow them their distinct
Memorialls. It had been Gospel enough to have said, God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. Who ever thou be then, that will
call no Friday good, and whose Life, or Acti^ns can lend no day that
Appellation? Give me leave to learn to spell Christianity, an that Book called
Gods-^ove to Mankind, (bound up in the course Cover of Humane nature) even that
verbum Deum, Christ Jesus, by beginning with the Cross (to us the Tree of
Life.) Blessed Redeemer* was it for making this, thou wast so long at thy
Supposed Fathers Tr^de, of a Carpenter? to make a Cross whereon to hang, Mundi
Fabricatoris Filium, non Fabri; the Son of the Worlds Creator, not of a
Carpenter: (as a Father varieth it) and those wonders of love, besides the Sins
of Men, enough to crack the Fastenings of this Glorious Fabric. When I
consider what a weight of Wonders it bore, I sinck under the weight of my
single wonder at them. Saint Austines Pen has drawn the lines of those Riddles
that centered in Christ on this Cross, Sermon de Natali Domini. Homo factus
est hominis Factor, ut sugeret ubera Regens sidera, etc. The Maker of man was
made man. He sucked, whose^ pavement is the Milkie way; the Bread of Life
hungered, the Fountain thirsted. What but Riddles are they? that he that came
down from the Father of Lights, and he that neither slumbereth nor sleeps
should sleep; the way be weary; the Truth overthrown by false witness, the Judge
of all the world be arraigned, Justice condemned, Discipline whipped. Lastly, ut
in ligno Fundamentum Suspenderetur, that the Founder and Foundation it self of
Heaven and Earth should hang on this splinter of his Creation, an Ignominious
Tree; a Tree indeed, but of the voc all Forest; which although it silence its
Spectatours with wonder, yet it self speaks Instructives, it speaks Shame,
C^mfort, Returns.

1. Shame; and here, blessed Apostle, give me leave to say, I am ashamed of
nothing more than the Cross of Christ, as I believe those Revi^wers are, whom
the Prophet speaks of, They shall look back on him whom they have peirced.
Ungrateful Cure, that the Physician must become Patient, and that of ^ Death
it self, to make us whole that have wounded him. Let thy Goodness, O Lord!
plead for thy Wisdom in this Bargain (no other excuse else can be found) to
buy sinful Dust with thine own Blood: redeem our shame, by the shameful Death
of Glory and Immortality it self. Thou that gottest nothing by making the
world, would thou put thy self to more charge than all of it is worth, to
redeem the worst part of it, fallen Man? but [ sic Tibi been placuit] it was
the good plea^ure of thy will, answers that. It has been the wish of pious
m^^ to see Sin in its Natural Deformity: would thou have a lively Picture
of Sins* and thy shame? none comes near the Idea of a Crucified Savior, set
upon the Mount of Meditation, as that real Cruci^^x was on Mount Calvary. View
but a dying Savior, and thou will easily assent to that Truth; They are Fools
(and that with a witness) that make a Mock of Sin. A twelve months Dispute in
the Schools, will not so soon confute venial sins. Thoughts thy Peccata
Capitis, Capital Sins, were so Legally, as well as Locally, and were the Crown
of Thorns, the first Shedders of that Innocents blood: in this Tragedy, thy
Peccata Oris, Tongues, and Mouths, Transgressions in words, or Intemperance
were the Gall and Vinegar mingled for a Cordial in his Torments. But then thy
Opera manuum, Handy-works, were those Nails fastened by the appointment of that
wicked Assembly, and Conspiracy of Priests, and Elders, the Representative of
us all: we were present all, principal, not only accessory to this
God-Manslaughter, nay, Murder: (that therefore is forgiven, because committed,
never any Crime but this expiating it self) And what is now become of Venial
sins, when the least is Murder, as guilty of the blood of Christ.

2. But O my Soul! look on the light side of this black Friday, on the
Recovery of this Eclipse of the Suns Creator; and though Shame muffle up thy
Face, when thou look on him as peirced by thee, bare thy face with Comfort
when thou look on him as peirced for Thee. Behold in mount Calvary the place
of Skuls, Death has lost the Field, Hell is routed, and the Devil has
betrayed himself (in betraying Christ) to shame, and the loss of his
Captives. Deaths Prisons are broken open, and Christ's own Resurrection
antidated. Look on the Cross now as the Scepter of Admission; (the Apostle
makes it so) now Aha^uerus his presence is not deadly; si^full Dust may not
now fear being turned to Ashes, by that consuming fire; the Court of Requests
is set open, and the grand Master of Requests our Crucified Jesus. Now then
again we will say with the Apostle, We arr not ashamed of the Cross of
Christ; nay, God forbid we should glory in any thing bu^ the Cross of Christ:
this is that Scala Caeli, Heavenly Ladder, Jacob dreamed of, (a Dream so
pleasant, that stones were Pillowes) and indeed the sight of this Cross will
make all other Crosses easy.) on this Ladder was his Prayers ascending, Father
forgive them (and in them all the World) and as it were Heavens Echo
descending, delivered by this Cr^cified word: in that Consummatum est, it is
finished; as if he had said, all is done, and granted in Heaven, and Earth,
that my blood cried for. Let Writers wrangle of how many several sorts of Wood
this Cross was made. I am sure to the Believer it is all Arbor vitae, an
unguarded Tree of Life; to which Angels invisible (or visible, the Ministers of
the Gospel) will now Lead us rather, than fright our Approach with any flaming
Sword, though Superstition has made this Cross as big as Noah's Arc (if all
the chips of it (which several places brag of) were gathered together.) It is
no Fable to say, each Believer may make himself an Arc out of it, against the
Deluge of Fire the World expects. (Pardon the expression, Sodomes Rain will
justify it:) fling but one Chip of this wood into all thy troubled and bitter
waters, and it shall sweeten them: It is the Christians Armory for defensive,
or offensive Weapons; the universal Medicine: no Tree ever bare such Fruit as
this, when it bare the Fruit of the Virgins Womb. Though Nature wore blacks on
this day, for the Death of the God of Nature: yet to Faith the Bridegroom was
but now come, even then when his Corporal Presence left his Disciples. From
Good Friday does the Apostles Charge bear date: Rejoice always; his grave
Clothes are those Handkerchiefes that wipe all Tears from our Eyes. This is
the first day of Sorrows, Exile, and Joys return to lost Mankind; his
Birthday beginning Hallelujahs, but respectively to the finishing of this day.
Then to us a Child was born, this day a Savior, a day of Hope to true men,
whereon a Thief (as it were) takes Heaven by violence: the Joys and Fruits
that drop from this Tree, will be the Business of Eternity to recount, when
all Crowns shall be thrown down to this Crown of Thorns; for that only is
worthy, it is this Cross is Caecorum Dux, claudorum Baculus, the blind man's
guide, and lame man's Crutch, on the way, and in the end is lignum vitae
aeternae, the Tree of everlasting life, as Cassiodorus on the fourth Psalm.

But lastly, the third Voice is, Returns; but, what shall I return the Lord
for all his Benefits? is the question of the grateful ^oule, or of a Faith
working by Love; to which Question there are many Answers ^ hear God himself
telling his choice of a^^ we can give him, and it is, My Son give me thy heart;
which besides its usual exception, sounds like a Barg^in as well as Request;
and so the works, my Son, ar^ not so much Compellation (and that an honorable
one) of his Redeemed ones: but as if he should say, There is my Son, for him
give me thy heart. I am sure it is no wresting of the words to say, the words,
my Son, are a strong Argument used, for to move our returns of Love, because
they intimate the giving of his Son, to make us Sons: well then, give thy
heart, and Christ will think himself well appayed for all he has done, nay,
suffered for thee. It is Justice no less than Gratitude, to surrender all we
have, or are to him, that has so dearly bought a Bargain so hard. Let the
same mind be in us that was in those, whose hearts were set on fire with Love
to their Redeemer, by the Beams of his Love, darted first (through Faiths
burning Glass) on their Souls. What were the Doings, and Sufferings of the
Apostles, and Martyrs, but Raptures of Love? who looked on flaming Faggots, but
as Hymenaeall, and Nuptial Torches, lighting their long before espou^ed
Souls, to the Marriage of the Lamb: to whom Life was Martyrdom, because an
Exile from the Chamber of their Bridegroom; therefore having Vitam in
Patientia, mortem in desiderio, their Lives in no other esteem than
Affli^tio^s, and Death in their desires as a Reward, or Release. Riddles to an
earthy Soul, wedded to Phantasmes of Happiness; whose Fruitions are but
Semelaean Embraces of a Cloud, for Jupiter; Shadows for Substance. But whether
are these Reflections of Love vanis^ed in these our days, or nights rather of
Creature Idolatry, and Atheism? all that was done this day for us miserable
men, can scare preserve the several of its Observation. We are ready to afford
Good Friday bad Language, and arraigne its Remembrance of Superstition, and
through Zeal (too Pharisaicall) to Crucify its Memorial: but that is not all
our Ingratitude. How little will man do, for what God-man on this day suffered?
Such small Tokens of our Love (that in his Members he beggeth) how hardly we
part with? nay, seeing our unkind Niggardliness, he de^ireth us not to give,
but lend him Relief; and yet how few Creditors can this All-sufficient D^btour
find? we will lend Man on his Bond for six in the Hundred, sooner than on Gods
Hundred for one, ensured on a word so firm that one Jota of it shall not perish
in the general Fire of Heaven and Earth: could this be, were not the Actions
of this Day (and signs of Gods Love manifested on the Cross) but as a Tale
that is told, and of no concernment to us? Let the Cross on thy six Pence (if
that be the only Cross thou can endure) put thee in mind what he suffered,
that beggeth the smallest Cross in thy Purse to relieeve him in thy Brother;
starve not thy Crucified Savior; let the Jews cruelty suffice, and let not
thy uncharitableness vary his Torment: it is no less than the Bread of life,
and Giver of thy daily bread, that keeps constrained Fast days in thy hungry
Brother, till thy Plenty make him a Thanksgiving day: shorten his Lent, and thy
Easter and Resurrection shall be the more cheerful. He has said it that will
one day audit the poor man's Complaints, and thy Stewardships Accounts; when no
Sin, but unkindness^ to thy suffering Savior, shall be cast into thy Dish, to
the feeding of the never dying Worm of Conscience; and if he appear (as it is
thought he will) with all his Wounds upon him, and laying his Hunger,
Nakedness, unrelieved Imprisonment to thy charge, Shame cannot but extort a
Confession of the Desert of all thy present, or feared Horrors; but doubtless
it is better looking on him whom thou have peirced on the Crucifix, than
Tribunal, and by affective Meditations, to view (as reacted) the Tragedy of
this day, than for want hereof) to tremble at the Triumphs of that, wherein
those Wounds that here speak penitential Shame, and unspeakable Comforts,
shall then speak confounding shame, and unutterable Horrors. Thus have I
(with leave of the Scrupulous) been so superstitious as to descant on that Text
of the Crucifix, even the Word that was God, taken to pieces (or divided) by
Jewish cruelty, by Misinterpreters wrested, by Presumptious Christians
misapplyed, by uncharitable made illegible, by few rightly believed, and by as
few beloved: And I have endeavored to pluck some Fruits from the Tree, which
promises a non moriemini, you shall not dye, to those that taste of it; which
to own (nay glory in) and that in thought, words, or writing; let him be
ashamed, that has no hope therein. For my own part, I could wish an Extract of
all human^ Abilities, and Quintessence of divine Assistance, and all (as that
Box of precious (...) Savior, (...) Memorial, and (...) of his (...) a Theme,
(...) ging such as descant on it. Wher^ore it was a pious Rapture, and
exemplary, wherein an able Poet of our own expresses his Resolve to leave
lighter Fancies for divine: with which I conclude.

Prompted by thy example then, no more
In Moulds of Clay will I my God Adore;
But tear those Idols from my heart, Carews Poems 160
and write
What his blessed spirit, not fond love shall indite.
Th^^ I no more shall Court the verd^nt Bay,
But the dry leaveless Trunk on Golgotha;
And rather strive to gain from thence one Thorn,
Than all the flourishing Wreathes by L^^reats worn.
2d. Divine Essay. THE COMMANDED TREE OF KNOWLEDGE.
THE Cross of Christ in its second, and Metaphorical Acception, is the
Christians Burden, and Badge: That which he is to take up, that which he is to
glory in. The one is'a Paradox (and a smart one) to the Flesh; the other to the
World; but both Truths to be learnt before ere a letter in the Christians
Christ-crosse-row; ^s being indeed, though none of the Letters, as instructive
as all the four and twenty. Nor is it the Badge only, but the Scutcheon, the
Coat of Arms of every Christian stian, and take Saint Paul's word, a Coat that
sticks as near as the Skin, nay, Flesh; for he bore the marks of Christ's
suffering in his Body, Galath. 6. 17. Christ is called the first Fruits,
Christians are the latter; and that not only in Reference to the Resurrection,
but this Tree; on which to be born, or which to bear, must be accounted no
strange thing to those that call themselves by that name: to taste, or be the
Fruit of this Tree, has no less Temptation (and more justifiable will our
yiedling be) than that forbidden one had, that conquered Adam in the complete
Armor of his own Righteousness: For if any, this now is a Tree of Knowledge,
and that commanded, not forbidden, making us know, and known: The Cross with
Christ on it shows Gods love to thee; but with thee on it, shows thy love
to God; the Knowledge it bea^eth is well worth the gathering: would you see God
look into the Furnace, there not only the three Children, but their
Persecutors found the true God Prophets, and his Children, it may be, can
discern him in the still Voice; but the voice of Thunder can cure the Deafness
of Atheism it self; Judgments can make them subscribe to his Power, that
would not to his Patience: an uncheckt current of Affairs we know has drowned
many in Atheism: When Storms we know can teach even Mariners to pray, that at
other times (too many of them) think not so much of Heaven, as look on it, and
that not to find their way thither, but some petty Port on Earth. Cross
Events will teach even Machivellians their Catechism, if you will believe the
Oracle of Policy, Tacitus, quod in pace fors seu Natura, tunc Fatum and Ira Dei
vocabatur, Histor. 4. Stupid Incorrigiblenesse accompanied the continued
Prosperity of Nebuchodnazzar, who was more a Beast before he grazed, then while
he did, or after. The Ruffling Swearer dares not call his Teeth Puritans, if
their Pains reprove, and spoil the mouthing of his Oaths. A fit of Iliaca
Passio, the Colic called Miserere mei, Lord have mercy upon me, in
probability would be a good Recipe against cursing of others. A Door speaking
the same Language on it, and a red Cross on it would more effectually bring a
licentious Gallant out of conceit with a Brothell-house, than Salomons calling
it the Chambers of Death. So much more persuasive are the Sermons of the Rod,
than of Gods bare word; and the House of Mourning sooner than Gods House would
prove a House of Correction to a desperate Sinner, Ep. 67. p. 205. P. Seneca
calls his Life Mare mortuum, a dead Sea, in which no Adversity has ruffled
the smooth Streams of his Fortunes; and indeed he that is becalmed in
Prosperity, travelleth but little in discovery of himself: but is to himself
merely, Terra incognita. All a man can study is God, himself, and the World;
the knowledge of the first is a Fruit of this Tree, and so are the two latter:
for ones self, this Cross teaches him whereof he is made. Alexanders Wounds
let out Jupiters Blood presently; no longer will he be flattered into a Deity,
when he finds the Arrow, or Weapon so saucy as not to take notice of his
Godship. Then for the World, how by Losses do we gain a true discovery of its
Bracteata felicitas, Tinselled happiness, outside filme of Contentedness,
which when flaid off, what appears but vanity, or vexation of Spirit:
nothing, or too much to consist with Tranquillity of mind, the best of it to be
reckoned among our Impedimenta, Baggage, or Fardells that must be left behind.
Quicquid circa Tejacet Rerum, tanquam Hospitalis loci Sarcinas specta:
Transeundum est. Look on the things of the World but as Parcells, or Paoks must
be left in this Inue of the World when thou must depart. Look on Riches on the
Wing, and their uncertainty will lesson thee out of that, vivimus tanquam
semper victuri, the Philosopher complains on, that living with the Desires of
Abiders, as he says: omnia tanquam mortales timemus, concupiscimus tanquam
Immortales, our Fears are like Mortals, our Desires as if Perpetuity were the
extent of our lease of Life; and all long of this Reason, nunquam nobis
Fragilitas nostra succurrit. Did we observe what Reakes Pestilence, War, Famine
(or to sum up all) Ruin, keep, what Clatter they make in this Potters Shop
of earthen Vessels, we could not fool our selves into a Belief, our Vessels
were of such durable matter. But this Tree does not only make us know, but also
known, and the N^ble Order of the Cruysado Heaven bestows not on Milk-sops,
low-spirited Souls; no, their Portion is Prosperity, as fit for effeminate
tenderness, according to that, Prospera in Plebem ac vilia Ingenia deveniunt.
Seneccur bonis Mal. c. 4. Prosperity is the lot of low and vulgar Spirits; so
that the Cruysado is not only a distinguishing, but ennobling Order. They that
do not once look on all the Pomp, and Glitter of any Court on E^^th; a
suffering Paul will draw them as it were from enjoying, or increasing their own
Happiness, to look on him now suffering as much, and as fast for Christ, as
before he acted against him. We are become a Spectacle, says he, to God,
Angels and Men: It is not a trivial sight draws the Eyes of so glorious a
Theater: the light of Nature judged such a Spectacle, as Virtue gallantly
suffering, to be one of the rarest Imaginable.

Quid habeat in terris pulchrius Jupiter? si convertere Animum velit, quam ut
spectet Catonem, jam non semel fractis Partibus, stantem nihilominus inter
Ruinas rectum. Senec. cur Bon: Mal. c. 2. What pleasinger Spectacle could
Jupiter have, than to see Cato after several Overthrowes of his Party, stand
even in the midst of Ruin upright? What more pleasing Spectacle to the Theater
of Heaven, than to see gallant selected Spirits engage in its Cause, to the
Expense of blood, loss of Wives, Liberty, Children, Estates, with more daring
than their Persecutors threaten, or execute, and loose all earthly Enjoyments
(for Heavens Euge, well done thou stout and faithful Soldier of Christ) with
more cheerfulness than their Enemies enjoy them. A despised Martyr insulting
over his Insulters; wearying his Tormentors, embracing their Cruelty, and even
meeting Death, causes Heaven to ring (as it were) with a Plandite, and makes
them renew their Antheme, Quo usque Domine, How long O Lord, how long, etc. of
so much more Concernment is one suffering Saint, than all the Noise-makers in
the World, and Traders for Power, or Pelf; and the Cruysado, or Cross of
Christ, above all Orders taken up by the Potentates of the World: and the Crown
of Thorns more honorable than Diade^s, and Stephen killing Lapidary above the
richest Jewels in either Indies. Thus they are in Heavens Book of Rates; none
but those ignorant of thy Worth, O Tree of Knowledge! would decline thy Fruit,
nor any fear the Cross, but such as look not through Faiths Prospective. Set
the Promises on the Cross as thy Sights, and it will prove a Jacobs staff,
discovering the height of thy Rewards after this moments suffering: It will
show thee the top of Jacobs Ladder, of which thy Afflictions are but the
Rounds, by which is made thy Ascent to the Throne of God; from having Stones
thy Pillowes here, as Jacob had, to having Stars thy Pavement, as Abraham and
all departed in the Faith have. Thus will this Tree of Knowledge suffer another
Metamorphosis, as before from a Tree of life to this Tree of Knowledge: so
again from this Tree of Knowledge, to that Tree of Life, not in the midst of
the Garden, but the City of God, Revel. 22. 2. That bears twelve manner of
fruits, and twelve times in the year: and that it shall never be blasted, see
the third verse; there shall be no Curse. But I conclude with that Summary of
our Behavior under the Cross, and Encouragement to that Behavior, in the
close of Drexel. Gymnas. Patientiae. Sustineamus paulisper, and non deerit
Certantibus Auxilium, nec vincentibus Praemium. Fear not, being one of Heavens
Gladiatours, to enter the Lists against any Encounter; since thy seconds are
more, and mightier than thy Adversaries, and thy Reward more Glorious, than the
Conflict was sharp.

3d. Divine Essay.
THE DIVINE PROSPECTIVE.
WHen I look on that Expression of the Apostle, 2. 4. and last verse Corinth.
While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are
not seen; for the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are
not seen are Eternal: I am not so angry at what they call Nonsense, nor think
it always implies some thing ridiculously dissonant from Reason, or Grammar;
for in Criticis Sacris, in Sacred Critics, Judgments on mere Sense, are
Nonsense; and Conclusions made from Invisibles, the best Christian sense. Look
through Faiths Prospective, and they will confess Mathematical
Demonstrations, but Conjecturals, in comparison of the Discoverys of this
Glass; look through it with the Manifying End on Invisibles (for such is its
Frame, it lesseneth Visibles) and thou will see Sights not more strange, than
satisfying. A sure and certain Hope of Resurrection; a Kingdom made without
hands, eternal in the Heavens. The All-sufficient thy Portion, Hell, and Death
under thy Feet; Mansions trimming up for thee, that call the proudest
Structures here but better modeled Dunghills; it shows the Society of God,
his Angels, and Saints, at the distance only of some few years; and thy
desired Home, that makes the most contented Residence on Earth, to be but a
Banishment with some better Accommodation. Through this thou may discover
the true Non-such; compared with which, Lovres, Escurials, or the Stateliest
Palaces lessen into undiscernablenesse, as to the Eye natural, and
inconsiderablenesse, as to the Eye of Reason. Show me better Sights than these,
and I will change Prospectives. These may seem as incredible as the Discoveries
of Galileus his Glass, to any that never used any but a Half-crown
Prospective. Yet some of these Stephen was honored to see with his natural
Prospectives, his Eyes: these Invisibles to his Enemies being made visible to
him; this Sight made him lose his feeling of Pains, or Fears, and in the
midst of a Storm of such Hailstones (as might have been said to have killed
one (whose Hopes are only in this Life:) he is said to fall a Sleep. The
Apostle discovers the use of both ends of this Glass, this magnifying one,
and that other lessening one, in those Christian Paradoxes, 2. 6. Corinth. 9.
10. etc. where he shows the Visibles, or Things of this World to be but
tanquams, only as if weres: the very Miseries of it (which are the most real
things in it) he makes so.

As unknown, yet well known, as dying, yet behold we live, etc. The Worldlings
will readily believe he spoke not such things on any things visible in himself,
or other Christians. As unknown, quoth he? (would the incredulous Worldling
say) I, sure enough, what are they known for? but to be an obscure People,
whose Forefathers (it may be) have not troubled the Heralds Books for many
Generations. You see, I am sure, none, or very few of the Great Ones, or
Eminent Ones of the World profess this Crucified Christ. But see the Apostles
Invisible he spied against this Visible, yet well known: and so he is indeed
that is in Gods Books; that is a Spectacle to God, Angels and Men; that has
a Crown laid up for Him, as sure, as he has it may be scarce a Hat now. Known
he is sure, that is pricked down for one of the Judges of the twelve Tribes of
Israel, when Christ shall go his Circuit to judge the World in Righteousness.
Show me one of more note in all the Scroule of the worlds Worthies, and I will
confess our Glass dim: but go on.

As dying, nay worse, would Flesh and Blood say; better to be dispatched out of
the way, than to live such a life as thou did blessed Paul, 2 Corinthians. 11.
23. etc. in Labors more abundant, in Stripes above measure; nay, so far from
as dying, that in Deaths often, and behold we live: most true, for none live
but they that live by faith; for the natural life, what is it? but a Death,
bearing date from the first day of our Birth, from whence the Clock is still
going down a Progress to Corruption, a mouldring away; whereas faith is a
growth, nay, a building up in the most holy faith: A being in Heaven (like
Caleb, and Joshua^^) as Spies, though not in Possession; a life not dying, but
changing into Immortality of Bliss; as chastned, but not killed. What a
lessening word has Faith found, for that Flesh and Blood calls Butchery?
calling all his Endurings, the smart of the Fasces, bundle of Rods, not
strokes, a Securi from the Hatchet, mild and merited (so Chastisements are)
behold the small end of the Prospective turned on his Martyrdomes, looking on
them as merited, not meritorious; with the humility of a Child, or Schoole-Boy
chastned. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing. What (may the Worldling say)
will you persuade us out of our Senses? as sorrowful? if thy life, Apostle! be
not sorrowful, or be always rejoicing; then none on Earth sure is miserable:
when thy Ordinary was fasting many times, thy Rest but weariness, thy waking
Care (and that of all the Churches) thy welcome (to many places) a whipping
Post, thy Chamber a Dungeon, thy Furs Cold, thy Clothes nakedness, thy
safety Perils, in both Elements, Sea, and Land; by both sorts of men, thy own
Countrymen, and strangers, in City, and Country. What is sorrow? if all this
bring thee but to as sorrowful; nay, if it hinder not thy obeying thy own
counsel, Rejoice always; These clouds make that rejoicing invisible to
dimsighted Nature: but could we look through that glass of Faith, we should
believe, the Christians everlasting joys did, even, here begin; as people that
are assured of comforts unexpressible, (no less then invisible;) that will
have no commerce with any Sense, neither Ear nor Eye; nay, of such a
quintessence, that the most immateriall comprehensive part of man, his soul and
appehrension cannot reach it, which are therefore glorious, because
unspeakable: but let us view further through this Paradoxicall glass.

As poor, yet making many rich: as poor? Sure blessed Apostle! (though thy
writings were a Mine of richer sense, then thy contemporary's Seneca's,) thou
did not exceed him in wealth. Thou had (I believe) no concealed bags, never
to be fingered, but by unthankful heirs, nor any hatching at any close
interest: no, we are misinformed, if all thy wealth would load thine own small
size; if thou make this but a poverty with a tanquam, as poor; Poverty has
left the Earth, and Beggary is a competency. Domitian enquiring after the
estates of Christ's Kindred, and finding all of them not worth thirty Acres of
Land, dismissed them, as inconsiderable Fellows; and do thou Oh Paul, call
the Family of Christians, but as poor? although thou wast Ambassador for
Heaven, yet did thou travel often at thy own Charge, and that hardly earned,
by Tent-making (in the night it may be) that thou might have leisure to
build Temples for the holy Ghost in the day. Sumpter Horse thou had none, for
thy Cloak and Parchments; and seldom (it is likely) Saddle Horse for thy
self: and is thy Poverty dashed with this Tanquam, as poor? yes, that it is,
and look on the other End of his divine Prospective, and you find him rich, and
to spare; for he is making others rich. Nay, then the Worldling, or the
Christian Dreams: What Riches (will the World cry) can he afford? that
receives of the Earthly things of others to supply his Necessities. But thou
Fool, look on his Invisibles (to use the Apostles words again) and thou will
confess them Riches indeed. Will you view the Possessions of those he had
enriched? why they are no less than You are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Their
Riches consist not so much in Possessing, as being Possessed; but the
Possession is mutual, for God is theirs that are his: and then judge you what
the Christian possesses; for Earthly things, the Earth is the Lords, and the
fullness thereof; so that he possesses the Lord Paramount himself, for
Heavenly (or to sum up all) he that has him, has that which makes Heaven,
his Presence, and the All Sufficiency it self: and let the most Covetous
desire more if he can. And would you have some Evidence for these Possessions?
Faith can furnish you: it is the Evidence of things not seen: and would you
have Witnesses to these Evidences? take Evidence and Witnesses too, you shall
find both in Hebrews 11. where the Clearness of our Prospective, and its
excellent Discoveries are rarely illustrated, although by a Cloud of Witnesses
(pardon the Expression) they are above a Jury, that are more particularly
brought in to witness these Truths; read and wonder at the Properties of this
Glass.

1. It was Abels burning Glass, that burnt his Sacrifice to a Perfume, and
sweet smelling Savor to the most High; when nothing but loathed Fumes rose
from Cains Oblation, verse 4.

2. In Enoch it had a strange Effect; that Glass that makes all these great
things, and Hopes Visible, made him Invisible, verse. 5.

3. Noah used it for his Astronomicall Glass of Prediction, long before (by
it) discovering that all the Stars would prove Hyades, that all Heavens
Treasures, of Waters and Earths Storehouse would be both laid out on the
Destruction of the old World; so as it proved his Weather-glasse, making him so
Weather-wise, as to provide against this Storm, verse 7.

4. Through this Prospective of Faith Abraham looks on Gods Command of him to
change his Quarters, to leave his Country and Kindred, as on a Statute of
Provision; knowing the Almightys Sequestrations are but better Compositions,
his Pilgrims settled enough, and his Exiles always at home, as being shadowed,
and supported by Omnipresence it self: through this he saw a City, whose
Foundation was made by no less than the Maker of Heaven and Earth, and an
Inheritance not to be looked for in the Nonage of life; for which he should not
be of years, till Death had delivered him into Possession (which uses here to
deliver our Possessions to others) verse 8, 9, 10.

5. Sarah did but look in, and she conceived, verse 11. and could see thousands
of Millions to come from him, that came from her dead Womb, Genesis 24. 60.

Through this Abraham saw (more than ever Nature did, as it is thought by some)
a Phoenix-like Resurrection of his Son, as possible with God; therefore obeys
that Command of offering his Son, believing a Metamorphosis Possible, with the
All-sufficient; that as he in Obedience turned his Son into a Sacrifice, so God
would again turn the Sacrifice into a Son, verse 17.

7. Through this Isaac shows his Sons, Jacob, and Esau, Possessions beyond
what he could leave them.

8. Through this Opticall Cylinder, Jacob discovered to Joseph his Diagonall
like Blessing, on his Sons Manasseh and Ephraim, as if he wonld transmit the
Blessing, as he had received it, Cross to Primogeniture; that as Isaac's, so
should his Blessing descend cross to the Claims of Nature, verse 21.

9. Through this Joseph could see the Israelites on their March toward Canaan,
and therefore by strict Orders gives his Bones possession of that Earthly
Canaan, when his Soul was now going to the Heavenly, verse 22.

10. Through this Moses his Parents looked, when obeying Gods, Thou shall not
kill, rather than Pharoahs, thou shall kill, they became Children to God, and
glad Parents of a Wonder-working Son.

Through this Moses made one of the strangest Discoveries (can be told
Infidelity) more content in Isreal's Bondage, and Sufferings with Joseph, then
in all the Prerogatives Royal of Pharaohs Court: for he looked on the
invisible King of Kings, verse 24.

12. Through this Israel could see no water, where the red Sea even now did
flow; whereas the Egyptians could see no Land for water, nor ever after Light,
verse 29.

Archimedes Glass might fire Ships at Sea; this Glass did what his Engines
could do, batter down Walls.

13. Israel venit vidit and vicit Jericho, Israel came, and through this Glass
saw, and overcame Jericho: here it was true, Creed quod habes and habes, they
did but believe the Town their own, and it was so, and that Jerichoes Walls
would fall, and they did fall, verse 30.

14. By this Rahab dressed her self, when she protected the Spies, and hereby
made sure of sleeping in a whole skin; the surest way to preserve the Beauty
she had left, verse 31.

Times Glass would be run out ere we could fully show the Virtues of this;
view them therefore Summarily, reckoned in the ensuing verses of that Chapter,
and show me (if thou can) such Discoveries in all, or any Contrivance the
world can boast of. If the Devil have thee on a Mountain, where thou may
see the world and all its Glory: Look through this Glass of Faith, and its
lessening end will show them but as a Molehill, which with the Foot of Scorn
thy Soul can spurn into inconsiderablenesse. To this lessening end the very
Heathen seem to have a Glass made very like: when they looked on the worlds
Profits, or Pleasures with contempt, as below the Admiration, or Desires of a
Reasonable Soul; even their Glasses (though they could not discover a world in
the Moon) could discover so much of the Moons Changeableness in the world, as
cheapned all its Pomp and Vanities, more in their esteem than the Christians
Vow, and Brightness both of this Advantageous Glass does among too many of
that Name: more shameful and inexcusable the Fault of our Eyes, not the dimnes
of the Glass, which in this excels theirs, that it not only shows the
worthlesnesse of this world, but that transcendent Excellency of that other,
which they could not guess at, but by some general Comparisons, with the
Emptiness of this (or as the Vulgar phrase it, that there could not well be a
worse.) But the glorious Discoveries of this Prospective will never be fully
discovered til it is broke, and the ^se of this swallowed up in the use of that
^ndiscoverably discovering Glass of the Beatificall Vision, to which we shall
be de^ivered over by the Experiment of Death: A Meditation whereon may well
challenge ^he close of this Work, since it is the truest Finis of Things, and
Actions, as well as Books; and in the very Art of divine Meditation, the
Method is justifiable to ^egin with Meditation of our Saviors Death, and to
end with thoughts of our ^wn.

THE GRAND EXPERIMENT.
THE Grave is not a more common Place (literally) for Reception of our Bodies,
than Death has been (in Scolasticall acception) for the exercise of men's Pens.
To all which Descants on this c^mmon Theme, I can give no other Title but of
Theoricall Conjectures of what it is, or of the Alterations it brings; no, even
through Faiths Prospective, and by Sacred Writ, though we have made cert^in
Discoveries of both (as true as Truth it self that spoke them; so true, we may
say as Marlorat to them that called him Deceiver; if I have seduced any (says
he) God has seduced me, who cannot lie yet all those too (though not
Conjecturall for the Substance, yet are so, as to the D^gr^es, or manner of
those Truths Appearances hereafter: all writ by Prophan^, or Sacred Penmen may
be termed guessing Discoveries (as Moses did Canaan at a distance, that could
yield but an imperfect, though a sure Vision of what he could come no nearer
to) in comparison of the Experiment of dying; as most excellently (if not the
first that so named it) a Poet of our own calls it: an Expression, I must
confess, so taking with me, as hinted these Conceptions on our return into the
Womb of our Mother Earth. An Experiment it is with a Janus face, the Soul in
death, discovering the true Estimate of what she here has gone through; be they
Doings, Sufferings, or Enjoyments; and what condition she is now in, and shall
be to all Eternity.

1. In its looking back on Life, it experimenteth such things to be
unquestionable Truth^, that the generality of the Living take to be the
Paradoxes of some contemplative. Stoics, or Anchorets. The dead Epicure cannot
but subscribe to the truth of Sardanapalus his Tomb, that I find storied to
have a hand in a posture of filliping, reaching out of the Tomb, and the Motto,
omnia n^c Tanti, all is not worth a Fillip. More elevated Souls will confess
Lipsius his Epitaph, or Inscription (by himself made and enjoined to be writ
on his Tomb) was good Philosophy, and no worse Divinity. Vis ut altiore voce
tecum loquar?
Humana cuncta, Fumus, umbra, vanitas;
Et ut uno verbo absolvam, nihil.


Shall I deal plainly with you? (says he) all humane Things (not his very
wisdom on this side the grand Experiment, and Opener of our Eyes, Death
excepted) are mere Smoke, Shadows, Vanity, or in short, nothings; they will
then acknowledge Pindars (...). Pyth. od. 8. That man is but a Dream of a
Shadow; and that Ulysses in Sophocles knew what he said, when he concluded
(...). Sophocl. in (...) Fla^^llif. p. 18.

(...).


I plainly perceive (says he) that while we live, we are but mere Images, or
vain Shadows, when under ground, the Covetous Mole (that while alive made
Earth his Heaven) will have no doubt his Eyes opened; when he shall see all his
Toils, and Purchases fall under the narrow bounds of his half-starv'd
'Carkasses Dimensions, and himself in Possession of no more, than (the
Churchyard Surveyour) the Sexton allotteth him: nay, this Experiment will cure
the blindness most incurable even of Scholastic Infidelity; for then shall
the Opinionative Atheist find, that his Life was but one continued Fallacy,
made up of false Reasonings, Scoffing Contradictions, or destructive Mistakes.
Aristotle, when but in the Suburbs of Death, may give him a taste of his
condition, whose words on his Deathbed are said to be these, Auxius vixi,
dubious morior, nescio quo vado. Kilius. Expos. Epist. Domin.
I lived (says he) anxiously, dye doubtly, and know not whether I go: all in
general will look back on life with Apprehensions not unlike those in Valerius
Maximus: Val Mex. (...) c. 12.
Humanae autem vitae conditionem praecipue primus and ultimus dies continet;
quia plurimum interest quibus Auspicijs inchoetur, and quo fine claudatur,
medij Temporis cursus prout Fortuna Gubernaculum rexit, modo aspero, modo
tranquillo motu peragitur; Spe semper minor, dum and cupide votis extenditur,
and fere sine ratione consumitur: As if there were (as he says) but two
considerable days in a Man's life, the day of his Birth, and day of his Death,
all the space between being but a Medly of Chances, or Changes, or indeed a
pleasing, or troubled Dream, short of Hopes, full of Fears, or Desires, and
spent they cannot tell how. In this like a Dream it is vanished into a
forgetfulness to relate: but the most Demonstrable Discovery in relation to
the several Conditions of life, will be that of Alphonsus King of Spain, Cinis
aequat; that of all, Death will prove the truest, and most powerful Leveller,
of all the Differences of men (in their ^nternalls, or Externalls.) Here will
be no distinction; in Levellers Hall (as I may term the Grave) how are men
disrobed of all their Differences, or Privileges, that on earth distinguished
them? and here are shuffled into a Regardlesse and objcure Equality; no Crown
leaves such a Print on any Skull, that we can say this was an Alexanders, this
a Diogenes's: Nor has the dust of Cleopatra now any more Attraction than that
of Martials Vetustilla; this Sceleton is the Spoils it may be of some
captivating Beauty, the talk and Wonder of her Age, Courted with Obeisance of
Scepters; yet having no Dowry but the Empire of a face: what Charm has it now
against the detestation and scorn of all Beholders? this Dust whereon we tread,
it may be is the all that is left of some unmatchable strength, -- and tam
parvus
Cinis Herculeus est; huc ille decrevit Gigas, Senec. H^rc. Oetaeus.

Ecce vix totam Hercules complevit urnam.
The Ashes of a Hercules now scarce fills an Vrne: so small is strengths
Epitome in Deaths Archives. Of what activity here are all the Machivellian
Policies of the subtlest Statesman? Maugre the Ambition of his Plots, his Dust
is now regardlesly trampled on, by those feet, that not long ago durst not but
make many a Scrape to their Cring-expecting Haughtiness; there is on no Bone
Chronicled their former Eminence; on neither arm their Gentility blazoned: the
Monument lasts longer it may be (because costlier) of Dives, than Lazarus
(whose Receptable is Inscriptionlesse) but Solomon levells them; not only one
with the other, but (in this particular, and in Deaths Quarters) with the
Beasts themselves, Eccles. 3. 20. telling us, all go to one place (and when
there he tells us what we are) all are dust, and return to dust Well, we may
show the Tombs of great ones, with their proud Distinctions, Epitaphs and
Titles of Honor, but their Contents we cannot: the dust of the Richest Miser
does not here turn to Ore, but is as arrant Dirt as his that raked Dunghills,
and slept as well as fed with the Prodigalls fellow Commoners, the Swine; that
delicate Flesh (to whom Perfumed Baths were as familiar as to the meaner
cleanly Ones Fair water was) does not here smell of Rose water, Spike, or
Ladanum; the finest of their dust will not officiat for Orrice Powder, to
perfume that Servants Hair, or Perriwigg, that it may be from his own (or by
help of some hired) Invention, told the living Idol it breathed Arabian
Spices, and could not afford to call any Path she trod, under a Bed of Roses,
or Violets (though vulgar eyes could see nothing but Plantan, Grass, or
Gravel) this grand unflattering Experiment of levelling Death, finds no such
matter: how contracted a Map does it present us with of all those large
Possessions of the Rich and Mighty Ones of the World? those Legs that could not
before (it may be) travel over them in a day, may now bestride the Land and
Possessour too, being reduced to no more than Adam equally left his Children, a
Grave. Nay, here Land goes by an unheard of Proportion, your Possession like
your Clothes fitted to your size, not Titles, or Wealth. Thus a Kings Porter is
richer now than his Master, that possessed Kingdoms when alive, and is now, it
may be, only not so poor as his Dwarf, till they moulder to undistinguishable
Dust. The dust of the Beggar (look on him as to the Universe, whereof he is an
Integrating part, as equally as the proudest) does take up (it is like) as much
room, and to use our divine Poets instance, make as great a crack if it turn
Creditor to a Thunder-making Exhalation, as his, whose Name, or Actions, made
never so great a noise for the moment of this life. Hear the Original of my
instance.

The Brags of Life are but a nine days wonder;
And after Death the Fumes that spring
From Private Bodies, Herbert Poem. p. 60.
make as big a Thunder,
As those which rise from a huge King.
The Bodies of the Poor, or Sickly are now as serviceable to the Circulation of
matter, as the lustiest and richest; turn to as good Crasse, prove as
beneficial to the Parsons Cowes, or Sheep: in general, serve Natures
perpetual Motion of Generation and Corruption as well, as the best Pampered
Carcass; nay, it is well if we may not say of some, they do more good dead,
than alive, under ground than on it: but the Tyranny of this impartial
Leveller Death is experimented chiefly, in that it abolisheth those truly noble
distinguishing Characters of Wisdom, and Piety. As to the former, in the Grave
the Skull of the greatest Linguist has not the evidence of one single Tongue
to show; the learned Schoolman has not the riches of one Distinction betwixt
his Brain-pan, and a Peasants, that never was furnished further than with some
instructive whistle to a Teem. Plaintiff, and Defendant, Client, and Advocate,
Prisoner, and Judge are here huddled up into a Peaceful confusion; that
neither we, nor they themselves know the one from the other. As for Honesty, or
Piety, here the bodies of Oppressor, and Oppressed, Builder and Seller of
Churches, Blasphemer, and him that fears an Oath, rest alike, and sleep as
sound the one, as the other. And what is the Result of all this experiment of
Death, and its Review back on life, but that of David, Psalm. 39. 5. 6. that
Man, even in his best Condition, is altogether vanity.

But to proceed to the Discoveries of this Experiment, as to the present, or
future (which is now all one, as being unalterable) and for those that dye
interested in the Conquest over Death, they now Experiment it to be to their
Bodies a welcome Quietus est, or sleep to their Souls; a ravishing waking into
clear Dispellings of all Doubts; a joyful Release into most welcome Liberty,
and an Admission into unchangeable Possession of all Desirables.

1. It is a sleep, binding up (like the lesser snatches of Rest and Drowsings
in Life) all sense of Molestation from any thing without: and of those dead in
the Lord, Revel. 14. 13. is that of Ambrose concerning the grave, true, in quo
mollius ille dormit, quisquis durius in vita se gesserit. It is a Bed (so the
Welsh call the Grave) wherein he rests, that was before acquainted rather with
a weariness, than a life: but if you will sublime the Speculation with Picus
Mirandula, it is a Rest from the Spiritual Drudgery of Sin; for so he welcomed
Death, not as an end of Trouble, but Sin: nay, it is a pleasanter sleep than
all the dreams of life, it being in deed.

2. The truest waking of the Soul; no such opening of our eyes as this closing
them by Deat^h Mysteries will then appear as clear as Demonstrations; that
Grave dust is excellent Eye-powder; take a Seraphicall Fancies word, showing us
then the Trinity shall be as visible there as the Incarnation was on Earth; and
that was visible, for the very Devils saw the Son of God through that case of
Humanity: Our Authors words are these. Thou have but 2. Herbert on
ungratefulness. p. 70.
rare Cabinets of Treasure,
The Trinity and Incarnation;
Thou have unlockt them both,
And made them Jewels to betroath
The Work of thy Creation
Unto thy self in everlasting Pleasure.
The statelier Cabinet is the Trinity,
Whose sparkling light Access denies;
Therefore thou do not show
This fully to us, till Death blow
The dust into our Eyes,
For by that Powder thou will make us see.
We shall then more wonder at our Doubtings (having such a sure word of
Prophecy) than we now do at the Mysteries; when the most intricate and ridling
Articles of our Creed shall shine in glorious and undoubted satisfactions. Now
truly begins the Soul to feel what before she believed, and that she has not
believed in vain, but that he was faithful that promised. What Joys must they
be? when what the Soul then feels, shall for intension be Raptures, and for
extension Eternal. If you would read Conjectures of them almost Ecstatically
pend; peruse Sir Kenhelm Digby's Rapture in his Treatise of the Immortality of
the Soul: examine the Truth, and what is the life of a Christian? but his
Exile from his Country, at best a Wardship; thy last day is the first, the
Soul comes of Age, and dies into Possession of thy long looked for
Inheritance. What gladsome Experiments will this Change bring? from a life of
vain Pleasures, false Honors, bootless Hopes, unsatisfying Riches, stormy
Contentments, Surfets of Excess, pinching Necessities, Comforts carefully
procured of fleeting abode, and sad Departure, to Pleasures that no more know
Definition (or Description) than Termination, being as unexpressable as
endless: Honors above Blazon, Possessions of no less than of that All, that
is all in all, God himself, and of them a Lease during the Eternalls life.
Indeed to the Righteous death shall prove but an Anagram of vexing Thorns for
triumphant Thrones. But that these are not brags, let Testimonies of dying
Saints confirm, and no less illustrate what kinds of Experiments we may
expect in this Change of Changes. Some of them I shall borrow from Mr. Wards
life of faith in death, and we may call them Intelligence from the Spies of
Eternity, seeing and tasting the Grapes of that Canaan, and that in Janua
Ditis, in the Porch of Death, or Suburbs of Heaven; differing much from the
vain glorious Ignorance of some resolute Heathen, that have met Death with a
Rashness, blindly rushing on the sad Changes that troop after this Pale Horse,
or from some stupid blockishnesse incident to many even among Christians,
venturing on it as Children, or Madmen, on Dangers without fear, or wit: for
these sure Adventurers have on more mature deliberation encountered this Terror
of Terrors; and with undaunted Courage have forgot the tenderness of Age, or
Sex; so that as among Histories humane, Lives, of all other, are accounted of
singular use: So in Christian History the Deaths of good men cannot but be the
most useful discoveries of this Experiment of dying, beyond all the wrangling
Conjectures, Disputes, and Subtleties of Schoolmen, or Doctors of Theorys, and
beyond all the Discoveries in the Duncery of Life. Begin we with Simeon, and
you hear him experimenting it a longed for departure; implying his life to
have been a kind of unwilling stay, had it not been sweetened with hopes of
having Heaven in his arms below, before he was taken up to it. Cyprian
praises God at his death for his approaching Goale-delivery: Jubentius and
Maximinus Martyrs, called it the laying off their last Garment the Flesh, but a
kind of undressing themselves for sleep. Marcus of Arethuse (hung up anointed
with Honey, and in a Basket exposed to the stinging of Wasps and Bees) calls
it an Advancement saying to his persecutors; How am I advanced, despising you
below? by these three Experiments, this terrible of all terribles, as Aristotle
calls it, has more of Invitation in it (than affrightment) of the Banished
to a home, the sleepy and weary Traveller to his Bed; nay of the Ambitious
Soul to Advancements. That the Epicure may not fear death (nay, love it) let
him get that Martyrs Pallat (as it is storied of Mr. John Bradford) that
embracing the Faggots, said to his fellow Martyrs, be of good cheer Brethren,
for this night we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord. Of Death the lazy
need not be afraid, for no bed of Down or Roses so pleasant; if you will
believe Paynams dying Testimony (the time when Incredulity it self will scarce
deny men credit) I feel no more pain (says he, in the midst of the fire)
then if I were in a bed of Down, it is as sweet to me as a bed of Roses. Would
the Chemist be glad to have his Coals turned to Pearls, if his aims fail of
turning his Br^ss^ to Gold: This great Operatour Death can do it, if you will
believe Noyes kissing the Stake, and saying, blessed be the time, that ever I
was born for this day, and saying to his fellow Martyrs, we shall not lose our
lives in this fire, but change them for a better, and have Pearls for Coals,
etc. Here is changing the Species with a witness. It is a farewell, I
confess, and at first appearance one that seems sad, as the Poet
prophesies. Linquenda Tellus, and Domus, and placens
Vxor: neque harum quas colis Arborum
Te, praeter invisas cupressos,
Vlla brevem Dominum sequetur.
But how abundantly more joyful are the Welcomes the Soul meets with in this
grand Experiment? look on the sadness and joy both in that one speech of a
cheerful Martyrago, when she said, farewell Faith (and that seems sad)
farewell Hope (then sure we can look for no comfort; yes, it follows) but
welcome Love, and let me add Fruition, which if I conceit all one, is not far
wide from Truth, Fruition and Happiness being nothing but the poor Creatures
swimming in boundless Emanations of the Creators love to all Eternity. And are
not now grave Clothes the best Hankerchiefs to wipe all tears from the eyes
of the miserable; but let fellow Travelers in the same Road expound one the
others meaning, and then would you know what love departed Saints do welcome,
and are welcome to: It is no less than that of Wedlock, (which the Poet
tells is largest; -- in aperto conjuge major:) take Bishop Ridlies word for
it, for he desired some of his Friends next day to come to his Wedding, his
Martyrdom (which I believe many in our days would run from, rather than dance
at) Madam la Glee in France was of the same mind, when putting on her Bracelets
as she was going to dye, giving this reason for it, I am now, says she, going
to my Spouse. But to show you more strange Experiments (though to flesh and
blood Paradoxes, to Faith Demonstrations) What think you if in the view of
Death, some tell you it is not Death? so did Windelmuta, when she was told she
had not yet tasted how bitter death was; no (said she) neither ever shall I,
for so has Christ promised: Nay, it is a life, if you take a word Royal, it
was Frederick Elector Palatines, to his Friends wishing him Recovery; I have
lived enough to you, let me now live to my self and with my Christ; as if it
were so far from being a Death, as it were but a beginning to live. So truly
agreed Seneca with this Kingly Judgment, Dies quem tanquam extremum reformidas,
E^ist. 102.
Aeterni natalis est; and even the Brachmanes consent with it, that esteem this
life man's Conception, and his Death day, his Birth day unto that true and happy
life, to him which has been rightly religious. But that it is an Experiment
above all other, or Notions of Truths divine or humane (necessary to be known)
and especially of these very discourses concerning scarce believed, and (at
best) but Conjectured Comforts in Death, Guy de Bres shall witness with a
solemn Affidavit; who said, the ringing of my Chains are music to me; this
Prison an excellent School, all my former discourses were as a blind man of
colors, in comparison of what I feel now, etc. by which he shuts under
blind Conjecture, all that has been apprehended of death, or its Comforts and
Condition afterward: in comparison of dying men's Demonstrations; what then are
those of the Dead? The sum of all deaths experiments, that is by me believed
(and not by me alone, but all such as take Gods word) is that which Solomon
delivered as a Dogmatist; and wherein the Lady Jane was (as I may term her) an
Empyrick feelingly finding the truth of it in Atriolis mortis, the very Porch
of death; who being requested to write her Symbol in the Lieutenant of the
Towers book, before her beheading, wrote this; Let the glassy condition of this
life never deceive thee, there is a time to be born, a time to dye, but the day
of death is better than the day of Birth. What glorious discoveries enlightened
her constant Soul, when but going out of these Darknings of Life? let Valerius
Maximus usher in the Verdit of profane Assenters to this Truth, that the
Experiments of Death to them that make dying the best Act they ever did in all
their life, are far more desirable than dreadful. Lib. 9. c. 13.
De cupiditate vitae. Vt ipsa comparatione pateat quanto non solum fortior: sed
etiam sapientior mortis interdum, quam vitae sit cupiditas. Things rightly
compared (says he) the preferring of life before death, in our wishes as well
as judgment, is an Act of no less wisdom, than valor. And hearken to
Christianity, and the Apostle Paul phraseth it, a Wish equal to the Gold
searching Chemists endeavors. I desire to be dissolved, melted down; there is
the Projection: and would you know the Elixir that results? it is being with
Christ: if that be not gain above all metallic Transmutation, Preaching is
foolishness (without an Irony) and hearing madness; the first may get Tithes,
and the latter naps of Digestion: and Sermons were better winkt at, than
hearkened to, were not the gains by death above all the Incomes of life. Let
Rosie-crucians be dumb after the mention of this Experiment, and theirs be
admired, only where this is not believed; a Christo-crucian (of which this
Apostle was none of the meanest) is an order of far more recompencing
projections; I now believe, and after death shall find among Christians
Expressions hereof, I know none fitter to conclude with, than that Martyrs
expression, He is come; short indeed, but meaning more than can be expressed out
of Heaven. I durst (if I enjoyed them) change all Sublunary Enjoyment for what
he then felt; that was but in the Suburbs of Heaven, and then going to make a
Bonfire with his Body for joy of his Souls entranceinto her Masters joy. And
would thou get such Relishes as might make thee count these no Paradoxes;
experience thy Soul in the comforts of Christ's dying for thee, and thy own
daily dyings with him, and all the Terrors of this experiment of dying will
dye, and thy longings after it revive, till both fears and desires are
swallowed up in fruition of those unalterable alterations. But O Death! to bad
and good thou will prove an Experiment of all that has been said, or writ of
thee, and incomprehensibly more; to the former of far more, than ever was
believed or feared; to these latter of transcendently more than their narrow
living hopes could comprehend; the highest and vastest Apprehensions of thee
among the living are but as the Apostle says, thinkings like a Child: our
thoughts on this grand change will change, as much as a Philosophers
conceptions (matured by the most sagacious inquisition into nature) does from
his Child-hoods apprehensions of the Sun, Moon, Meteors and other visibles,
when we shall come to know as we are known. Let all the world judge whether
death was ill called, or is ill believed an Experiment that delivers us over to
a kind of Omniscience; for by no less are we known, and with little less
shall we know; our happiness being nothing else but vision, and complacence in
that sight; where in that mirror light it self, al Desirables and felicitating
Instructions shall by Fruition be seen, and by Vision be enjoyed.

FINIS
Scribendi ad Dei Gloriam, and hominum utilitatem, Initium sit Agendi. Martial.
Epigr. Lib. 4. Ep. 9.
Ohe jam satis est, Ohe Libelle,
Jam pervenimus usque ad umbilicos:
Tu procedere adhuc, and ire quaeris,
Nec summa potes in Scheda teneri.
Sic tanquam tibi res peracta non sit,
Quae prima quoque Pagina peracta est.
Jam lector Quaeriturque, deficitque,
Jam librarius hoc and ipse dicit.
Ohe jam satis est ohe Libelle.
Which farewell to my Book take thus near sense, though not words.

Enough, if not too much, my Book! forbear:
You Are big enough, if not too big: I fear
Beyond a Pocketing thou ^lt swell: enough
Thou did I doubt in thy first Page; such stuff
Thou do contain, will quickly Readers make
Repent themselves; and pray the Stationer take
His Boo^ again: They Are sick, and have their fill.
The Printer too me prays to hold my Quill.
Enough sure then, if not too much; forbear.


THE INDEX.
A.
AFfoctions cut off our right Ear, page 1 Authorities Influence on Assent, 27
Agricolas timely death, 279 Affictions reward, Mercies Hyperbole, 37 with
innocence Martyrdomes, 286 Their Arrant, 29 Agues no Fevers in vulgar
apprehension, 47 Alms of Physic no Charity, 55 Age of people to be seen in
the water, according to some fools, 29 Acceptable words required in Salomons
Preacher, 144 Academia a word nor lawful in Paul 2ds. time, 140 Alms the best
Prayers, 205 Alexander Aristotle's Pupil, 171 his natural Philosophy, 172 his
Logic, 173 Rhetor. ib. Politics, 174 Alchimists credulity, 214 Affairs of
men but Plays, 313 Alcibiades his Possessions not in the Map, 3^5 Alphonsus
his Experiment concerning death, 352 Ambitious busy-bodyes, but idly employed,
298 Their Exploits will scarce make an Almanacks Since, ib. Their Chronicle
Galaxied into a confused Mention, 299 Home Antipodes, 302 Admiration of men
whence 434 Antiquaries will rather keep Moses broken tables than Gods whole
ones, 216 The Antinomian Honey Combs Preferment, 230 Amaras library, 238
Christ preached for Angels, 358. Arithmetic, which is best, 200 The Apes cure
of the Doctor, 105 Astrology, with whom in credit, 255 Aristotle's Logic
corrupted his Philosophy, 254 Authors to be read like Anonymo's, 208. Authority
mistook, 211. Authors must be looked on as Senators not Dictatours, 119 Avicen
wept when he prescribed a Purge, 88 Avarice what, 496 Atheist best confured
when he can hear nothing. 551 Attempts against higher Powers the pride of
singularity, 280 Arts fare ill when judged by the unskilful, 92 Austerity of
life the Schismatics Cloak,
B.
BOdleies Library, 239. Banks his Horse taught as well as some would have
Christians, 143 Blindness of Parients in choice of their Physicians, 110 B^^hs
of some, sadder than their Funerals, 23 Beauty what, 339. its impropriation;
what it costs, 266. more eminent in women, 331 338 The word Back, Back mistook
routed an Army, 424 Beggarly Busy-bodies the greatest Detractors, boasting one
half of the peoples Physician. Bellarmine as much enervated by English Doctors
as any, 163 Books the best furniture, 243. Their Elements, 260 Uses, 248 Are
not Epistles Dedicatory to particular Fancies, 263 A godly book a Byword, with
whom, 320 Bona a rare example of women's constancy, 328 All we have is borrowed,
401 The Buyers weakness sets price on the best worthy books, 233 Some
building, but varied Prodigality, 502
C.
Carelessness sometimes commendable, 28 Caesar's abilities in Learning, 170 etc.
His Commentaries are his sheets of lead, 171. His Pen makes more Tributary
than his Sword. 414 Cato^s opinion of women, 377. His constancy 292 Caligula's
vain Triumph, 314 Captious Critics not to be regarded, 262 The just Cause
will prevail, 287 The censorious Blast often removes the Tree in concell, 270
Changing of Physicians danger. 125. Or of Physic, ib. Cato Censorinus worse to
be, Cithara by whom invented, 482 Charity has its reward to which Boasting is
Usher, or Waiting Woman, 58 From a small chance, a great change in War, 423.
and may give Victory, but not Courage, 288 A haireless Chin graduates No-bodies
with Somebodie, 434 Cineas his Discourse, 310 Childrens Employments, how they
differ from men's, 309 Good causes miscarry, 292 Cause not to be concluded the
same from likeness of Effects, 221 Circes Sister to Aesculapius, 136. Christ
choosing illiterate men not our Directory, 152 Choice of Physicians often by
Contagion, 113 Slavish to seek our own cheerfulness in another countenance,
311 Pharisaicall Cottington^, 196 Cobblers in art and worth often translated to
wealth, 421 Contentation the true Philosophers stone, 4 The congregationers
question 209 The Conqueror always a gallant man, 288 Commerces of men but
cousenages, 18 Common Wealths happy, where Arts keep^ their bounds, 98 Counsels
to Patients beyond any Recipe, 136 Constancy of learned Piety, with whom
ridiculous, 177. Its Apology, 179 In our own countrymen, nothing excellent,
111 Credulity of People incredible, 112 Its Tyranny, 214 Curtius his Physic
disliked because a stranger, 103 A consecrated closet commendable, 349
Half-crowns sometimes get the better of whole ones, 424 Chrysostom free from
Detraction, 456 Christ's cross a Tree of the vocal Forest. 520 It is Arbor
vitae, 520. His kindred poor, 540 The Cruysado, a most noble order, 531 Crosses
can teach Machivellians their Catechism, 529 Accidental cures make famous,
438
D.
EAch day has its sorrow, 31 Death to Christians a prize, not Shipwreck, 17.
An experiment with a Janus face, 540. A sleep, 557 A waking, ib. Its gladsome
Experiments, 559 etc. Degrees are in Universities commendable Shibboleths, 106
Mis-became some, ib. are often bought abroad, and sold dear at home, 107
Departure of a disease imputed to the last commer, 115 The dead better company
than the living, 246 Detractions the fifth Element, 445 Demosthenes his public
spirit, 178 Demades his caution, 366 What Divine passable with some, 62. 91.
92. Undone in order, 453 Diet not regarded by she Physicians 53 The Do-little,
worth no more, 30 Dominion over consciences a subtle principle of selfe-aimes,
360 The Donatists revenge, 364 Divinity-mongers no small corporation in these
days, 26 The degrees of some, 166 Doctors unwelcome after cure, 130. Their
Entertainment, 120 Didymus the Grammarian, 228 In Duels the worsted as gallant
often as the Conqueror, 288
E.
EDucation taints our judgments, 210 Earth a book to Botanists, 295. On it and
for it what a coil, 317 Echo from an upright conscience above the gingles of
fame, 21 Bad cares admit no good reports, 4 An Elixir for long life, 7. 24
Epiclus his modesty, 148 Queen Elizabeth still gives Physic commendably, 56
Elements of man, 395. The fifth, which, 445 Eloquence its force, 244 Just
estimate of things not usual, 264 England the Nursery of Mountebanks, 95
Empyricks to whom friends, ^18. of which some have no more books than doublets,
123 Doctor Emericus against Waterology, 73 Strange Excuses made by people, when
they come to satisfy Physician, or Apothecary, 130 Eradicatives ill omitted,
88 Experience mis-judged and esteemed, 83. It alone dangerous, 84 116 At
Exchange, or Faires, hereafter little thought on, 313 Our explications of faith
have broke its Unity, 241 Where excess beats Taptoo, diseases beat Travel,
30^ Etymology of Eve, 330 The good Example Master of the Sentences, 206
F.
FAlling States men always accused of dotage, 289 Fashions cross the Seas as
often as the Packet Boat, 225. They are indifferencies, ib. Dissembled Fasts that
will one day feast the Worm of conscience, 371 Fevers make Ember weeks in the
body, 127. and therefore must be allowed their Fasting days, ib. Fevinus his
complaint, 96 Fellows of any Trade may pass for Physicians, 93 The word
Fortunate Physician above all commendations, 290 Friendship not contracted
(...) Drink, 38 Some men do not so much live, as fool, 301
G.
GEometry, which best, 200 Good may come from the most empty, and be received
by the most full, 305 Globe of the Earth how small, 314 Gonella's Story, 93
Gospel Revelations now the abused word for whimseys, 192 Goodness is success,
293 The christians graples for his time, 306 Grave dust preserves our
chronicle, 21. The best Powder of Experience, 100 and 558 The act of Generation
may murder ones Country, 23 God the liberal man's Debtor, 35 Gossiping
discourse, what 455 Gluttony what, 498 G.
H.
HEaven with too many but a Babble, and Hell a Fable, 164 Few husband
themselves, 4 Hatred from politic or religious differences deadly, 258 History
shows us the Worlds Markets, 247. Its Blots whence, 268. etc. It is of a
false Glass, 270. Its charge, 271 The hands of Preachers must preach, 197
Helicon not troubled with Suitors, 430 Henry the 7th poisoned in the
Eucharist, 242 Hestods wish, 279 What Divine a true Holdsworth. Dr. Holdsworths
just character, 198 The Repute of Honest better than that of Learned, 202 Hit
or Miss, the Quacks Dance in practice, 50 Hot things may cool, 221 The great
Husband a Prodigal, 296
I.
IAlop may be sold too cheap, 50 Injuries how to be entertained, 40 Jewish
faith touching Utine safe, 66 In possibles not to be desired, nor unavoidables
to be feared, 28 A blind Jew a great Waterologer, 74 Inconstancy under
remedies, or Physicians, its own punishment, 127 Impunity deplorable, 293
Juleps cool, often improper, 87 Intellectual Idolatry, 208 Ink has poison in
it, Learning and Religion know, 227 Humane Invention not always excluded
Devotion, 485 Jehus Reformation, 369 King Junipertus his revenge on a good
Bishop, 392
K.
MY Lady Kents Powder the last refuge of Gooody-Physitian, 51 Too many Keys to
Scripture have broke the wards, 244 Knowledge without practice, but Pedantry,
199. Its match desirable, ib. Kissing when first used, 324 Kalendars
partiality, 270
L.
Labors of men, for what, 247 Lamenesse in address a discase in Patients, 119
Latin but sparingly allowed, 177 Lazy Divine Enemies to Learning, 141
Learnings enemies, who 139. etc. no Noli me tangere in St. Paul's time it can be
saved by the book, 149. Its usefulness in Divinity, 167. Its ruin too
visible, 190. Its contempt, what, 189 Lenitives sometimes not to be rested in,
^88 Lawyers Pre-eminence before the Physician, wherein, 99 Life a Stage Play,
8. Who true Actors in it, 9. a Game at Tables, 29 Disheartning Levells, and
their sad consequences, 437 Levellers Hall, 552 Lucilius his temper, 260
M.
MAlice righted is revenged, 39 Massaniello endites as well as some preach, 144.
Melancthon a good Coroner, 123 Melancholy men subject to change Physicians and
their courses, 125 What ado about Matches, 203 Men live like beasts without
learning, 191. are but a crowde of Mummers, 17 and Stage Players, ib. Some men's
memories above envy, 272. man loses himself most in seeking himself, 357.
Men fool at a dearer rate than children. The Magnetic Ladies paint, 353
Attire, ib. She crosses the sick man's bill, not prescribes it, 351. Banquets at
her door, ib. Marketings of the world foolish, 264 Man's speculation a comedy of
errors, and employments much ado about nothing, 319 The colic passion,
misereri mei, a recipe against cursing, 529 The Melesian Virgins modesty,
Marriages prerogative, 345 The Mexican Calendar, 305 Music what best, 200. Its
use, 482 hated only by ill natured people, 486. Of all Arts the most lasting,
ib.
N.
THe Name Doctor, and Fame Gifted, enough to make Physician and Divine, 168 The
name of a book once spyed, men fling their eyes off, 209 Nations may hate one
another customs, 224. Our demeanor toward their differences, ib. The
Non-parcille of the world, 204. Her Jointure, ib. Nature not to be distracted
from concoction of the disease, 126 Novelty a maine setter off with the people,
111. How to be entertained, 259 Nero's jest on Claudius, 302 The Nurses speech
for the Quack, 113
O.
OBstinacy called Solidity, 220 Opportunities of proper coutles in physic
omitted, 51 Orbis Intellectualis, meeter its Circulators, 212 Oneness of a
remedy with whom usual, 52. Oblivions Deluge, 417
P.
PAtients often prescribe to their Doctor, 120 121. have the hand Gout after the
Cure, 127 Pamphelets truest name, 231 A Paul's Churchyard-shop of more real
worth than all Lumbardstreet, 239 Paul no Enemy to Learning, 153. took
Testimonies of Truth from the Heathen, 166 Perfection nor to be looked for in
men's works, 263 Peremptorinesse in desires, or love to be avoided, 16 Peoples
Creed concerning Petticoat-Practitioners, 54. their charity to miscarrying
Quacks, 123. look Physicians should tell them Impossibles, or Invisibles from
the water, 82. as guilty of cross practice as their Parsons, 198 The peoples
Physicians Tools, 63. sets up in a Plague, ib. his Qualify a tions, 82. etc.
Petticoat Practitioners Rules for measure, 58. Mistakes, 59, their itch of
Pride, 54. Mischiefs, 60 61 Physic against Losses, 16. What the best, 206
Polycletus his Statue, 257 Politicians Gospel, 178 Poetry part of Paul's
reading, 166. part of Scripture in it, 470. nay, Rithme it self in some, ib.
its Dramatick part inferior to none, 472. its excellence, 477. etc. A well
tuned Eloquence, 469 Paedaretus his Repulse, 376 Polystraditas public Spirit,
377 Portia's grief for her Husband, 327 Posterity takes no notice who are
Purchasers, or who Spenders of Estate, 410 Preaching in wisdom of words, what,
154 Preachers some dull, some ridiculous, 142, making it the Auditors passion
to hear from them their Sermons. 151 Plinies Clock, 301 Principles of
prejudice, 253 Pewes needless where all turn Pulpi^arians, 139 Professions
must not be broke loose, from, or into, 10 Poor, the Almighties Box. 34 The
best Ensurers, 39 Poppy-water, or Syrup, edged Tools, 49 Physick-practise as
free as the Spanish Trade, 99. Its Theory conjecture, or controversy, and its
practice Lottery, 131 Physicians presence requisite, 81 Pulpit Burglary, 435.
158. 160. Dangerous prosperity, 283 5, 6.
Q.
QUacks (...) like Babels Bricklayers, 48. are guided more by Signs in the
Almanac than of the Disease, 49 Slander Courts with their Cures, 84. Their
Chorography, 85. Undertakings, ib. Shop, 86. Method, 85. Put offs, 90. are
clippers of Gods Image, 99. and Murderers hired by the Murdered, ib. Quacking
Hermaphrodites Furniture, 45. Qualities, etc. 46. etc.
R.
Rates too high on things, whence, 10. Of men, what, 12 Reward of Charity
excels and exceeds the principal, 34 Lower-Region'd Souls are moved at
S^blunaries, 41 Reputation the Possession of the Dead, 21. more in our power
than our fortunes, 24 Reason is a Paradox, and Sense a Riddle to
Sheephysitians, 50 Remedies blindly applied are Diseases, 50 A practicing Rib
will kill more than the Jaw Bone of an Ass, 61 Two Rogues at Dort set up for
Waterology, 79 Receipt Books dangerous to practice by, 117 Readers heads too
full, or too empty, 250. should be Rasae Tabulae, 258. must come to Books as
Guests, not Cooks, 261 Reformation false always to the worse, 509. by ruin is
madness, ib. splits on sundry Rocks, 502 Religions way plain and sure, 175
Riches in what they consist, 11 Ruin follows extirpation of Learning, 191
Rhetoric a Whetstone the two-edged Sword did use, 165
S.
SEa-marks to the Haven of Health, 89 Sex not to be known by the water, 72
Sophistry more taking then success, 231 How many Stairs one fell down,
required by one to be told out of the water, 80 The Shambles of Empyricks very
large, 220 Scriptures Excellence, 150. Lofty style, ib. has most of all Arts,
ib. The sound of the Houreglasse more precious than that of Tagus, 297 The
spirit of Prophecy is not gone quite out of learned men into Chaplains of the
Whip, etc. 168. Sion and College, good Grammar, 138 Salomons honor, 397.
Wealth, 399. Buildings, 403 Scholars know how to use all of a Quill, 169. good
Politicians, 174 their Fortunes low, 180. but the rich men's faults, ib. they
with more Gallantry Scorn (than others enjoy) the fine things of the world,
181. Their Cannots fewer then their Abilities, 186 The Stage Creditor to
wisdom. Scarlet Boys must meddle with Books, 320 The Scorner plays the
Fool in the Souls Tragedy. Slanders Entertainment, 460 A Song made by God
himself, 471 Sardanapalus his Tomb, 549 Sermons like familiar Discourse
please, 252 Scripture used by men as their Pleader not Counselor, 254 The
Scientificall Syllogism not Ergo'd till death, 258 Success ill guide of our
Judgments, 282 Socrates his Candidnesse, 263 Sweetnings of life ill justled out
by its cares, 309 Sermons of the Rod with some, most powerful, 529 Schisms,
whence, 361 The Suists Creed, 365. Suicisme tains Acts of Religion, 358. etc.
of Charity, 372. Its cure, ib. Sins bearded, or gilded pass for virtue, 512
T.
OUr Table is a Book, 36. Transitories not to be too closely embraced,
Womanish tenderness in apprehension of Injuries invites them, 41 The Council
of Trent damned Authors more than Books, 209 Tree of Knowledge and Life now
apart, 193 Truth and Love now lie a bleeding, 241 Tongue and Ear a monstrous
match, 199. the Music at it, ib. Time Master in all Arts, 273 Time sadly
shared, 295. Time-changers for money no wise Chapmen, 298, its Wasters, 302.
how redeemed, 304 Ones Nail, or Thumb covers a Kingdom in the Map, 315 We
Triumph on, and for a Turfe, 316 Trojan women's Policy. Testimonies of dying
Saints, 560 etc.
V.
Virtue to be taken with a sweet or ill-sented breath, 19. her great Seal, 20
Variation of remedies necessary, 87 The Valentian Doctor his Elements, 102 The
complementall Visitant, a time-waster, 302 University-breeding counted
necessary for exposition of humane Laws, 167. No ullus in quovis singulo, 260,
unus in omnibus, etc. No affrighting Proverb, 259 Sad Vespers often succeeded
with Festivals, 33 Urine shows little, 65 Uncertain in the best unsufficient
in the most of its informations, 66. etc. Vulgar a bad Judge, 20. in choice of
Physicians or Divines, 62. Dispense Prizes, or their Favor soonest to
Ignorance and Impudence. 133 Venial sins how best confuted, 518 Uxoricusnesse
a Prodigality, 503 Volupiae Sacra, 310 The Goddess Viriplaca, 324
W.
WAterologers Knaves, 47. his Degree and habit, ib. their Cheat, 64 and 66. may
grossly mistake 71. their impudent Tales out of the water, 75. as that a woman
had a Tree in her belly, 77. etc. Waters Instructions alone dangerous, 81
Cunning women first set up by foolish men, 46. women will still be learning
Propria quae maribus, 45 A woman with too few Teeth and too much Tongue fit to
be somes Physician, 122 The world to some a Primer, to others a Polemicall body
of Controversies, 213. The Worlds wiseman buyeth a lease with an Inheritance,
266 Wickedness has its pawses, 275 What one wonders at, another jeers, 213
Wicked Prosperity but a Reprieve, 282 A What would you next may be urged to
most men's undertakings, 310 Whores Retorick above any Orators, 335 Wit in bad
Lodgings, 356 None so famous to advance it self, 427 Women as capable of
Abilities as Men, 321. their bodies of more curious structure thon men's, 338
Wines justifiable uses, 506 by whom complained against, ib. The winning side
all commend, 288
X.
XEnophon, Scholar of Socrates, a brave Commander, 174
Y.
YOung in years may be old in hours, 8 Tacitus his sad twenty years, 279
Z.
ZAandainelo's practice, 118 Blind Zeal, or lame knowledge fruitless, or
mischievous, 194. it breaks one Table against another, 202 it calls Learning an
Idol, 251
FINIS

