THE Gainefull Cost. As it was delivered in A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right
Honorable House of LORDS, In the Abbey Church at Westminster, on Wednesday the
27. of November, being the day appointed for solemn and public Humiliation.

By Henry Wilkinson, B. D. Pastor of Faiths under Paul's.

2 CHRONICLES. 31. 10. etc. Since the people began to bring the offerings into the
house of the Lord, we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty: for the
Lord has blessed his people; and that which is left, is this great store.

VERSE. 21. In every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and
in the Law, and in the Commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his
heart, and prospered.

LONDON, Printed for CHR. MEREDITH and SA. GELLIBRAND, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, 1644.

To the Right Honorable House of LORDS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
PErsons of highest rank and eminent qualifications, are satis amplum alter
alteri theatrum; but persons so qualified, when they are employed in matters of
greatest and most public concernment (as your Lordships are) become a (...).
spectacle to the world, and to angels, and to men, 1 Cor. 4. 9. Look well how
you behave your selves, for you now act either to the greatest prejudice or
profit of the Kingdom, and the Church of God. If the great wheel stands still,
the wheel within the wheel cannot move; and they had need move very cautiously,
who if they move irregularly, prove fatal. Cross motions in the superior
orbs of a State, do as much trouble wise men to reconcile them to the
principles of peace and government, as the Astronomers are troubled to save the
Phoenomena, by ^a^ning of Epicycles, and Concentricks, and Eccentricks: God
forbid that any should be put to the labor of coining distinctions to salve
the counter-passages or planetary motions in those spheres in which the
brightest flarres of our State do move.

It was a pious as well as politic inscription in the Court at Ratisbon,
Quisquis Senator curiam officii causa ingrederis, ante hoc ostium privatos
affectus omnes abjicito: Camer. Cent. 1. c. 33.
iram, vim, odium, amicitiam, adulationem, Reip. personam, and curam subjicito:
nam ut aliis aequus, aut iniquus fueris, ita quoque Dei judicium expectabis aut
sustinebis. It is an inscription not so fit to be written on a Parliament
house door, as on every Parliament man's heart.

Your Lordships are not ignorant how much there is, not of weak man, but of
wicked man in the great transactions of the Church and State. And I doubt not
but you see and loath that generation (and there be many of them) who betake
themselves to a side merely for hopes, interests, and engagements sake; these
are their summa credendorum and agendorum, by these they act, and believe no
further then these do reach, these to them are the Law and Prophets. It is
well enough known, that the interrogatory that Saul made to the Benjamites, is
a most 1 Samuel 22. 7.
concluding topic to mercenaries; Will the son of Jesse give every one of you
fields and vineyards, and make you all Captains of thousands, and Captains of
hundreds? These be they whose Cynosura and polestar is profit, and the Kingdom
their prey, and gold their god. We hope that your Lordships will take care,
that such as these are, shall never be great, and that great men shall never be
such.

I shall not trouble your Honors any further, nor will I in the least kind
anticipate the book by giving so much as a taste of the heads before hand; only
thus much I could heartily wish, that as it is a Sermon of cost, so it were a
costly Sermon, every line of which were worthy to be written in letters of
gold; the Author would never think it too good to be thus dedicated since to
be employed for your Lordships good, is the crown and happiness of

Your Honors most devoted Servant in Christ, HENRY WILKINSON.

A SERMON PREACHED before the Right Honorable House of LORDS, At the public
Fast November. 27. 1644.
1 CHRONICLES. 21. 24. And King David said to Ornan, Nay, but I will verily buy it
for the full price: for I will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor
offer burnt offerings without cost.


IN this Chapter you have David sinning in numbering the people, v. 1, 2, 8. and
begging pardon. Then you have the Lord punishing, verse. 14, 15. after that, you
have David and the Elders humbling themselves before the Lord, verse. 16. Now
upon this great sin of David, and Gods great judgment upon that sin and
David's great humiliation upon that judgment, you have one of the greatest
mercies and favors vouchsafed to David that his heart could wish; for you have
a command given to David, to go and set up an Altar in the threshing Floor of
Ornan the Iebusite, v. 18. which place was afterward the place where Salomons
Temple was built, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. whereupon David did presently set about the
work, which was to prepare for the building of that Temple, chap. 22. 1 Chronicles.

Thus it pleases God to order things, that great sins being committed, great
judgments are inflicted, and great judgments produce great humiliations, and
great humiliations are great preparations for the greatest mercies. Our case is
somewhat alike: we have sinned grievously, God has punished us fearfully, we
have humbled our selves, (I could wish I were able to say as David did) and I
doubt not but the issue will be, nay we see it in some measure, the building
the Lords house, of which Salomons Temple was but a Type.

The words are a loving and noble answer, to a loving and noble offer; here is
a pious contention betwixt two Kings (for Araunah was a King) 2 Samuel 24. 3. who
should be at most cost for God. Araunah thought that upon such an occasion, and
at such a time, he could not do too much, and therefore he offers his
threshing Floor, and the Oxen for burnt offerings, and the threshing
instruments for wood, and the wheat for a meat offering, verse. 23. but as Ornan
thought he could not offer too much, so David thought he should have offered
too little if he had taken this, and as it were have paid his own debts to God
upon another man's charges.

We have two parts in the words: 1. David's answer to Ornans offer: 2. David's
reason of that answer. In the first you have first the purchaser, King David.
Secondly the purchase he was to make. Thirdly the price in gross. Fourthly the
fullness of it. David does not beat his bargain, and bring it as low as he
can, but is ready to give as much as the things were worth to the full.

Doct. It becomes persons of highest rank and quality, to offer and ^^pend at
the highest rate for God.

In the second general which is David's reason, first observe his justice. It
is thine, and I will not do that injury unto thee, as to take thy goods upon
those terms: although Ornan offered freely upon David's asking; yet David knew,
that preces regum imperia sunt; the desires of Kings carry the force of
commands. Secondly, his Piety: The thing he asked was for the Lord, now he
thought it not becoming his piety to offer to God without expense.

From his Justice we collect this Doctrine: It is a piece of injustice to offer
another man's goods, though it be to God himself.

Secondly from his Piety we draw this Doctrine: A heart piously affected, will
be expensive and costly in the service, and for the honor of God.

I shall handle only this last Doctrine, as being that which the Text holds
forth most clearly. But before I come to the confirmation of it, something must
be done by way of explication of the terms of the Doctrine: which shall be done
by resolving a question or two.

1. What do we mean by cost? Resp. That especially which concerns Temple
work, or the building, and repairing, and advancing the Church of God, the
house of Christ, which is so much out of repair, so much run to ruin and
decay. Then for the kinds of cost that we would have men be at; they are,
first, cost and expense of time, which ought to be redeemed, Ephesians. 5. 16. that
it may be laid out for this work of God: we should not measure out too narrow a
scantling of time, especially now in this juncture dum fervet opus; and
therefore we should purchase time from our sleep, and recreations, and company,
and meals, and ease, and lay it out upon this work that is now in hand.
Secondly there is a cost of labor, and pains, and diligence; we must make it
our buisinesse, the travel of the heart, of the head, of the hand, they must
all be laid out, in this work: we must spend thus, and be spent; our strength
and parts which are the most costly things we have, they must go all. Thirdly
there is a cost of substance when need requires; it must be good for quality,
and large for quantity, if a man has it. Fourthly there is a cost of self, of
life, when a man carries that in his hand as being ready to spend it in Gods
service, then a man is said to lay out his life, when he adventures it, and
puts himself into danger of losing of it, 2 Cor. 1. 10. when a man escapes
unexpectedly a great danger, it is looked on as a sacrifice even of the life,
Heb. 11. 19. now that which is purchased with danger and great difficulty, that
has cost, as fears and tears, is fittest for God, 1 Chronicles. 11. 18. the sword
that David got with so much danger from Goliath, was fittest for God, 1 Samuel 21.
9.

2. If it be asked what we mean by the service of God? Resp. This is taken
either largely, for that whereby we serve the Lords providence in our several
places and callings. Or secondly it is taken in a more restrained sense, for
that which does more immediately concern the Lord and his worship, and the
building of his house. If perhaps I speak of offering sacrifices to the Lord in
this business, it is to be taken concerning sacrifices in a moral not legal
sense. The first Argument to prove the Doctrine, drawn from God. 1. In regard
of the dignity of his person.


These things being premised, I now proceed to the demonstration and
strengthening the Doctrine. The first Argument to prove that a heart piously
affected, will be expensive in the service and for the honor of God, is drawn
from the object of this service, God himself. And in him we may consider,
first, the greatness, dignity, and majesty of God: He is a great King, and
therefore it is fit we should be at cost with him. The Lord does expostulate
in a chiding way, the matter betwixt himself, and his people that pretended to
serve him, Mal. 1. 6. 8. He pleads his dignity, as if he should say, You
pretend that I am your father and master; where is that respect and honor that
these relations call for? will any of you dare to offer a base contemptible
sacrifice to your Governor? will he take it at your hands? what do you make
of me? am not I a great King and Governor? It was the saying of one, that as
he knew his own distance, so he would have others know it too that Non
P^tabam mertibi tam samiliarem, Aug. Caes.
were inferior to him; who, being invited to a feast by one of his subjects,
but not finding such entertainment as his dignity required, said, he did not
know that he was so familiar with him till then. The Prophet Isaiah, having
spoken of the greatness and dignity of God, Isa. 40. 15. then he tells verse.
16. that Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof sufficient
for a burnt offering. Such is the greatness of our God, that it is a
derogation from his Majesty, to offer any but the best unto him. Whence it is,
that all those that worship the Lamb, who is worthy, they therefore attribute
all that ever they can to him, Rev. 5. 11, 12, 13. so the wise men when they
came to offer to Christ, they offered of the best the countries afforded, for
he was a King, Mat. 2. 2, 11.

Secondly, In regard of Gods commands: he calls for the best, 2. In respect of
his commands.
and that which is best, is most costly. The equity of the Leviticall Laws is
yet in force: now the Lord did command the first fruits. Lev. 23. 10. and Exodus
34. 10. every firstling that was male the Lord claimed that; of which we may
say, as Jacob did of Reuben, Genesis 49. 3. Thou art my firstborn, my might, and
the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of
power: and Deuteronomy. 15. 19, 21. the males must be without blemish: and Levit. 22.
19, 20, 21, 22. the offering must be perfect; the purest oil, the finest
flower, the fattest cattle were required: by all which was represented how that
God would be served with the best: he must have as the choicest of our
substance, which is the most costly; so the choicest of our selves, of our
strength, and labors, and time, and whatsoever we value best.

Thirdly, in respect of Gods interest: He has the greatest interest 3. Because
of his Interests, (...) are many and great.
in all we have, and therefore it is fit he should have our cost, our best, and
all. First, he has interest by right of creation; whence it is that the 24
Elders use this as a reason of their doxology, Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy, O
Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou ^rast created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Secondly, by right of
purchase; and therefore the Apostle draws his argument from this ground, That
we are bought by a price, and therefore we ought to glorify God, etc. 1 Cor.
6. 20. Thirdly, in regard of more then ordinary pains in our most costly and
excellent things: our best services come in a more special manner from God:
our best fruits come all from plants of his own setting and watering, and
therefore, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 9. 7. Who planted a vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Hence it is that the Lord pleads against his
people; upon this very ground he does expostulate the matter, that he had been
at much cost and pains with them, and therefore it was great reason that they
should have made a return answerable some way to what he had done, Is. 5. 1,
2, 4. Fourthly, by an interest of Covenant: we have bound our selves over to
God, to give him the best, and he has bound himself to give us the best; I
will be thy God and you shall be my people, carries the best, and all that each
other can do: And therefore God lays it as one of the greatest aggravations
on his people, that they had failed in point of Covenant, Hos. 6. 7. They have
transgressed the Covenant, there have they dealt treacherously: He says,
There, even where they should have been most faithful, even there have they
proved Delinquents. Fifthly, by special favors and obligations, this puts God
into a further interest in our best services; It is an argument of his own
making, Deuteronomy. 10. 20, 21. to stir them up to serve him, for he is thy praise,
and he is thy God, that has done for thee these great and terrible things,
etc. He uses the like argument, verse. 12. 13, 14. to bring on the greatest
duty, verse 19. Sixthly, by interest of conquest, he has conquered our enemies,
that had our best and most costly services once, and he has freed us from
them; and therefore it is fit he should have them now. It is the very preface
to the whole Law, put in as an argument to Israel for obedience and best
performances, in regard he had freed them from the bondage and vassalage of
Egypt: they served the Aegytians with cost and pains formerly, but now I have
conquered them; therefore, let me have your cost and pains spent in my
service.

2. A second argument, to prove that we should be at cost and pains in the
service of God, is drawn from the nature of the service The second argument, is
taken from the nature of the service it self.
it self; Gods service carries cost in it: It engages man in many
difficulties and dangers: It will cost a man his relations, his reputation, his
interests, his substance, his life, his pains, and his travel, and his
dearest self. Christ telling the very nature of his service, says that a man
cannot be his Disciple, unless he denies himself etc. Luke 14. 26, 27 and
therefore verse. 28. Our Lord Christ advises men to consider what his service
will cost them, before they enter into it, and Luke 9. 23. He shows that the
cost of his service reaches to self: It will cost us labor and perhaps blood
to, for it is a combat: it will cost us sweat, and most earnest contestation,
for it is a race, you must run, and you must fight for it, 1 Cor. 9. 24, 25.
2 Timothy 4. 7. Luke 13. 24. 2 Pet. 1. 5. Herodolus ^nciently, will tell us, (...).
The greatest services require the greatest pains and cost; besides, I may
add this, that Temple work, and the building the Lords House, carries more
then ordinary cost; those two books of Ezra and Nehemiah will sufficiently
confirm this Alcaeus hin^s an allusion to this purpuse, (...).
: danger and difficulty is in laying every stone of this building. The best
things and the most excellent, do carry with them, ever the greatest cost of
pains, and travel, and substance: The very heathen gods in imitation of Gods
service, did expect the most costly service, and what was Hiero. Megiserus.
Arma Dio^ippi ^orantia sanguine, fanum Grad. v^ exornent; ^an ma gis illa
placent. Thom. Venatotius. Sal Mars orna tur, spoliato ex i^ste, cruentis
Ar^is, and spol^is, caede ferc^s equi. The conclusion of two cop^es of verses
in dona Templis consecrat^. Opson. omn. Hor.
offered to them, must be purchased at a dear rate, Psalm. 106. 37, 38. The
Israelites served Satan at a dearer rate, then they might have served God.

You have had the Doctrine confirmed; let us now see what is required in our
offering, that so it may be accepted; for so it may fall out that a man may give
a great deal, and yet be at no cost; and a man may give a very little, and
yet be at a great deal of cost: as appears by those that cast in of their
abundance into the Treasury, and the Widow that cast in her mite only, Mar. 12.
And a man may take a great deal of pains to no purpose, and a man may be at
less pains sometime to good purpose: Let us therefore see what ingredients
must go along with our services to make them hold weight, and as will make
them such as God will own for costly services; we see how the most costly and
painful services have been What ingredients are required to go along with
out services to make them such as will be accepted. (...). They must be without
mixture,
refused, Isa. 1. 10, 11. 12. and a cup of cold water that carries no great
expense of cost or pains to give it, shall be accepted; nay, the Lord
expressly declares himself against Sacrifices of the greatest expenses, Mich.
6. 7. Let us therefore examine what may be rerequired of those that offer unto
God.

First, It is required, that what we offer to God, should be without mixture:
It is a frequent complaint of the Lord against mixtures, Isa. 1. 22. their wine
mixed with water, and silver become brass, and tynne was mingled with it: and
the like complaint we have, Ezekiel. 22. 18. Hos. 4. 18. By which expressions,
was showed how they were corrupted in their lives, by which corruptions, the
service of God was sowred in regard it mingled it self with it: It was also
forbidden under the Law, that they should plow with an Ox and an Ass
together, or wear linen and woollen garments, Deuteronomy. 22. 10. Levit. 19. 19.
Neither must they sow their field with mingled seed. The Lord by there ordinary
actions did instruct them in his service, how that he would not have a mingled
service but a pure and holy worship, without mingling inventions of men, or our
ways and wills with Gods, though they seem never so fair and plausible.
Swines blood was as good as Sheeps blood, and for color there is no
difference; yet the one was abhorred of God, and the other accepted: Now this
pure service of God is the most costly; as the finest flower, and the purest
oil without mixture of b^^nne, or base ingredients; fine linen without
mixture of woollen, pure gold without mixture of dross, bright refined silver
withut mixture of tynne, and simple wine without mixture of water, and the Ox
without the Ass; that is, the clean without the unclean, by all which the
best services are set forth, being things of the most value and greatest price
and cost; to offer a service to God free from our wills mingled with Gods, our
pollutions mingled with his holy injunctions, to offer him a service free from
our own hypocrisy; our own principles, our own leaven, to offer him a service
entirely his, with a total self-denial, as it is a very difficult thing to
flesh and blood, nay impossible, so is it very costly in regard of the pains
and sweat, etc. we must lay out in it.

Secondly, that which we offer to God must be our own: But how 2 What we give
to God must be our own.
can that be? what ever we have is Gods already. I will not trouble you with
distinctions of proprietas, and jus, and donum; but in brief, that we have may
be said to be ours and Gods too, 1 Chronicles. 29. 3. David says, he had prepared
of his own proper cost, and yet ver. 14. 16. it was said to be Gods 1 What
Spanh^mius says concerning opera bona, may be applied to our purpose, speaking
how they can be said to be nostra. Di^untur nostra, quia a Deo donata nobis,
neque quaerentibus, neque prome, entibas: for which he qu^es Salme^on, Tract.
30. Tom. 5. Nosirum enim quod nobis dotur ab alio, ergo and illud quod nobis
denatur a Deo: Sic Christus noster est. 2. Opera nostra dicuntu contradistincte
alienis. 3. Scri^tura aliquando uscribit gratiam and gloriam nobis, aliquando
Deo: ut Paulus vult nos (...) salutem nostram, nos convertere, etc. Interdum
ascribit Deo utramque, Deum dare velle and perficere, etc. The same may be said
of that we offer to God; sometimes it is called ours, sometimes it is called
Gods. Dub. Evangel. c. An. and quomodo bona opera nostra?
: Therefore when I say ourown, I mean not only in respect of some propriety
and interest by the Civil laws of a State, for all the things, and their very
title by which the wicked do possess them, are impure Tit. 1. 15. but their
own in respect of a higher title, and better interest as holding all in captie
in and by Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. he that builds a Church by that which he
has gotten by usury or bribery or by false dealing which he has exercised
against the Saints, he raises a material temple upon the ruins and bones of
the spiritual temples. He that gives to the poor that which he gets from
others injuriously, he serves God upon other men's charges. He that performs any
spiritual duty there must be the actual exercise of a man's own gifts, or else
it is not accepted. For, suppose one join in prayer with another, and hears a
sermon, if a man's own faith etc. be not engaged in the business, though they
be excellently performed in regard of him with whom he joins; yet this is to
offer a service which is not ones own: no man must spend for God at another
man's cost, or be at another man's finding, every one must serve him in the sweat
of his own brows. He that gives that to God which he takes from others, this
is theevery rather then bounty. We may speak of men's offering to God, as
Testari nequ^uut impubes, religiousus Filius in sacris, morti damnatus, and
obs^s, Crimine damnatus, cum muto surdus, and ille Qui Maj^statem l^sit, sit
caecus and ipse. Vid. Io. ab Imol. in c. qua Ingredientibus de testa. extra. In
every one of those there is some desect, some want; either he is not sui juris,
or he wants his senses, etc. Vid. H. Swinburne B. of Civil Law, 2 part of
brief Treat. of Testaments and Wills. 3 What we offer, must be free and with
a willing mind.
Civilians do concerning those that they say may not bequeath or give away by
testament; if they be not their own men, or at their own disposing, or the
like, they cannot give.

Thirdly, that which we offer to God, we must offer freely without constraint,
of a ready mind and willingly; we must offer our hearts in the sacrifice we
give, and service we perform to God. The Civilians have a distinction betwixt
Munus proprie est, quod necessario obimus lege, more, impen^ve ejus, qui
jubendi habet potestatem. Dona autem proprie sunt, quae nulla necessitate
juris, of sicii, sed sponte praestantur, quae si non praestentur, reprehensio
est: and si praestentur, plerumque law inest. Pancirol. de Donis, and he out of
Marcian. l. Manus, de verb. signif.
donum and munus: that is munus which is performed upon duty, that is donum
which a man may choose whether he will do or offer or no, as being free in the
thing. Whatsoever we offer to God, we are bound to do it, and so in their
sense it cannot be donum but munus: however, if it be with the heart, we may
say in a theological sense, that it is a freewill offering; when we offer our
hearts, wills, and affections, we offer freely; and then we are said to give to
God. That man that does not offer his heart, though perhaps he may do much,
and give much, as they did, Isa. 10. etc. yet their service is not looked on as
a costly service, it wants the heart. But he that offers never so little, yet
if he gives the heart, he offers cost, he gives himself, it is worth a whole
world. He gives freely that gives all, though he gives never so little; and he
gives as much as any can do, for he leaves himself nothing, that gives
himself in the gift. This is the cost God looks at more then all the treasures
in the world. And therefore David in that great bus^esse of preparing for the
Temple, exhorts the Princes of Israel to set their hearts and their souls to
seek the Lord 1 Chronicles. 22. 19. (...) therefore and build, etc. by which he
shows clearly, that unless the heart were in the business, it would be
nothing worth. So when the Tabernacle was to be set up, there was proclamation
made, that whosoever was of a willing mind should bring his offering, etc.
Exodus 25. 2. so also it is observed, Exodus 35. 21. how willingly they came and
offered their hearts: it is noted likewise ver. 22. and 29. how freely they
gave: and Exodus 36. 5, 6. it is observed that they were so hearty in the work,
that there was a^restraint laid upon them that they should give no more. In 1 Chronicles. 29. 2. it is said of David, that he prepared with all his might for the
house of God: and ver. 3. he set his affection to the work, whence followed
his cost, ver. 9. there was great rejoicing, not at the offering, but the
willing offering, and that it was with a perfect heart, ver. 9. repeated again
ver. 14. with thanks for a willing heart, and spoken of with humble
acknowledgment, ver. 17. whence we may learn, that it is the heart that makes
the sacrifice and service a costly one to the purpose, and that which is
accepted of the Lord. He serves God at an an ease and a cheap rate, and indeed
he offers slight stuff to the Lord, which offers a heartlesse, negligent,
careless service.

4. What we offer to God, it must be offered wholly to him: 4. It must be
offered to God alone, without sharing betwixt God and any other.
as it must be integre in respect of the heart, so it must be integrum in
respect of God. We must not join any other with the Lord in our offering; for,
if we come to divide in our services, though they be never so costly, yet God
has no share at all, if he has not all. he that puts his own Interests, or
names his own ends with Gods, offers nothing to God, but all to himself. He
that thus divides, makes sure of all; for God, having right to all (as the true
mother of the child. 1 King. 3. 26.) will not endure a sharing and parting of
his own peculiar. A divided offering betwixt God and our selves, or sins, or
the world, or men, is not a costly one to God, for it is none at all. The
Pharisees did give alms, and fast, and pray etc. to be seen of men, though
they were services pretended to be offered to God, and such as cost them pains
and money; yet they offered that which cost them naught to God. A man builds an
Hospital, or Temple, or the like, at very great expenses; yet if his own name
and honor be inscribed on the work; if a man's own honor be twisted with Gods
glory, this is not to offer cost to God, but to a man's own self. He that gives
to God, with respect to himself, he does not so much give or offer a gift, as
drive a bargain; he offers to himself and not to God.

5 There be some special ingredients which are required in him (...) person
most be (...).
that offers. 1. He that offers any thing to God, must do it in faith, without
which it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6. It is said also, That by
faith Abel offered a more excellent sacrifice then Cain, v. 4. It may be Cain
might offer as good for substance as his brother did, but faith put an
excellency into it: or, if this be not the meaning, then we may understand it
thus, That by faith ^bel took more pains then Cain, and sought out the best he
had to offer to God, whereas Cain took that which came next to hand. Faith
receives all from God, and offers all to God again; it sticks at nothing.
Abraham had rather (I doubt not) have offered his whole estate then his son;
but Faith offers him, Heb. 11. 17. by Faith the godly offered themselves to the
greatest tortures in the world, verse. 35, 36, 37. and he that offers up
himself to God, to be a holy, and a lively, and an acceptable sacrifice, he
offers the greatest and most costly sacrifice that he can do.

2. Love is a second ingredient: this is a costly grace. It was Gods love that
made him so expensive toward us: God so loved the world, John 3 16. that he
gave his only begotten Son, etc. according as a man loves, so he spends, He
that loves his sports, spends his estate on them: we are most costly on that
vanity that we love. Love will be at labor and cost. Jacob served a hard
apprentiship, but Love sweetened it so, that-the time seemed but a few days,
Genesis 29. 18, 19, 20. Love is even prodigal, Ioh. 12. 3. Mary took a pound of
^yntment very costly, and spent it on Christ, though Judas could say, Why is
all this waste? yet she (I doubt not) would be as ready to say, Oh that I had
more! I can never do too much for Christ. Love ^very laborious and sedulous as
well as expensive. Men, we see, take any pains for gain, and that which makes
the wheels run merrily is the oil of love: This the Apostle takes notice of, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3. the work of faith, and labor of love.

3. Zeal is required in our cost; and that costs very little that 3. Zeal.
does not cost us zeal: this will lay out what a man has, and what a man is,
his substance and himself. Psalm. 69. 9. and Ioh. 2. 17. we may see how David
the type, and Christ the Antitype were eaten up by zeal of Gods house; this is
it which heightens the affections, that draws out all the treasures of the
soul, that transports the affections, and sets an edge on them, and is like
Elijahs fiery Chariot, in which the soul rides, and is carried in the service
of God. The zeal of the affections is the expense of them, they are set on
broach by zeal, and they will all run out and be exhausted for God. Zeal is
the flames of the soul, which wastes and consumes all in the soul for God: it
puts a note and stamp of eminency and singularity on every thing. Love, if
zealous, is strong as death; it is a transportment and ravishment, that is the
high note of it. Thy faith, if edged with zeal, rises up with confidence and
full assurance: Thy selfe-denyall, if zealous, is a kind of selfe-cruelty; thou will out with thy lustful eyes, and off with thy offending hands: Thy
patience, if zealous, is hardness and long-suffering, and great suffering, and
extreme suffering, and all suffering. The riches of the heart lie in Zeal, and
are laid out by Zeal. It is the strength of the soul. As it was said of
Sampson, that his strength did lie in 4. Prudence, Nota^ dignunt est, Deum
voluisse omnia, and oblationes sale condi^i, and mandato ter repetito, Lov. 2.
13, ut designaretur symbolice omne sacrificium and sapientiae and prudentiae,
and sale int^gritatu, incorruptionis and innocentiae condo (...). ^rid. Sphano.
Dub. Evang. o^.
his hair, and when that was cut off, he was as an ordinary man: so I may say
of zeal, the strength lies there; take away that, and a man becomes an
ordinary man: There cannot be a costly sacrifice without the fire of Zeal.

4. Prudence is required: It is the sacrifice of a fool without prudence.
Under the Law there was a special command, that every sacrifice should be
seasoned with salt, which is the * symbol of prudence; what we offer to God
must cost us the expense and travel of the brain, as well as the sweat of our
brows and the best of our substance. We must cast about and contrive the best
way we can to lay out our selves in that we offer to God. Christ puts us upon
that course by showing us how that men if they be to undertake any great
business, will first sit down and consider, and wisely forecast with
themselves what way and by what means they may bring about their designs.
Luc. 14. 28. 31. He that is not a good husband for the Lord, and a wise Steward
in improving things for the best advantage for God, he may lose all his cost,
and therefore there must be a cost of wisdom in what we offer to the Lord.

5. It must be offered by the hand of a Mediator whatever we present to God.
He that offers the best sacrifice in the world to God, 5. What is offered must
be given up by (...) hand (...) a Mediator.
but does not offer it by the hands of Christ, offers a sacrifice of no worth:
wherefore in the Law anciently it was commanded, that though the sacrifice were
a male and without blemish, so that there could be ^o exception against the
sacrifice; yet it was to be brought to the Priest and to be offered by his
hands. ^ev. 17. 3, 4. etc. The Priest was to stay it and to offer it; it was
death to do otherwise. In like manner now it is: Suppose a man prays, or
hears, etc. and he does it in the most exact manner; yet if he presents these
services in his own name and not in the name of Christ, if he does not bring
his sacrifice to the Priest the Lord Christ, if he does not bring his sacrifice
to the Priest the Lord Christ, and that he offers it in his name, it will be
loathed. It is not because we perform a duty in the most excellent manner that
it is accepted, but because Christ our High Priest presents both us and our
services to the Lord: So that if a man should offer as many sacrifices as were
at the Dedication of Sa^omons Temple and all without blemish, and that the
persons were clean that offer them, and that all qualifications did meet that
are required; yet all these are accursed, if they be offered in their own
name: the least things that were offered, even an Epha, or a Gomer, or a pair
of Turtle Doves, or a mite, were accepted from the hand of the Priest, when
rivers of Oil should be refused, if presented otherwise. This is set out in
the type, Levit. 5. 8. ad 11. every sacrifice must be sprinkled with Christ's
blood, this is the chief ingredient; his incense must go along with the
sacrifice, and then he will smell a sweet smelling favor, Levit. 10. 11. and
16. 11, 12 13. All our performances must be dipped in his blood, and be
presented by his hands, and then the Lord will accept them; for in him alone he
is well pleased: those services are costly indeed that are besprinkled with
Christ's blood, and offered up by Christ's hands.

Having confirmed the Doctrine, and showed how we must (...) to (...) to the
practice of (...) doctrine confirmed. (...) He that (...) out for God lays up
(...).
say out our cost for God, I proceed in the next place to propose some
Considerations to move you to the practice of the duty.

1. He that lays out his cost for God, especially in Temple-work, lays up a
treasure for himself; he lends to the Lord, and he will be his play master. If
any thing in the world can put God in debt to the creature; this will; he is
pleased to enter bond (as it were) for payment of all arreares in this kind.
So it pleased God to order things, that though there was a whole tribe taken
out of the number of the children of Israel to serve at the Sanctuary; yet when
they came to be reckoned the second year, and the tribe of Levi was left out,
it is found that the number is just the same to a man as it was before that
tribe was taken away, as appears by Exodus 38. 26. and Number. (...). 46. the
sum in both, six hundred thousand, three thousand five hundred and fifty men;
So that there were so many young men of 19. years old as now supplied the want
of the Levites which were set apart for Gods service, that the people of God
might see that they should be no losers, though they gave a whole Tribe to God.
There is a blessing promised to them that set about this Temple-work. Hag. 2.
18. 19. And how were David, and Solomon, and Ezrah, and Nehemiah blessed in the
work? How was Hezekiah blessed, and all the people also, with abundance, after
they brought offerings to the house of the Lord? (...) Chron. 31. 10. 21.

2. The Lord takes special notice of all those that do engage 2. The Lord
takes exact notice of persons and their behavior in this busin^s^^ that he may
accordingly reward them.
themselves in this Temple work; he takes notice of all particulars, that he
may be sure to reward men accordingly. 1. He observes if a man have but a
disposition to a good work; he looks into purposes of a man's soul; they stand
not for ciphers before him, but carry great weight with them, 2 Corinthians. 8. 10.
How well did God take the very purposes of David in this business? 2 Chronicles. 6.
8. 2. He takes notice of the time punctually when men do set about his work,
he puts down the day of the month in the Almanac of Heaven, Hag. 2. 18. and
this is only that he might bless them from that day forward. 3. He takes
notice of what men do give to his work, to ashekel, Number. 7. So also 1 Chronicles.
29. 6, 7, 8. is set down what the Princes offered; likewise Ezra 2. 68, 69.
there is set down to a dram of gold, and the pounds of silver which were
offered: he has his book of accounts, in which he sets down exactly the gifts
to Temple-work, that he might require them to a dram, and to a shekel; nay,
that he might pay use for what they so lend. What an honor is it that the
contribution-money, and the names of those that gave, should stand upon record
to all posterity? 4. He takes special notice of the willingness of men's
hearts in his work, and therefore it is often set down, how willingly every one
offered to the Tabernacle, and to the Temple, Exodus 25. 2. and 35. 21, 22, 29.
1 Chronicles. 29. 9. their willingness twice observed there, and v. 14. taken
notice of again; v. 17. twice more spoke of; the Lord looks on this in regard
he requites men according to this, 2 Cor. 8. 12. If there were any that did
offer unwillingly amongst them before cited, they are not taken notice of, as
being unworthy the very naming. 5. The Lord take notice of men's carriage and
behavior in the business, how they do advance his work or hinder it in any
kind, that so he may deal with them accordingly; he observes what pains, as
well as what cost men are at, Neh. 3. how they did carry on the building of the
Temple: what part such a one built, and what part such a one; what proportion
and measure they had, how far they went: It is noted of some of the builders,
how they repaired, and laid the beams, and set up the doors, and the locks,
and the bars, ver. 3, 6, 13, 14, 15. the Lord takes notice even to a bar, a
beam and and lock; he observes further, how they went through with the work, it
did not stick on their hands; he observes of one, how he and his daughters did
engage themselves, v. 12. the weak endeavors of this sex shall not be omitted,
v. 5. there is a note of ignominy set upon the nobles of the Tekoites, and
others, that either did withdraw from the work, or hinder it from going
forward. Neh. 3. 5. it is said the Tekoites repaired, but the Nobles would not
put their necks to the work, the Nobles stigmatized; then, chap. 4. 1, 2, 3, 8,
11. you have the reproaches and affronts set down which the enemies did offer
to them that were in the work: Upon that you have set down the valor, courage,
and resolution of those that did fall to the work maugre all oppositions
whatsoever, v. 16, 17, etc. then chapter 6. you have a treaty propounded, but not
yielded to, v. 10. etc. they would have drawn him perhaps to propositions; but
Nehemiah, as he will not send to the adversaries, so neither will have to do
with them when they send to him: Then you have set down what intercourse of
Letters there were betwixt the Nobles of Judah and Tobiah, and how there was an
oath passed from them to him, in regard he was a great man, v. 17, 18. It is
set down also how these treachetous Nobles did extol Tobiah to Nehemiah, and
told Tobiah what ever he said of him; upon which Tohiah sent him Letters to
make him afraid. The Nobles of the Tekoites, and the Nobles of Judah have a
very ill name in this whole work. Hence we may observe, that God takes special
notice of underminers and opposers of the work, and sets a black coal upon
them, that in due time he may remember them according to their deeds.
Wherefore, since God does observe every man's carriage so exactly as he does in
that work, which does more immediately concern his own glory, every one had need
be the more careful to approve themselves faithful and diligent in that work,
and to offer themselves most willingly in that service.

Thirdly, A third argument, to offer to God all our labors, and 3. An argument
from the builders of Babel.
to be at cost in his service, may be drawn from those that are at so much
pains and cost in the building of Babel, and in opposing the building of the
Lords house; they move every stone, they leave nothing unattempted, whereby
they may retard, or put back, or obstruct any way that building. It costs them
not only a great deal of pains and vexation of spirit, and vast expenses, but
the loss of their souls to boot. Let us but look on the Antichristian party
in this Kingdom, and see how industrious they are, how vigilant, how wise in
their generation to make use of all advantages to promote their designs; they
do not offer to the Devil that which costs them naught: he is a hard Master,
and his service is a very troublesome, dangerous, desperate service, and yet
how zealous are they in it? How many life's have been sacrificed in it? Let it
never be said, that Satan should have more cost bestowed on him, more pains,
and care, and time laid out in his drudgery, then the noble, and honorable,
and glorious work of God, now in your hands, should have bestowed on it.

Fourthly, The excellency of the service, together with the difficulty, should
be a great incentive to the work, to draw out your 4. From the excellency of
the work: this respects noble spirits in a special manner.
cost, and lay out your pains in it. This to a noble spirit is one of the
greatest perswasives; which to a low, degenerous, poor spirit, is a
discouragement. If it be matter that carries weight and importance in it, and
that it is -- dignus vindice nodus, who so fit to undertake it as one of David's
Worthies? Now there is something in noble persons, truly noble, which as it is
an incentive, so likewise it is an engagement on their spirits, that they of
all men should undertake the most difficult service, and the most excellent,
which is the building the Lords House. It is said concerning water that comes
from Springs and Fountains, that it will ascend and rise in a Conduit or
Cisteme so high as the head of the Spring lies, but no higher: so it is with
the spirits of men, those that are of a low base descent will not rise up to
any high employments; but those that are of a high descent rise up without
forcing or constraint to the highest enterprises: Hence it was, that the
ancient H^roes did desire to be accounted of the offspring of the gods, and
men did desire to persuade great persons that they were so descended, that so
their spirits might be raised up to their springhead: In Lucian we have him
thus speaking, (...), etc. And (...) says thus, (...) est (...), ut se and
(...) fortes, eitam^ falsam sit, ex (...) genito^^ credant, (...) to moilo an
mus (...) a us, ^lut elivina (...) fiducians gerens, res magnas aggred^eda:
prasumat (...) us, agat (...)tius, and (...) earitate saelicius.
Alexander thought it very conducible to him that he was esteemed the Son of
Jupiter, for he was feared by reason of this opinion men had of him, by the
Heathens. We shall find the Ancients very ambitious in this kind; so the
Romans said they were descended of Mars and Venus; Hercules and Persens are
reported to spring from Jupiter; Seleucus of Apollo; Augustus and Scipio of a
Dragon: and the maine reason was, that they might have a greater engagement on
their spirits to do nobly: Whence also it was, that men of low parts, and such
as would not or could not undertake great matters, were called terrae filii. So
that it is clear, that noble spirits have great engagements on them for the
undertaking of great designs: It lies more upon them then upon other men, they
seem to degenerate, when they begin to fear or draw back.

A truly generous and noble spirit is so far from being discouraged by
difficulties, that, like the Palm, the more weight it has laid upon it, it
gathers strength the more to encounter the Assaylant: Hence it is, that those
that stood before the Throne had palms in their hands, the ensign of victory.
You have a remarkable instance of such a spirit as we speak of in Caleb, Numb.
13. when the Spies had seen the Anakims and Giants, the walled Cities, and
those multitudes of enemies, verse. 28. 29. their hearts began to faint; but
Calebs spirit did rise at them, and he said, Let us go up at once, and
possess it, for we able, ver. 30. but the others hearts failed them. ver. 31.
So again, when these white-liver'd Spies did discourage others by their fear,
Caleb shows his courage, chap. 14. 9. and says, They are bread for us: It is
said of him, he was a man of another spirit, ver. 24. It was valiantly resolved
by Agis Apud Mantineam, qu^us^am (...), ne (...) adversar^s, quod (...) plures
(...) Apotheg
, when he was dissuaded from going against his enemies, because they were more
in number, he said, He that will conquer many must encounter many.

That this may further appear to your Lordships, give me leave to confirm this
fourth inducement to the great work of God by some special argument respecting
the condition of your persons:

First, it has pleased God to place you as stars of a greater magnitude in a
superior Orb; now it is certain, that by your light Arguments respecting the
c^ndition of Nobles and your Lordships in a special manner.
and influences, which you may diffuse farther then others, you may do much
more then others can do in any great business: for to whom the Lord has given
such eminent talents, who is so fit to conquer the greatest difficulties as
they are? these are the Chariots and horsemen of a State. if these do not
undertake great things, who should? God looks for more to whom he has given
more: If those that are the vitalls of a body politic do not undertake the
weightiest businesses; how can it be expected, that those that live in a manner
upon their influences should: When the Lord has any dangerous service and
difficult, who is so fit to say, here am I, send me as a Jeremy, Jer. 6. 8.
does not the cause of Christ say now, who is on my side, who? Is it not now
said, who will defend me now, I am bleeding and sinking? Who so fit as Nobles,
and honorable persons, they are fittest to engage for a noble and honorable
Cause? who so fit to deal with difficulties like Goliahs and Anakims, as our
Sampsons, Joshuahs, David's, Calebs, Nehemiahs, Zerubbabels, men of excellent
and noble spirits. Every qualification is a particular engagement, and strongly
binds you to the greatest services; the greater Wheels and superior Orbs must
move others. Wherefore, as the Elders speaking to Boaz, prayed that his wife
might be like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel;
and to him they said, do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem,
Ruth 4. 11. The same I wish of your Lordships, that you may build the House of
God and do famously in England, and as those Nobles did we read of Number. 21. 18.
make use of their staves, which some think were Ensigns of honor, to dig a
well for the public good; so I wish that you would make that use of your
honors for public service, which as they are glistering, to make you more
conspicuous then others, so are they binding to make you more serviceable.

Secondly, As noble persons have greater advantages in regard of
qualifications, so they have greater advantages then others in respect of the
opportunities presented to them, to carry on the most difficult services:
causes and persons become humble suitors to men in great place, and expect
shelter and protection from their wings, opportunities are candidates, and
become petitioners to them.

Who has so great an advantage to discover dangers at a further distance, as
those that like Saul are taller by the head and shoulders then other men? Or
those that are placed in the watchtowers of a State: Who has opportunity to
do more, then those that when they move, do move whole legions at once? you
are as the Magazines and Treasures of the State you have opportunity to furnish
out thousands, with ammunition and artillery for service: by how much the more
that others do depend upon superiors, by so much the more opportunity they
have of doing good: you stand upon the vantage ground in regard of others, and
by that means you may the more promote and carry on the cause of God.

Thirdly, The eyes of God and man are upon you, and upon eminent persons more
then on others: It is expected that you should be the Primipili, the
Antesignani, the first to set upon difficulties: men look at you that they may
write after your copies; your actions being written in capital letters; men
usually make such as you are, their level, and Seneca says, concerning
private men, that their virtues have tha^ unhappiness that priusquam apparent
diu luctantur, yet they are recompensed in this quod and vitia tendras habent,
but he says moreover, nullius magis cavend^m (...) qualem fanom (...) quam
qui qualemcunque ha^urint magnam Val^turi (...), de Clem.
aim, and square, and rule. A godly noble man is, norma publica, he is as a
public standard, men walk by his rule, and measure themselves by his line: If
a public person fails, he murders the expectations and hopes of thousands at
once Non ad rationem s^d ad similitudmem (...), Sen.
; just as you do, others will do the like, you see when Abimelech cut down a
bough and laid it on his shoulder, all the people did the like, Iud. 9. 48, 49.
God Almighty expects more from you, and from such as are of eminent parts; for
as he has drawn some fairer characters and prints of his own image with his
finger in their souls; so he expects they should hold them forth that others
might copy out their excellencies; besides, God has been at greater cost and
charges with you, he has maintained you at a higher rate, he has laid out
much of the treasures of his goodness, and has spent upon you a great deal
of the riches of his bounty on you; and therefore he does expect, and will
require a greater account from you, then from men of an inferior rank; to whom
much is given, much will be required, Luke 12. 48.

Fourthly, Then a fourth argument, may be taken from the success that you are
like to find in carrying on this work. Do but see what an encouragement David
had, so far as he went in this work, how did the Lord prosper him, and what
exceeding great provision did he lay in for the work, 1 Chronicles. 22. 2, 3. etc.
then see how the Lord encouraged Solomon, verse. 13. and how did the work go on
and prosper in his hands. Again, consider how God did engage himself to those
that did rebuild the Temple, Is. 44. 28. and 45. 1. 2, 3, 13, 14. Hag. 2. 4, 5,
8. The Lord that has the disposing of power and riches, and all things in his
hands, promises that they shall be subservient to that great work, to which
also, we add Zech. 4. 5, 6. where the Lord engages himself in a special
manner, to promote and carry on that work, in a wonderful and extraordinary
way: Whence I argue, that if the Lord was so gracious as to promise, and to
perform his word to them that were engaged in his work anciently, them surely,
he will do it now; if to them that were employed in building the material
Temple, much more to them that shall lay out themselves in building the
mystical House of God, by how much the more this does excel the Type? There
might be set down many other encouragements, but I forbear in regard I have
done it in another discourse before the other honorable House.

I come now to make foam use of this, and to apply to our selves. Use, first of
reproof to diverse sorts of people.
There be diverse sorts of people to be reproved. First, those that are very
surly and churlish toward Christ and his work: if you come to them, and desire
their assistance and furtherance in the cause of Christ; they, like as Nabal
did to David, give a very dogged answer, 1 Samuel 25. David sent to him in his
distress for some relief, and he answered David's servants, and said, Who is
David? and who is the son of Iesse? and ver. 11. Shall I take my bread, and my
water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto whom I
know not whence they be? Just such an answer you have from many, they will say,
they must maintain their families, they have wifes and children, and they
cannot spare what they have provided for them to give to they know not whom:
they may well say, for they know not whom, for Christ is unknown to them: They
are of Judas his mind, who when he saw an alabaster box of precious ointment
poured on Christ's head, he said, To what purpose is this waste? Mat. 26. 7, 8.
And why was it not sold, and given to the poor? but the Text takes notice,
that he spoke this, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a
thief, Ioh. 12. 5, 6. so we have many that say, to what purpose is all this
waste? counting all lost that is laid out for Christ and his cause: their
friends or estates that are lent to Christ, they are all lost. Is it possible
to be a loser in that service, where the loss, if it may be so called, or
rather the laying out, is a laying up, and the expense is the greatest gain.
That man that breaks by his expenses in this service drives the most profitable
trade, he breaks into treasures and abundance: his few grains and drams and
mites, are exchanged into pounds and talents. Does Christ speak paradoxes or
falsehoods, when he speaks of gaining by losses? Mark 8. 35. Whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake, shall save it. Does not he drive a good trade, and
is it not a very fair exchange that gets an hundred fold? and does not he
speak true, that tells us this for a truth. Matthew. 19. 29. whatever a man
loses, he shall have an hundred fold here in this life, besides everlasting
life hereafter. Thus by a sacred usury men lay forth their poverty for
treasures, their nothing for all things. They are very ignorant that talk of
losses in this service; they may be at cost, they cannot be at a loss.

Secondly, there be a second sort of people to be reproved, who count that
their chiefest gain which is filched from God and his people and cause: among
these I reckon those that detain unjustly the Ministers dues I am forty that
we are fallen into those times, in which men, under a pretense of
Antichristianism, do detain Church dues, though these were before ever the
head or horns of the beast did appear so as to be taken notice of.

Origin speaks of Church rents, Hom. 31. in Matthew. and Eus^bius of a house
belonging to the Church, which he complains was taken away by Paulus
Sa^osatenus, live. 7. c. 24, then you have the edicts of Constantine and
Licinius Imp. to this purpose, E^sob. l. 10. c. 5. It was the care and piety in
ancient times to give and so firmly to entail an allowance liberal to the
ministry, as that the injury of the times should no^ change and alter the
property so far as was possible, Synod. Romans sub Symmac^o Anno 503. tota
contra invasores Eccles. Council. Meldens. c. 5. Council. Gangrens. c. 8.
Aurelean. Conc. 4. An. 543. c. 19. the words of the Synod 3. sub Symmcaho in
exemplari constituti de Ecclesiae conservandis, are very full to this purpose.
Ne unquam praedium etc. quocunq, titulo atq, commento alienentur. Si quis vero
aliquid eorum alienare voluerit inef sicax atq, irritum judicetur, sitque
^acienti, vel consentienti, acci^ientiq^, anathema. If these were times of
ignorance, God grant they do not condemn our seeing times, Vid, Sir Hen.
Spelman d^ ^^temerandis Ecclestis.


. These be far from David's temper, who would have thought himself the poorer
rather, if he had not laid out his riches on the work of God. Many there be,
that make it their business to keep back whatever they can from Christ; but
let them be afraid of this by the example of Ananias and Sapphira, who were
both smitten with sudden death for their keeping back and lying together, Acts
5. 2. 5. 10. How many are there that have builded themselves upon the ruins of
the Church, and raised up their families upon that cost that others have
bestowed on the Ministry and Saints. But all such gains will prove like the
gold of Toulouse, or the equus Sejanus, that never thrived in any hand; or like
the coal stolen from the Altar by the Eagle, which when it was brought to her
nest, set it on fire; There goes a privy curse, and there is a secret hidden
worm at the root, that will eat out all such men's increase. It is a design
that carries much of hell in it, to make a poor, and so by that means you
shall be sure to have a base, illiterate flattering Clergy. We read in story,
of two great persecutions V^d. (...) Eccles. l. 7. c. 3. Niceph. l. 7. c. 3.
T^codor. l. 3. c. (...) Niceph. l. 10. c. 5.
of the Church; the one under Dioclesian, the other under Julian. The former
intended to root out all Professors, and occidit omnes Presbyteros, he killed
the Preachers; but for all this, Religion (as if it had been manured only)
sprang up the more and flourished. But the other, occidit Presbyterium,
murdered the Presbytery; for he took away all the means that was allotted to
maintain the Preachers of the Gospel; and this was the most desperate
persecution of the Church.

Thirdly, they are to be reproved, who are contented to be at some cost for
God, but not at much: some that have been at cost in some kind, in some part
of their substance; but the cost of their hearts, the travel of their brains,
the desires of their souls are bestowed on the building of Babel: they lend a
hand unwillingly to the one, but a heart most willingly to the other: they lend
a shekel to the one, and give a talent to the other; they thus make friends of
unrighteous Mammon, but when they fail, they shall never be received into
everlasting habitations: they give full weight, heapt up and pressed down to the
one, but a gomer or an Ephah shall serve the turn for the other. Some there be
that offer their service, but it is as those did Ezra 4. 1, 2. and they will
help to build the Lords house, but it is only that they might hinder the work,
and destroy the building. I could wish that as those were refused by Zerubbabel
and Ieshuah, and the chief of the Fathers, who told them, they had nothing to
do with them to build an house unto their God, but they themselves would build
an house unto the Lord God of Israel, verse. 3. that such as these (and we have
abundance of them) had never been entertained in the Lords work and service.

Fourthly, there be some that are at cost, but it is rather for the building
themselves a name, then the Lord a house. They are at cost, but it is as men
that lay out their money for a purchase; they drive a bargain for themselves:
they seem to be very zealous, and they will tell you so, as Iehu did, and say,
Come see my zeal for the Lord: If you did not see it, the Lord should have no
more from them, then he should have had from the Pharisees, if a trumpet had
not been sounded before them, that they might have glory of men, Mat. 6. 2.
they have so interwoven their own interests with Gods Cause, that as they have
handled the matter, it looks like a linsey woolsey stuff, and they have
twisted them so fast and so close together, that now it will be a very hard
matter to sever between them.

5. There be that offer to God their own, but not that which God will own, even
bastards of their own begetting, and God must father them, that which bears
their own image and superscription, and not Christ's; they stamp institutions of
their own and baptize them in the name of Christ; they bring models span out of
their own brain for the most part, like a Spiders cobweb woven out of its own
bowels, and these (as Spiders ^oe) they will hang upon the Lords house, as the
richest ornament they can bestow. Look on the whole frame and model of the
Papacy, and see if from the Pope with his long, etc. of Church Officers, down
to (...) Apparitor, it be not a humane creation, there be some of whom (...)
say no more, but only I think are too bold in this, that they entitle Christ
to coin It was truly said by the great Philosopher, Multafa samult^s veris
probabiltora a^parent But as the great Or ^our says, so say I in this case, Vt
pule^er rimum judicem esse ver. (...) videre. sic proveris salsa probare
turpissimum est.
fetched out of their own mint, but Christ will never own creations and
productions of men's brains, nor will he accept of any coin that is offered to
him in the building of his house, but that which bears his own image: you know
that counterfeit coin though it beareas a similitude with the true, yet it
carries treason in the very forehead of it: You have several sects walking in
several ways, speaking several languages, all helping to build, they say, the
Lords House; but if a man may judge by the confusion of tongues, it is a Babel;
however those frames of men's setting up, and those models of their creating,
may seem to be very like the Lords, yet men should not be so bold as to make any
like his, as it was said concerning the anointing oil, Exodus 30. 31, 32. and
when they have made it like his, put it off in Apud me constat multos plurimum
potic^sse ad detegendam veritatem, nisi se illam penitus arripuisse
credidissent. Pet. Gassendus in praes. in 1 lib. exercit paradox. adversus
Aristoleos. b Petr. Gassendus Exercit. 4. contr. Arist, asserit maximam esse
incertitudmem doctrinae Exerc. 5. asserit and probat quod in numera deficiant.
6. quod in numera superfluant. 7. quod in numera sallant. 8. quod in numera a
contradicant apud Aristotelem.
his name; this is to offer a great indignity to Christ. a I think that many
had come nearer the truth in matters of the Church, if they had not thought so
stiffely, and peremptorily affirmed, that they had found it; every one insists
upon his own (...), and thinks every one out of the right way that is not in
his: I may say of these as a very b learned Author does concerning Aristotle,
that many things are uncertain, many defective, many superfluous, and many
false, and many contradictions, and therefore I conclude them not fit to be
offered to the Lord. You have in Lucian and Boethius, and others, Sophia brought
in miserably co^plaining of the unworthy usage of the pseudo-Philosophers, who
did usually put their falsities under her name, and canonize their errors
under the name of truth: Sure I am, Christ has as great reason to complain of
some, who when their errors are pursued, fly to him as to a City of refuge,
and shroud falsehood under the wing of truth. It is come to that pass Iactabant
quidam solaecismos esse lauds and gemmas Philosophorum; if you find fault
with their Haeccietates, and aliquitates, and their absurd incongruities, they
answer you with laughter thus, Non curamus de verbibus, sed de sensis. vide
copiose de his Hermol. Barb. Scalig. Exercit. Patricum Aristotelomast. tet.
Gassendum, etc.
now as it was in Philosophy, that solecismes and barbarismes in the business
of Christ's Church, are accounted exquisite and absolute patterns to be
commended unto others: I forbear to quote some bloody tenets and licentious
doctrines, all offered to Christ as his own institutions; what they speak and
write, is as if it were e tripode, you must not question it, and as if there
were an infallible (...) upon what they deliver for truth, it has a pasport
among many, and travels up and down without question or control: Such also is
the frenzy of many, that as one speaks concerning the It was the saying of a
profess^ur of Philosophy, mallet se errare cum Aristotele, quam been sentire
cum aliis.
great Philosopher, they had rather err with their masters and Lords of their
faith, then speak truth with others.

2. I come now to a use of Examination and enquiry into three The second use
is, of Examina^ion and enquiry after 3. particulars.
things: 1. What cost we have been at for sin: 2. What cost we have been at
for God and his service in general. And 3. what cost we have been at with the
Cause of Christ now at this time amongst us.

1. Let us call our selves to some account concerning our accounts 1. The first
enquiry is to know what we have spent upon our sins, what cost we have been
at against God.
and expenses in and upon sinful courses, that so we may be humbled before the
Lord this day. I fear that Tekel may be written upon what we have done for
God, which was one of the words of the handwriting that appeared on the wall,
Dan. 5. 27. I fear that we being weighed shall be found too light; but our
service for sin has been in a full measure, pressed down, and heaped up, and
running over. Let us consider of all the years that we have lived, what have
we laid out for God, what expense of time have we been at for him: Have we
given him the tyth: I would we had. If our time were weighed in the balances,
we shall find that we have been at cost but with minutes for God, and hours
for sin, at hours for God, and days for sin; at days for God, and weeks and
months for sin; at weeks and months for God and whole years for sin; at
some spare time for God, horae subsicivae must serve him, and at apprentiships
with sin.

2. Look at your cost of strength and pains, on whom have we bestowed the
first fruits of our strength, the cream and flower of our selves and
faculties, when we did run fresh and quick like vessels newly set on broach,
who did we draw forth our selves to then? the diseases and aches in your limbs
and bones will tell you that you do possess the sins of your youth. Job 13.
26. so that we had need make that prayer with David, Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not
the sins of my youth; we may put in, nor of our riper age, in regard the
strength, and vigor, and activity both of the one and the other have been
given to sin.

3. Look into your bills of accounts, and into your idle expenses, and see who
has had most of your estate, of that kind of cost: Aurca hamo piscantur, qui
magno sum, tu aut periculo, de rebus patvis di^icent.
Consider and be ashamed, have you not been at a great deal of charges about
things of no value, and even fish with a golden hook (as August. C. said) for
things of no price. Consider, have none of you maintained more bruites merely
for pleasure, than you have members of Jesus Christ. I fear some of your
sins have been very costly. In the great book of accounts which the just
Judge keeps by him, you may perhaps find pride bringing in her bill with a
prodigious Item of so many hundreds or thousands it may be upon her score: Then
you may find luxury, and riot, and excess come in with items of so many
Lordships exhausted for us; so many rents of those and those farms and
freeholds spent on us. Then come in Hawks and Dogs, and horses, with a black
crew more embruitished then the beasts they look to, these bring in so many
tenants rack-rents, and so many tenants ruins for us. Then covetousness and
oppression, etc. they bring in their bills and items written in blood. Item, so
many skins stayed off the backs of the poor, to cloth their Landlords. Item,
so much flesh off their backs to feed them. Item, so much blood drawn from
them, to furnish their great Lords with drink: Such a complaint in the like
language was made against the heads of Jacob and the Princes of Israel, Micah
3. 2, 3. Then you have plays, and gaming and heathenish sports come in with
vast Items, and great sums squandred away upon them; besides the cursed lies
and oaths which come in as supernumerary to the account. I must not forget one
that wipes her mouth, and says I have done no ill. Prove. 30. 20. she brings in
as costly Items as any: She has an Item for so much in sattins and tissues
taken up at such a time for suites of apparel. Item, so much in an
entertainment at a banquet, so much in Pearls and Diamonds, and Jewels to
adorn me Do but see what a catalogue of vanities these kind of women carry
with them, and those very costly ones to, Isa. 3. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
. The Physicians and Apothecaries they bring in their bills, with an Item of so
much for curing such a disease, procured by a surfeit of drinking, and
intemperate diet and by other ways which I leave to those that heal them to
tell of them. Then comes in the flattering trencher Chaplain, that flatters his
Lord and Master in all these sinful expenses, and dares not open his mouth
against them, he brings in a bill much like the rate of Micahs Levite, Iud. 17.
10. ten shekels of silver a year, a suit of apparel, and victuals: But you
will say, this is to be reckoned amongst expenses for God; no, by no means,
for this is not so much as the hire of a whore, which was not to be given to
God, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. It is a base contemptible sum that the Levite brings in,
but it is too much for him that could see his Lord spend so much sinfully, and
not tell him of his abominations.

Ah pudet haec dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli. I fear the Lord is now
reckoning with our Kingdom, for these and the like expenses and will proceed
to take a very strict account for the hundreds, the thousands, and ten
thousands, and millions that have been spent, and spilt, and cast away upon our
sins. Our sins have been costly, and now they be bloody sins. We have not
served sin with that which costs us naught. The very superfluity of England,
and the expense of the second and third courses would have maintained another
Kingdom: Nay, perhaps they might have gone near to have maintained the whole
family of Christ (I speak of the true members) here below; for nature is
contented with little, and grace with less.

I fear we have been at more cost to purchase vengeance and calamity, hell and
confusion, then we might have been at for peace and the Gospel, heaven and
happiness. Demosthones, though nor for conscience, yet for cost sake would not
lie with that famous Strumpet of Corinth, he said he would not purchase
repentance at so dear a rate I could have wished we had not been at so much
cost to purchase so much misery.

Secondly, Let us take a view of our cost, for God and Christ: We would all of
us be counted the servants of God, and heaven is in our desires, if it be not
in our earnest endeavors; all of us would have the crown of righteousness,
but all will nor go to the price of it; they are loath to fight for it, and to
finish their course, and to keep the faith which must go before the crown, 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8. We would all have the penny, but we care not for working in the
Vineyard, and bearing the burden and heat of the day: We would all have the
reward at the end, but we care not for running the race; we would all enter
into glory, but we do not like this striving to enter: men therefore, beat
their bargain as low as they can, and feign they would bring down the price of
heaven, they are not good customers, they undervalue the commondity, they seem
to bid fair many of them, and Agrippa-like are almost persuaded; but since
they will not come off roundly with the Merchant, and sell all that they have
for Christ, but come near the price, and not come up to it, and almost reach
it, but not altogether, they shall altogether go without it: Such as these,
be like those fordid Jews, that valued Christ at the rate of a slave, as it
is said, Zech. 11. 13. a goodly price, I was prized at of them, etc. Men will
be contented to be at cost for any thing for vanity, that they may have it in
possession, rather then for glory, which they look on in reversion, but are
much mistaken in the thing.

Now when all costs and charges are to be cast up, and all accounts to be
brought in at the last day, then will Christ bring in his arreares, and he will
then tell how we would not be at cost for him; they will have a sad reckoning,
to whom Christ will say at the last day, as he is brought in speaking, Mat. 25.
42. 43. You indeed professed to love me, but when I was an hungered, ye gave me
no meat, you would not be at the cost of a piece of bread with me; when I was
thirsty, you gave me no drink, you would not be at the cost of a draught of
drink with me; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in, you could not afford
me a little room, or lodging in your house; I was naked, and ye clothed me
not, you would not be at so much cost as bestow cast clothes upon me: sick, and
in prison, and ye visited me not? When by reason of ill diet, and hard and
cruel usage inprison, I was ready to be starved, you would not so much as
provide some comfortable thing for me, that might have refresht me: How shall I
say that you loved me, when you suffered me to beg and starve, and go naked,
when a little cost, only your superfluities would have supported and maintained
me in good fashion. Then for the profession of the Gospel, he will bring his
accounts in for that, he will then show how that men like the foolish Virgins
did procure lamps, and would be at the pains to trim them perhaps, and
likewise, to go forth to meet the Bridegroom, but they would never be at cost
for Oil, Matthew. 25. 12. Then for the confessing of Christ, he he will bring
in his charge upon that, and show how men indeed, did take upon them to
confess him in show, but they never would be at the cost and pains to do it
in truth. For they could hear his name blasphemed, and torn in pieces by dogs,
and never stand up in the vindication of his honor; they could see his
ordinances trampled on, and not so much as afford a word or deed to advance
them: So that Christ will say, thy confession of me was a mere denial of me,
then shall they find the truth of that, Mat. 10. 33. Whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I deny before my Father that is in heaven.

Then you shall have all holy duties and graces, bring in their accounts, and
tell how they were performed and embraced: prayer will say, these Christians
did say a prayer, but never pray a prayer, they never sighed or gronaed in
prayer, Romans 8. 26. The word of God will speak and say, that indeed they did
hear it sometime, but heeded it not, like those in Ezech. 33. 32. they heard,
but did not practice; they read sometime, but remembered not: Sabbaths will say,
they never were entertained with delight, they never were sanctified with
spiritual rejoicing, they never observed them with any severity, but spoke
their own words, thought their own thoughts, did their own works expressly
contrary to that, Is. 58. 13. Then will Fasts come in and say, that they never
afflicted their souls nor shed a tear in a whole day; nay, they have found
their own pleasure upon a fasting day, which the Lord complains of Isa. 58. 3.
All duties and graces will come in and say, that they never had the heartcost,
the soul was never engaged for them; so that all these that are in such a
condition, will be looked upon as those that offered that to God which cost
them naught, even as those, Mat. 1. 8. that thought any thing good enough for
God, even the halt, and the blind, and the sick. If heaven might be had with
ease and idleness, sleep and security, carelessenesse and negligence, and with
Balaams wish, these will offer as fair as any, and there will be customers
enough; indeed who would be out of it, of the vilest of men, and what Saint
would ever come there. Let us not flatter and deceive our selves; what ever we
give to God must be superlative and excellent; the choysest ingredients are to
be put into every service; he will have our righteousness an exceeding
righteousness, Matt. 5. 20. Except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of heaven. What a shame will it be that pride and malice, and
luxury, etc. shall be able to bring in upon their accounts such vast sums;
and duties and graces, they bring in ciphers; or which is worse, instead of
accounts they will bring in complaints, and tell how they were vilified, and
scorned, and trampled under feet: prayer and hearing the word, and reading, and
holy meditation, etc. will tell how they were not heeded, and how indeed
Gallio-like they cared not for any of these things: they will tell how
sometimes they were put off, as Felix did Paul, to a more convenient season:
sometimes, they were almost persuaded like Agrippa; sometimes, as Herod and his
men of war entertained Christ, Luke 23. 11. they were set at naught, and
mocked: sometime the dancing of an Herodias, sometime the kiss of a Dalilah,
sometimes mammon, and the cares of the world, sometimes gamesters, sometimes
good fellows, sometime one, sometimes another interposed, that these duties
and the rest could find no room, no time could be spared for them; this will
be but a sad reckning: Think not that heaven will stoop to such base offers as
lazy, and negligent men do make, for we see that we must eat our daily bread
in the sweat of our brows; much more the bread of life: We must sweat for
Christ, we must bleed, nay, we must die for him.

Thirdly, consider the Cause of God amongst us, the building of the Lords
house, the setting up of his ordinances, worship service, and discipline
amongst us; what has this business cost us? You will tell me, it has cost
millions already; and yet I fear it has cost but little Let us cast up the
expenses: at first it cost you your plate, and such like superfluities, such
things as might be well spared: but may it not be said of this offering, as
Christ said of theirs whom he saw cast something into the Treasury, that you
gave of your abundance: he looked on all that they cast in as a thing of no
value, not so much as a mite. But you will say, that there has been a great
deal offered since: I could wish we could say, it has been offered; has it
not been fetched and extorted from many as so many drops of blood? I am sorry
that such is the hardness of men's hearts, that our Parliament must be feign to
make Ordinances to take that from men, which they will not offer, and that Gods
Cause must be beholding to an Excise. I am sorry that we should be so little
affected with the Cause amongst us, that of necessity, by reason of the sordid
condition of men, Ordinances for loan, and that upon Interest, must be made to
maintain and support it; whereas every one should rate himself, and strive to
go before another in this business; and put an excise upon himself, not of a
part but of all, not of his estate but his life in this business. Is this to
offer that to God, which costs me something; or rather is it not a kind of
exposing to sale, a bargaining, at least with hopes of gain. What a strange
thing is it, that the public faith of the Kingdom should go further then the
public faith of heaven? and that the Parliaments word should be taken before
Gods word? and that their security should be thought better then the security
of the blessed Trinity? God has said enough to us, if we would believe him,
that we shall be no losers by offering, by giving to his building, to his
cause. Besides, if we consider the grudging, murmuring, repining, the
reluctance that goes along with it, which I cannot say, is given by men, but
rather forced from them, certainly we must conclude, that David's mind was
wanting in this business very much. The Scripture observes the wonderful
willingness and readiness of those that did help forward the work of the
Sanctuary; there needed no rateing of them according to their estates, but
every man offered so freely, that there was a restraint laid upon them, that
they should bring in no more. It seems also that at the building of the Temple,
there was some unkind and unbrotherly carriage of the chief among the Jews
toward their brethren, which did cause some grief and trouble among them,
Neh. 5. there were great complaints of exactions, ver. 1, 2, 3. etc. which made
some interruptions among them; but observe how Nehemiah behaved him else when
he knew of it, verse. 6, 7. he presently rectified the thing; whence I infer,
that it is the desire of the Lord, that his work should be carried on with all
cheerfulness and willingness of mind, that whatever service was to be
offered to him, should be a free will offering. Shall it ever be said, that
Christ has a Cause in England to maintain, that cries for help, and offerings,
for hearts and hands for substance, and life's, and could not have them, at
least not willingly? Shall it ever be said, that any of you have Thom. Lansius
orat. cont. Hispaniam taurum est deus Christianorum.
a penny left that might advance this building, and you would not offer it.
Then will I say, as the poor Indians (seeing the unsatiable desire of the
Spaniards after gold) said, gold was the God of the Christians; money is their
god that will not give God their money. Shall it be said, that any of us have
a hand, or a foot, or a limb, or a life to lose in this Cause, and we would
not spare them? We would not be at so much cost in the business, the time is
now come, perhaps, that you may be put to it, as the young man in the Gospel
was, to sell all, not to purchase, but to offer to Christ: It may be the time
is come in, which Christ will call for honors and dignities; and will your
Lordships carry them, and lay them at his feet; and say, these I lay down at
thy footstool, that thou may by them be advanced into thy Throne? Can you
say, not my honors, Lord, but my life; honor me so far, as that I may loose
that for thy sake, that have honored me so far as to loose thine for me: I am
sorry I have but one to loose for thee, but if I had as many as there be sands
on the sea, thou should have them all. It may be the time is come, that he
will call for all your rents, revenewes, possessions; and can you say, I am
sorry there is no more for my dear Savior?

Cursed be that honor and dignity, and let ignomy and reproach for ever light
upon it, that shall refuse to be offered to the Lord: Cursed be that estate,
and let beggary and baseness, shame and contempt, be in the habitations of
those that will not part their substance for Christ: Cursed be those limbs, and
let them rot: And cursed be those life's, and let them perish that deny to
offer themselves to Christ. He that thus loves not the Lord Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maranatha, 1 Cor. 16. 22. And he loves him not, Christ himself being
interpreter, that will not lay down his life for him. I hope none that hears
me are thus cursed, but those that will not now offer their help to the Lord
against the mighty, they are like Meroz, cursed, and cursed bitterly to.

However we thus speak to you in the name of God, yet remember that God does
not stand in need of any thing you have, but he is pleased to put you upon the
trial; he will see what you will do for him: He needs not ask your leave,
he may take what he pleases from you, as having a greater interest and
propriety in what you possess, then you have your selves; he is pleased to
take what you give freely, and to call it a gift, but if you stand upon it, he
will let you know that it was his, before it was yours, and now it is yours,
yet it is more his then yours: Hear what God says, Psalm. 50. 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. All the beasts of the forest be mine, and the cattle upon a thousand
hills, etc. but ver. 14. he tells you what he looks for, Offer unto God
thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most High: he looks for offering,
though he stands in need of none. And David professes, that he was ready to
offer sacrifice, if God would accept it, Psalm. 51. 16. but verse. 17. he tells
what sacrifice God did delight in. This is a day of Humiliation, and this is
the most proper offering for the day; which should be a heartbreaking day; he
that offers to God a fast without afflicting of his soul, without being in
bitterness for his sins, without mourning, without sighs and groans,
without tears, or trouble, that has dry eyes, without some pangs and travel
of soul, without a conflict of and agony in his spirit, without some kind of
bleeding in his heart, he offers a sacrifice that costs him naught; the Lord
will reject such a fast as this, as he did theirs, Is. 58. 5. but the costly
fast that God looks at, is verse. 6. 7. That is a costly fast indeed, when
heaven and Earth are at strife and contention; when you strive to offer to God
rivers of tears, then does God even strive to offer to you rivers of
consolations: when you are at cost with God in your hearts, he is at cost with
you in his blessings. The Lord even speaks this language to you to day, those
sins that have cost you thousands to maintain them, let them now cost you
some tears from hearts truly penitent, and deeply affected with the sense of
them, and all your sins shall be pardoned, and my debt book shall be crossed,
all your iniquities shall be blotted out, I will remember them no more.

Here we come to offer to God a service of his own prescribing; but if we do
not offer according to his own way, we shall not only, not be accepted of God,
but we shall have that which we never looked for from God: he will not only
refuse the service which we offer, but he will send something that we would not
willingly have, Ier. 14. 12. When they fast, I will not hear their cry, and
when they offer burnt offerings, and an oblation, I will not accept them: This
one would think were bad enough, to loose their labor, but that shall not
satisfy; for it follows, but I will consume them, etc. That man that comes to
God in his sins, on a fasting day, he is refused with contempt, with an who
has required this at your hand, Isa. 1. 12. and with a scornful objurgation,
What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or take my Covenant into thy
mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my word behind thee, Psalm.
50. 16. 17.

Consider further, that when ever we appear before the Lord in our sins, we
do but like those that are in debt, when they come into their creditors sight,
they put them in mind of that which they owe them, and by that means they are
moved to clap a sergeant on there backs. Every one of us, is in great arreares
with God, much in debt, and have we procured a pardon? Remember that you are in
great danger, if you have not, for it is said, Hos. 8. 13. Then even then, when
they are sacrificing, Then will I remember their iniquity, and visit their
sins: just then, when they think to please God, then will God remember them
in fury.

Our sins have cost us very dear already; let us resolve never to be at more
cost with them, unless as Sates are with malefactors to correct, punish,
condemn, and execute them.

FINIS.
Die veneris 29. November. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this House does hereby
return thanks to Mr Henry Wilkinson, for his great Pains taken in his Sermon
preached by him on Wednesday last before their Lordships in the Abbey Church
Westminster, it being the day of the Monthly Fast: And this House does hereby
desire him to Print and Publish the same. And lastly, it is Orderd that none
shall print or reprint his said Sermon without being authorized so to do under
the hand of the said Mr Wilkinson.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parl.

I appoint CHR. MEREDITH, and SA. GELLIBRAND, to Print this Sermon,

Henry Wilkinson.


